COQUILLE - MUNICIPAL CODE 2000 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Coquille, Oregon 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 9, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

PREFACE 
    The Coquille Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Shirley Patterson, city recorder. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 9, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 1508, passed October 1, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 9, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 9, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System." (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 10 (1-12) 1479 12- 7-2009 Include 1480  6-14-2010 Omit 1481  3- 7-2011 Omit 1482  5- 2-2011 Omit 1483 11- 7-2011 Include Supp. No. 11 (2-13) 1484  8- 6-2012 Include 1485 11- 5-2012 Include Supp. No. 12 (3-14) 1486  5-20-2013 Include 1487  7-31-2013 Omit 1488  7- 1-2013 Include 1489 10- 7-2013 Include Supp. No. 13 (7-16) 1490  3- 3-2014 Include 1491  4- 7-2014 Include 1492  4-14-2014 Omit 1493 10- 2-2014 Include 1493 B  4- 6-2015 Include 1494  5-18-2015 Include 1495 Not used Omit 1496 10- 5-2015 Include 1497 10- 5-2015 Include 1498 10- 5-2015 Include 1499 11- 2-2015 Include 1500  3- 7-2016 Omit 1501  5-16-2016 Include 1502  5-16-2016 Include 1503  5-16-2016 Include Supp. No. 14 (11-18) 1504  8- 1-2016 Include 1505 10- 3-2016 Omit 1506 12-19-2016 Omit 5(Res.)  4- 2-2018 Omit 6(Res.)  4- 2-2018 Omit 7(Res.)  4-23-2018 Omit 9(Res.)  6- 4-2018 Omit 10(Res.)  6- 4-2018 Omit 12(Res.)  6- 4-2018 Omit 13(Res.)  6-18-2018 Omit URA 1(Res.)  6-18-2018 Omit 1507  6-18-2018 Include 1508 10- 1-2018 Include  
CITY OF COQUILLE CHARTER OF 1967 
ADOPTED BY THE VOTERS 
NOVEMBER 8, 1966 
A CHARTER 
    To provide for the government of the city of Coquille, Coos County, Oregon; and to repeal all charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time that this charter takes effect except certain provisions pertaining to the issuance and sale of bonds. 
    Be it enacted by the people of the city of Coquille, Coos County, Oregon: 
Chapter I - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1. - TITLE OF ENACTMENT. 
    This enactment may be referred to as the City of Coquille Charter of 1967. 
Section 2. - NAME OF CITY. 
    The municipality of Coquille, Coos County, Oregon, shall continue to be a municipal corporation with the name "City of Coquille." 
Section 3. - BOUNDARIES. 
    The city shall include all territory encompassed by its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified by voters, by the council, or by any other agency with legal power to modify them. The recorder shall keep in his office at the city hall at least two copies of this charter in each of which he shall maintain an accurate, up-to-date description of the boundaries. The copies and descriptions shall be available for public inspection at any time during regular office hours of the recorder. 
Chapter II - POWERS 

Section 4. - POWERS OF THE CITY. 
    The city shall have all powers which the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States and of this state expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers. 
Section 5. - CONSTRUCTION OF CHARTER. 
    In this charter no mention of a particular power shall be construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the city would have if the particular power were not mentioned. The charter shall be liberally construed to the end that the city may have all powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers that cities may assume pursuant to state laws and to the municipal home rule provisions of the state constitution. 
Chapter III - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 6. - WHERE POWERS VESTED. 
    Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council. 
Section 7. - COUNCIL. 
    The council shall be composed of a mayor and six councilmen elected from the city at large. 
Section 8. - COUNCILMEN. 
    The mayor and councilmen in office at the time this charter is adopted shall continue in office, each until the end of his term of office as fixed by the charter of the city in effect at the time this charter is adopted. At each biennial general election after this charter takes effect, three councilmen shall be elected, each for a term of four years. 
Section 9. - MAYOR. 
    At each biennial general election a mayor shall be elected for a term of two years. 
Section 10. - OTHER OFFICERS. 
    Additional officers of the city shall be a municipal judge, a city recorder, a city attorney, and, in the discretion of the council, a city manager and whatever other officers the council deems necessary. If the city has no city manager, all these additional officers shall be appointed by the council. If the city has a city manager, the municipal judge, the city attorney, and the city manager shall be appointed by the council and the other additional officers shall be appointed by the city manager and be responsible to him. The council may abolish or create the office of city manager at any time, but such action shall be by an affirmation vote of not less than five council members. 
Section 11. - SALARIES. 
    The compensation for the services of each City Officer, employee and council member shall be fixed by the council, provided, however, a council member shall not receive compensation in an amount greater than $10.00 per regular council meeting for not more than two regular council meetings per month. 
Section 12. - QUALIFICATION OF OFFICERS. 
    No person shall be eligible for an elective office of the city unless at the time of the election he/ she is a qualified elector within the meaning of the state constitution and has resided in the city during 12 months immediately preceding the election. For the purpose of this section, city shall mean any area included in the corporate limits as of the date of the election. In order to avoid conflict of interests and to provide a fully effective office-holder. A person is ineligible to hold elective office of this city if employed by the city for 20 hours or more per week on a yearly average or if the employment is not substantially volunteer in nature. The determination of whether employment is substantially volunteer in nature shall be made by the city council. For all other matters, the council shall be the final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members. This change will be effective January 1, 1983. 
Section 13. - MEETINGS. 
    The council shall hold a regular meeting at least once each month in the city at a time and at a place which it designates. It shall adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings. The mayor upon his own motion may, or at the request of three members shall, by giving notice thereof to all members of the council then in the city, call a special meeting of the council for a time not earlier than three nor later than forty-eight hours after the notice is given. Special meetings of the council may also be held at any time by the common consent of all the members of the council. 
Section 14. - QUORUM. 
    A majority of members of the council shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in a manner provided by ordinance. 
Section 15. - JOURNAL. 
    The council shall cause a journal of its proceedings to be kept. Upon the request of any of its members, the ayes and nays upon any question before it shall be taken, and a record of the vote entered in the journal. 
Section 16. - PROCEEDINGS TO BE PUBLIC. 
    No action by the council shall have legal effect unless the motion for the action and the vote by which it is disposed of takes place at proceedings open to the public. 
Section 17. - MAYOR'S FUNCTIONS AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. 
    The mayor shall be chairman of the council and preside over its deliberations. He shall have a vote on all questions before it. He shall have authority to preserve order, enforce the rules of the council, and determine the order of business under the rules of the council. 
Section 18. - PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL. 
    At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council by ballot shall elect a president from its membership. In the mayor's absence from a council meeting, the president shall preside over it. Whenever the mayor is unable to perform the function of his office, the president shall act as mayor. 
Section 19. - VOTE REQUIRED. 
    Except as this charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of the members of the council present at a council meeting shall be necessary to decide any question before the council. 
Chapter V - POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS 

Section 20. - MAYOR. 
    The mayor shall appoint the committee provided by the rules of the council. He shall sign all approved records of the procedings of the council. He shall have no veto power and shall sign all ordinances passed by the council. After the council approves a bond of a city officer or a bond for a license, contract, or proposal, the mayor shall endorse the bond. 
Section 21. - CITY MANAGER. 
    Whenever the office of city manager has been created by the council, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Qualifications. The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to political considerations and solely with reference to his executive and administrative qualifications. He need not be a resident of the city or of the state at the time of his appointment. Before taking office, he shall give a bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the council. The premiums on such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(b)  Term. The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be removed by an affirmative vote of not less than four members of the council. Upon any vacancy occurring in the office of city manager after the first appointment pursuant to this charter, the council at its next meeting shall adopt a resolution of its intention to appoint another city manager. Not later than six months after adopting the resolution, the council shall appoint a city manager to fill the vacancy, unless meanwhile the council abolishes the office of city manager. 
(c)  Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the city manager shall be as follows: 
(1)  He shall devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties, attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the council or the mayor, keep the council advised at all times of the affairs and needs of the city, and make reports annually, or more frequently if requested by the council, of all the affairs and departments of the city. 
(2)  He shall see that all ordinances are enforced and that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the city are observed. 
(3)  He shall appoint all other appointive officers and employees of the city, except the municipal judge and the city attorney, and shall have general supervision and control over them and their work, with power to transfer employees from one department to another. He shall supervise the departments to the end of obtaining the utmost efficiency in each of them. He shall have no control, however, over the council or over the judicial activities of the municipal judge. 
(4)  He shall act as purchasing agent for all departments of the city. All purchases shall be made by requisition signed by him. 
(5)  He shall be responsible for preparing and submitting to the budget committee the annual budget estimates and such reports as that body requests. 
(6)  He shall supervise the operation of all public utilities owned and operated by the city and shall have general supervision over all city property. 
(d)  Seats at Council Meetings. The city manager and such other officers as the council designates shall be entitled to sit with the council but shall have no vote on questions before it. The city manager may take part in all council discussion 
(e)  City Manager Pro Tem. In case of the manager's absence from the city, temporary disability to act as city manager, discharge by the council, or resignation, the council shall appoint a city manager pro tem who shall possess the powers and duties of the city manager. No manager pro tem may appoint or remove a city officer or employee, except with the approval of five members of the council. No city manager pro tem shall hold his position as such for more than six months, and no appointment of a city manager pro tem shall be renewed. 
(f)  Interference in Administration and Elections. No member of the council shall directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence or coerce the city manager in the making of any appointment or removal of any officer or employee or in the purchase of supplies; or attempt to exact any promise relative to any appointment from any candidate for city manager; or discuss directly or indirectly with him the matter of specific appointments to any city office or employment. A violation of the foregoing provisions of this section shall forfeit the office of the offending member of the council. Nothing in this section shall be construed, however, as prohibiting the council while in session from fully and freely discussing with or suggesting to the city manager anything pertaining to city affairs or the interests of the city. Neither the city manager nor any person in the employ of the city shall take part in securing, or contributing any money toward the nomination or election of any candidate for a municipal office. 
(g)  Ineligible Persons. No person related to the city manager or his spouse by consanguinity or affinity within the third degree, nor the spouse, shall hold any appointive office or employment with the city. 
Section 22. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE. 
    The municipal judge shall be the judicial officer of the city. He shall be a member in good standing of the Oregon State Bar Association. He shall hold office within the city a court known as the Municipal Court for the City of Coquille, Coos County, Oregon. The Court shall be open for the transaction of judicial business at times specified by the council. All area within the city shall be within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. The municipal judge shall exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction of all crimes and offenses defined and made punishable by ordinances of the city and all actions brought to recover or enforce forfeitures or penalties defined or authorized by the ordinances of the city, to commit any such persons to jail or admit him to bail pending trial, to issue subpoenas, to compel witnesses to appear and testify in court on the trial of any cause before him, to compel obedience to such subpoenas, to issue any process necessary to carry into effect the judgements of the court, and to punish witnesses and others for contempt of the court. When not governed by ordinances or this charter, all proceedings in the municipal court for the violation of a city ordinance shall be governed by the applicable general laws of the state governing justices of the peace and justice court. Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or abrogating the authority granted magistrates by the general laws or statutes of this state. 
Section 23. - CITY RECORDER. 
    The city recorder shall serve ex officio as clerk of the council, attend all its meetings unless excused therefrom by the council, and keep an accurate record of its proceedings in a book provided for that purpose. In the city recorder's absence from a council meeting, the mayor shall appoint a clerk of the council pro tem who, while acting in that capacity, shall have all the authority and duties of the city recorder. 
Chapter VI - ELECTIONS 

Section 24. - REGULAR ELECTIONS. 
    Regular city elections shall be held at the same times and places as binennial general state elections, in accordance with applicable state election laws. The city recorder shall give notice of each election to the extent that the city council requires. Each such notice shall state the officers to be elected at the election, and the time and place of the election. 
Section 25. - SPECIAL ELECTIONS. 
    The council shall provide the time, manner, and means for holding any special election. The city recorder shall give at least ten days notice of each special election in the manner provided by the action of the council ordering the election. 
Section 26. - REGULATION OF ELECTIONS. 
    Except as this charter provides otherwise and as the council provides otherwise by ordinances relating to elections, the general laws of the state shall apply to the conduct of all city elections, recounts of the returns therefrom, and contest thereof. 
Section 27. - CANVASS OF RETURNS. 
    In all elections held in conjunction with state and county elections, the state laws governing the filing of returns by the county clerk shall apply. In each special city election, the returns therefrom shall be filed with the city recorder on or before noon of the day following, and the council shall canvass the returns at their next regularly scheduled meeting. The results of all elections shall be made a matter of record in the journal of the proceedings of the council. The journal shall contain a statement of the total number of votes cast at each election, the votes cast for each person and for and against each proposition, the name of each person elected to office, the office to which he has been elected, and a reference to each measure enacted or approved. Immediately after the canvassing is completed, the city recorder shall make and sign a certificate of election of each person elected and deliver the certificate to him within one day after the canvass. A certificate so made and delivered shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of the statements contained in it. 
Section 28. - TIE VOTES. 
    In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the council. 
Section 29. - COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS OF OFFICE. 
    The term of office of a person elected at a regular city election shall commence the first of the year immediately following the election. 
Section 30. - OATH OF OFFICE. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, each officer shall take an oath or shall affirm that he will support the constitution and laws of the United States and of Oregon and that he will faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
Section 31. - NOMINATIONS. 
    Any person qualified as provided in Section 12, hereof, may be nominated for an elective city position. Nomination shall be by petition specifying the position sought in a form prescribed by the council. Such petition shall be signed by not fewer than 20 electors. No elector shall sign more than one petition for each vacant position. If he does so, his signature shall be valid only on the first sufficient petition filed for the position. The signatures to a nomination petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate paper of the petition shall be attached an affidavit of the circulator thereof, indicating the number of signers of the paper and stating that each signature appended thereto was made in his presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. With each signature shall be stated the signer's place of residence, identified by its street and number or other sufficient description. All nomination papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Recorder as one instrument not before the 250th day and not later than the 70th day before the date of the primary election if a primary election for the candidate is required and, if a primary election for the candidate is not required, such petition shall be so filed not before the 15th day after the date of the primary election preceding the general election and not later than the 70th day before the date of the general election, provided however, the Common Council may from time to time, by ordinance, fix such petition filing time requirements to conform such requirements to the laws of the State of Oregon. The City Recorder shall make a record of the exact time at which each petition is filed and shall take and preserve the name and address of the person by whom it is filed. If the petition is not signed by the required number of qualified electors, the City Recorder shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition within five days after the filing. 
    If the petition is insufficient in any other particular, the City Recorder shall return it immediately to the person who filed it, certifying in writing wherein the petition is insufficient. Such deficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition or a substitute petition for the same candidate may be filed, within the regular time for filing nomination petitions. The City Recorder shall notify an eligible person of his nomination and such person shall file with the recorder his written acceptance of nomination, in such form as the council may require, within five days of notification of nomination. Upon receipt of such acceptance of nomination, the City Recorder shall cause the nominee s name to be printed on the ballots. The petition of nomination for a successful candidate at an election shall be preserved in the office of the City Recorder until the term of office for which the candidate is elected expires. 
Chapter VII - VACANCIES IN OFFICE 

Section 32. - WHAT CREATES VACANCY. 
    An office shall be deemed vacant upon the incumbent's death; adjudicated incompetence, conviction of a felony, other offense pertaining to his office, or unlawful destruction of public records; resignation; recall from office, or ceasing to possess the qualifications for the office; upon the failure of the person elected or appointed to the office to qualify therefore within ten days after the time for his term of office to commence; or in the case of a mayor or councilman, upon his absence from the city for 30 days without the consent of the council or upon his absence from meetings of the council for 60 days without like consent, and upon a declaration by the council of the vacancy. 
Section 33. - FILLING OF VACANCIES. 
    Vacancies in elective offices in the city shall be filled by a majority of the incumbent members of the council. The appointee's term of office shall begin immediately upon his appointment and shall continue throughout the unexpired term of his predecessor. During the temporary disability of any officer or during his absence temporarily from the city for any cause, his office may be filled pro tem in the manner provided for filling vacancies in office permanently. 
Chapter VIII - ORDINANCES 

Section 34. - ENACTING CLAUSE. 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances hereafter enacted shall be, "The City of Coquille ordains as follows:" 
Section 35. - MODE OF ENACTMENT. 
(1)  An ordinance of the council shall, before being put upon its final passage, be read fully and distinctly in open council meeting and shall receive the affirmative vote of the majority of all council members present. 
(2)  The reading may be by title only (a) if no council member present at the meeting requests to have the ordinance read in full or (b) if a copy of the ordinance is provided for each council member and three copies are provided for public inspection in the office of the city recorder not later than one week before the meeting at which the ordinance is to be voted upon and notice of their availability is given forthwith upon the filing, by (i) written notice posted at the city hall and two other public places in the city or (ii) advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. An ordinance enacted after being read by title alone may have no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as it was thus filed prior to such reading, unless each section incorporating such a difference is read fully and distinctly in open council meeting as finally amended prior to being approved by council. 
(3)  Upon the final vote on an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the members shall be taken and recorded in the journal. 
(4)  Upon the enactment of an ordinance the city recorder shall sign it with the date of its passage and his name and title of office, and the mayor shall sign it with the date of his signature, his name and the title of his office. 
Section 36. - WHEN ORDINANCES TAKE EFFECT. 
    An ordinance enacted by the council shall take effect on the thirtieth day after its enactment. When the council deems it advisable, however, an ordinance may provide a later time for it to take effect, and in case of an emergency, it may take effect immediately. 
Chapter IX - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 37. - CONDEMNATION. 
    Any necessity of taking property for the city by condemnation shall be determined by the council and declared by a resolution or ordinance of the council describing the property and stating the uses to which it shall be devoted. 
Section 38. - IMPROVEMENTS. 
    The procedure for making, altering, vacating or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by the applicable general laws of the state. Action on any proposed public improvement, except a sidewalk or except an improvement unanimously declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be suspended for six months upon a remonstrance thereto by the owners of two-thirds of the property to be specially assessed therefor. For the purpose of this section "owner" shall mean the record holder of legal title to the land, except that if there is a purchaser of the land according to a recorded land sale contract or according to a verified writing be the record holder of legal title to the land filed with the city recorder, the said purchaser shall be deemed the "owner". 
Section 39. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS. 
    The procedure for levying, collecting, and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property shall be governed by general ordinance. 
Section 40. - BIDS. 
    A contract in excess of $500.00 for a public improvement to be made by a private contractor shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder for the contract and shall be done in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the council, provided, however, that the council shall have the right to reject any or all bids. 
Chapter X - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 41. - DEBT LIMIT. 
    Except by consent of the voters, the city's voluntary floating indebtedness shall not exceed $15,000 exclusive of street and sewer improvements, at any time; provided, however, such voluntary floating indebtedness may exceed $15,000 but not more than $50,000 when the same is incurred during the first half of a fiscal year and applied to and used as tax revenues as anticipated and provided in the current budget for the City of Coquille. 
    For purposes of calculating the limitation, however, the legally authorized debt of the city effect shall not be considered. All city officials and employees who create or officially approve any indebtedness in excess of this limitation shall be jointly and severally liable for the excess. 
Section 42. - TORTS. 
    In no event shall the city be liable in damage for an injury to person, a damage to property, or a death caused by a defect or a dangerous condition in a public thoroughfare, site, or facility, unless the city has had actual notice prior to the injury, damage, or death that the defect or condition existed and has had a reasonable time thereafter in which to repair or remove it. No action shall be maintained against the city for damages growing out of such injury, damage or death unless the claimant first gives written notice to the council within 30 days after the injury, damage or death is sustained, stating specifically the time when, the place where, and the circumstances under which it was sustained, and that he will claim damages therefor of the city in and amount which he specifies. But in no event shall the action be started until 30 days have elapsed after the presentation of this notice to the council. 
Section 43. - EXISTING ORDINANCES CONTINUED. 
    All ordinances of the city consistent with this charter and in force when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed. 
Section 44. - REPEAL OF PREVIOUSLY ENACTED PROVISIONS. 
    All charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time that this charter takes effect are hereby repealed, except those sections or parts thereof pertaining to the issuance and sale of bonds whose bonds remain outstanding or unissued. 
Section 45. - TIME OF EFFECT OF CHARTER. 
    This charter shall take effect January 1, 1967. 
Section - 46. 
    To amend the charter of the City of Coquille, Oregon, entitled "City of Coquille Charter of 1967", by adding thereto Section 46 to Chapter X Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of General Obligation Bond of said City in an amount not to exceed NINE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ($967,000.00) to provide funds with which to construct, equip and acquire property for a water treatment plant improvement, water storage, and water distribution with all appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for the treatment, storage, and distribution of water, providing the form of such bonds, permitting the pledge of income from water user charges and authorizing a special tax levy to pay principal of and interest on said bonds. 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted the "Coquille Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 1415 § 1, 2000) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    This code shall be known as the "Coquille Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the "Coquille Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Coquille Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Coquille Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 1415 § 2, 2000) 
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Coquille Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Coquille, Oregon, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 1415 § 3, 2000) 
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 1415 § 4, 2000) 
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 1415 § 5, 2000) 
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
    The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 1411, passed April 24, 2000. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 1411, but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 1412, 1413, and 1414. 
(Ord. 1415 § 6, 2000) 
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
    The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 1415 § 7, 2000) 
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 1415 § 8, 2000) 
1.01.090 - References to prior code. 
    References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 1415 § 9, 2000) 
Chapter 1.08 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Notice of election. 
A.  The city recorder shall give notice of a regular election of mayor and councilmen as those elections are provided for in Section 24, Chapter VI, of the city of Coquille Charter of 1967, as follows: 
1.  By posting notice thereof at four public places within the city within two weeks prior to the election; 
2.  By publishing notice thereof at least twice in The Coquille Valley Sentinel, or its successor, within two weeks prior to the day of such election. 
B.  The notice shall contain the names of all the candidates and the office or offices to be filled. 
(Ord. 907 § 1, 1974) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Time of payment of fines. 
    When a defendant is sentenced to pay a fine, the municipal court may grant permission for payment to be made within a specified period of time or in specified installments. If no such permission is included in the sentence, the fine shall be payable immediately. 
(Ord. 945 § 1, 1976) 
2.04.020 - Contempt for nonpayment of fines. 
A.  When a defendant defaults in the payment of a fine or of any installment of such fine, the court may require him or her to show cause why his or her default should not be treated as a contempt of court and may issue a show-cause citation for a warrant of arrest for his or her appearance. 
B.  Unless the defendant shows that his or her default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or her part to make a good faith effort to make payment, the court may find that his or her default constitutes contempt. 
C.  If it appears to the satisfaction of the court that the default in payment of a fine is not contempt, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount thereof, or of each installment, or revoking the fine for the unpaid portion thereof in whole or in part. 
D.  Whenever the court shall find that a default in payment of a fine is contempt, it may punish such contempt as follows: 
1.  Impose a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
2.  Commit the defendant to the city jail for a period not to exceed one day for each twenty-five dollars ($25.00) of the fine; provided, that no such commitment shall be made unless the court makes a finding that the defendant is not then indigent or is represented by or waived an attorney, and was not indigent or was represented by or waived an attorney in the original proceeding in which the fine was imposed. 
3.  Both impose such fine and commit the defendant to the city jail as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 945 § 2, 1976) 
2.04.030 - Collection of fines. 
    In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city may institute a suit, action, or claim for collection of a fine on a default in payment and may declare unpaid installments of such fine immediately due and payable. 
(Ord. 945 § 4, 1976) 
Chapter 2.08 - PUBLIC LIBRARY 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Established. 
    There is established a public library for the city of Coquille, Oregon, which shall be known as "Coquille Public Library." The mayor, subject to approval of the common council, shall appoint a public library board which shall consist of five members who shall hold office for a term of four years. The existing library board is reappointed to fill out the unexpired terms of their present appointment. The terms shall be as provided by ORS 357.465(3). Library board members may be removed from office by the common council at a regular council meeting. One of the five members shall be a member of the common council. 
(Ord. 1372 § 1, 1996; Ord. 924 § 1, 1975) 
2.08.020 - Appointment of members. 
    At the expiration of the term of any members of the public library board, the mayor, with approval of the common council, may appoint a new member for a term of four years. If a vacancy occurs, the mayor, subject to the approval of the common council, shall appoint a new member for the unexpired term. 
    After appointment, the public library board shall immediately meet and organize by the election of a president and treasurer from its members, and by the election or appointment of a secretary. 
(Ord. 924 § 2, 1975) 
2.08.030 - Powers and duties of board. 
    The public library board shall be a governing board, but this chapter shall not be construed as depriving elected or appointed officials of the city of any power they may have under the laws of the state or the Charter of the city. The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  The public library board shall assist in the interviewing process of selecting and appointing a library director. The city manager, as the fiscal and internal administrative agent for the library, shall have primary responsibility for library personnel, including recruitment, selection, classification, salary or hourly wage and supervision. 
B.  The public library board shall keep the common council informed about rules and policies for the efficient and effective operation of the library and its services and programs. 
C.  The public library board shall assist the library director in preparing the annual budget request to be submitted by the library director to the city budget committee. 
D.  The public library board shall make recommendations for the acceptance, use or expenditure of any real or personal property or funds donated to the library under Section 2.08.040 or make recommendations for the purchase, control or disposal of real and personal property necessary for library purposes. 
E.  The public library board shall make recommendations for the selection of sites for public library buildings or for location of library facilities. 
F.  The public library board shall review and recommend to the common council terms for contracts and working relationships with private and public agencies regarding library services. 
G.  The public library board shall approve an annual report to the state library and to the common council. The report shall be submitted in a timely manner on a form supplied by the state library. 
H.  The public library board shall develop and recommend to the common council long-range plans for library services. The plans shall be consistent with the city's priorities and with state, regional and national library goals. 
(Ord. 1372 § 2, 1996: Ord. 924 § 3, 1975) 
2.08.040 - Gifts to library. 
    Gifts of any real or personal property or funds donated to the library and accepted by the city shall be administered in accordance with each gift's terms. All property or funds shall be held in the name of the city of Coquille. 
(Ord. 1372 § 3, 1996: Ord. 924 § 3A, 1975) 
2.08.050 - Administrative agent. 
    The city manager shall be the fiscal and internal administrative agent for the Coquille Public Library, and the library shall operate in conformance with the city's administrative procedures including, but not limited to, those pertaining to the following: 
A.  Personnel, including recruitment, selection, classification and salary and wages for library personnel; 
B.  Receipt, disbursement and accounting for library moneys; 
C.  Maintenance of general books, cost accounting records, and other financial documents; 
D.  Budget administration; 
E.  Operation and maintenance of equipment and buildings. 
(Ord. 1372 § 4, 1996: Ord. 924 § 3B, 1975) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY RECORDS 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Record retention schedule. 
    The schedules of record retention provided in OAR Chapter 166, as authorized by ORS 192.105 and 357.895, govern the retention and disposal of all records on file in each department of the city. 
(Ord. 1145 § 1, 1983) 
2.12.020 - Certificate of authorization. 
    Records that have been retained beyond the retention period shall not be destroyed without prior written authorization of the mayor, the city attorney, and the department head to whose department the records to be destroyed pertain. The authorizations and a description of the records shall be on a certificate of records authorized to be destroyed form furnished by and filed with the city recorder. 
(Ord. 1145 § 2, 1983) 
Chapter 2.14 - CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK 
Sections: 

2.14.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the city of Coquille police department to access Oregon State Police (OSP) criminal offender information through the law enforcement data system (LEDS) for applicants seeking employment and/or volunteer work with the city of Coquille, in accordance with OAR 257-10-025(1)(a). 
(Ord. 1466 (part), 2007) 
2.14.020 - Procedure. 
    All proceedings pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with ORS 181.555 and OAR 257-10-025, which establishes procedures for access to criminal record information possessed by the Oregon State Police (OSP) through the law enforcement data system (LEDS), and as supplemented below. 
A.  All applicants for employment and appointed volunteers with the city of Coquille will be required to authorize the city to conduct a criminal offender information check through the OSP LEDS system. 
B.  The Coquille police department will conduct the check on the prospective employee or volunteer and report to the city that the applicant's record indicates "no criminal record" or "criminal record." 
C.  If the applicant's record is reported as "criminal record," the city will in accordance with OAR 257-10-025(1)(c), request a written criminal history report from the OSP identification services section and pay the applicable fee for this service. The city will make the written criminal history record available to the selecting official for his or her consideration in making the hiring decision. 
D.  The written criminal history record on persons that are not hired or appointed as a volunteer will be retained in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166-40-080 for a period of three years and thereafter will be destroyed by shredding. 
E.  The criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history that are hired or appointed will become a part of the confidential personnel file of that employee or volunteer. Access to confidential personnel files is limited to authorized persons who have an official need to access such files as sanctioned by law or regulation. 
(Ord. 1466 (part), 2007) 
Chapter 2.16 - ABANDONED PROPERTY 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Abandoned" means any property which has been left upon the real property of the city or upon its public rights-of-way or easements without the owner, or person leaving the same, having first obtained the permission of the city therefor, or where any property shall have been left upon the city's real property, or upon its public rights-of-way or easements, with the permission of the city but where the owner thereof has refused to remove said property after having been given fourteen (14) days' notice to remove the same by the city, or whenever property is found without an owner claiming it, or, by reason of arrest, confiscation, impoundment or by any other means, comes into the hands of the city. 
    "Interested person" means the owner, conditional vendor, mortgagee or other person having an ownership interest in property or a legal claim to property coming into the hands of the city. 
    "Property" means any personal property except motor vehicles, personal property seized pursuant to state law, property the disposition of which is governed by court order, or intangible personal property. 
(Ord. 1297 § 1, 1991) 
2.16.020 - Storage. 
    The city shall store the property at an authorized secure storage place pending investigation of ownership and disposition. The owner or operator of a place in which property has been stored by the city shall not release property without first having obtained a written release from the city. 
(Ord. 1297 § 2, 1991) 
2.16.030 - Investigation and notification. 
A.  The police department shall make diligent inquiry as to the name and address of any interested person. 
B.  The property shall be released to an interested person upon payment of any storage costs. 
C.  If an interested person is identified but has not contacted the city, the interested person shall be notified in writing as follows: 
1.  A brief description of the property abandoned shall be given including any serial numbers or other numbers identifying the personal property; 
2.  That the property is being held by the city; 
3.  That the city will, no sooner than ten (10) days from the date of the mailing of said notice, proceed to sell the property for cash to the highest bidder, and from the proceeds of the sale, retain a sum sufficient to pay the costs of sale and the costs of storage. 
(Ord. 1297 § 3, 1991) 
2.16.040 - Pre-sale procedures. 
A.  If an interested person cannot be found after due diligence, or if the interested person so notified within the time as provided in Section 2.16.030, shall fail to claim the property and pay to the city any storage costs owing thereon, then the property shall be deemed abandoned. From time to time the city shall hold a sale to dispose of abandoned property which has accumulated. 
B.  A notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city containing a brief description of the property involved, the owners thereof if known, and the day the property described therein will be sold at the time and place set forth in the notice. The notice shall be published not less than two times; the last publication of which shall be made not less than five days before such proposed sale. 
C.  A more detailed description of the property to be sold shall be posted in two conspicuous places in City Hall at least seven days before the scheduled sale. 
D.  If any interested person applies to the city before the sale has taken place and submits satisfactory evidence of his or her interest, and pays any storage costs and the appropriate share of the notice publication costs, the city shall surrender the same to the claimant. 
E.  If no claim as to a particular property shall have been made before the time set for sale, that property shall be sold at the sale at the time and place appointed therefor. 
(Ord. 1297 § 4, 1991) 
2.16.050 - Sales procedure. 
A.  The city manager, or such agent as shall be appointed to conduct the sale, shall sell the property to the highest bidder for cash, and the city shall have the right to enter a bid for the personal property, but not to exceed the amount of its cost incurred in connection with the seizing, keeping and offering the same for sale. In default of bids from others, the city manager may dispose of any property without the necessity of taking further bids. 
B.  The proceeds of such sale shall be first applied to the payment of storage costs incurred, costs for making such sale, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the treasurer of the city, to be credited to the general fund. 
C.  On the consummation of a sale, the city manager shall deliver, on behalf of the city, a bill of sale conveying the property to the purchaser, and deliver possession. 
D.  The sale and conveyance shall be without redemption. 
(Ord. 1297 § 5, 1991) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY 

3.04.010 - Sale of property-Security deposit. 
A.  When any person, firm or corporation initiates or requests the sale of real or personal property to it by the city, such person, firm or corporation shall pay to the city a sum of money, hereinafter called "security deposit," for the purpose of defraying costs of such sale incurred by the city. 
B.  The security deposit shall be in a sum not less than the estimated cost of a professional fee appraisal for the property to be sold plus the estimated cost of publishing notice of sale, if any. 
C.  In the event the property is sold to a third person by public sale, all of the security deposit shall be refunded to such person, firm or corporation depositing the same; and, in the event of no sale, to such person, firm or corporation making the deposit, within thirty (30) days after mailing notice of the appraised value to such person, firm or corporation, or after it receives notice of such value at a regular or special meeting of the common council duly recorded in the council minutes, and such sale is not made by reason of any refusal on the part of the city to sell, the security deposit shall be refunded, less the cost of appraisal and cost of publication, if any, to the person, firm or corporation depositing the same. 
(Ord. 889 §§ 1-3, 1973) 
3.04.020 - General administrative fees and rates. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the general administrative fees and rates for certain activities and procedures set forth in city ordinances. 
    The common council of the city shall set the general administrative fees and rates by resolution; in addition, any further changes or revisions to the fees and rates shall be made by resolution. 
(Ord. 1401 §§ 1, 2, 2000) 
Chapter 3.08 - CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING 

3.08.010 - Contract review board. 
    Pursuant to ORS 279.055, the common council of the city is designated as the city's local contract review board. 
(Ord. 1305, 1991: Ord. 1117 § 1, 1992) 
3.08.020 - Rules adopted by reference. 
    The common council of the city acting in its capacity as local contract review board pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.08.010, adopts as its permanent rules the provisions of the Oregon Administrative Rules set out in OAR 137.030.0000 through 137-040-0045 concerning public bidding and specifically adopts the provisions of Oregon Administrative Rules set out in OAR 125-300-0000 through OAR 125.360.0020 concerning public contract exemptions. 
(Ord. 1420 § 1, 2001: Ord. 1413 § 1, 2000: Ord. 1308 § 1, 1991) 
Chapter 3.09 - TAX ON SALES OF MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS 

3.09.010 - Purpose. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana, medical marijuana or marijuana-infused products in the City of Coquille is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana, medical marijuana, and marijuana-infused products. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.020 - Definitions. 
    When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Director" means the director of finance for the City of Coquille or his/her designee. 
    "Gross taxable sales" means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from sales of marijuana, medical marijuana and marijuana-infused products that is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. 
    "Marijuana" means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
    "Oregon Medical Marijuana Program" means the office within the Oregon Health Authority that administers the provisions of ORS 475.300 through 475.346, the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act, and all policies and procedures pertaining thereto. 
    "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the State of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    "Purchase or sale" means the retail acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any person of marijuana within the city and does not include the acquisition or furnishing of marijuana by a grower or processor to a seller. 
    "Registry identification cardholder" means a person who has been diagnosed by an attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use of medical marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person's debilitating medical condition, and who has been issued a registry identification card by the Oregon Health Authority. 
    "Retail sale" means the transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable consideration and does not include the transfer or exchange of goods or services between a grower or processor and a seller. 
    "Seller" means any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by the State of Oregon to provide marijuana or marijuana-infused products to purchasers for money, credit, property or other consideration. 
    "Tax" means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this chapter. 
    "Taxpayer" means any person obligated to account to the finance director for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.030 - Levy of tax. 
A.  There is hereby levied and shall be paid a tax by every seller exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana and marijuana-infused products as defined in this chapter. 
B.  The amount of tax levied is as follows: 
1.  Five percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products by a person who is a registry identification cardholder. 
2.  Ten (10) percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products but are not doing so under the provisions of the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program. 
3.  Modifications of the amount of tax levied shall be established by a city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.040 - Deductions. 
    The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana: 
A.  Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser; 
B.  Any adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products and does not include any adjustment for other services furnished by a seller. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.050 - Seller responsible for payment of tax. 
A.  Every seller shall, on or before the last day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January) make a return to the director, on forms provided by the city, specifying the total sales subject to this chapter and the amount of tax collected under this chapter. The seller may request or the director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or director deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and the director may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return shall not be considered filed until it is actually received by the director. 
B.  At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the director. Payments received by the director for application against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions that are not prejudicial to the interest of the city. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods. 
C.  Non-designated payments shall be applied in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax until the payment is exhausted. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax. If the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the director may order such a change. The director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the director deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax. The director also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment is made to the director. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision. 
D.  Every seller required to remit the tax imposed in this chapter shall be entitled to retain five percent of all taxes due to defray the costs of bookkeeping and remittance. 
E.  Every seller must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the director records of all sales made by the dispensary and such other books or accounts as may be required by the director. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records. The director shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.060 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Any seller who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of sixty (60) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed. 
C.  If the director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subparagraphs A and B of this section. 
D.  In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provision of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid. 
F.  All sums collected pursuant to the penalty provisions in paragraphs A and C of this section shall be distributed to the City of Coquille's general fund and may be used to offset the costs of auditing and enforcement of this tax. 
G.  Waiver of Penalties. Penalties and interest for certain late tax payments may be waived pursuant to consideration and vote of the city council upon proper presentation. This creates no duty of the city to reduce or waive any penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.070 - Failure to report and remit tax-Determination of tax by director. 
    If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report of the tax required by this chapter, the director shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. As soon as the director shall procure such facts and information as is able to be obtained, upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any seller, the director shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by having it served personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the seller so assessed at the last known place of address. Delivery/service is considered to have been completed on the third day after the determination notice of the amount is mailed. Such seller may make an appeal for such determination as provided in Section 3.09.080. If no appeal is filed, the director's determination is final and the amount thereby is immediately due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.080 - Appeal. 
    Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal the decision to the city council. The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the serving or mailing of the determination notice of tax due. The city council shall hear and consider any records and evidence presented bearing upon the director's determination of amount due, and make findings affirming, reversing or modifying the determination. The findings and decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. The city council's decision is final subject only to judicial review pursuant to ORS 34.010 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.090 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subparagraph B of this section, provided a claim in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds which the claim is founded, is filed with the director within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the director. 
B.  The director shall have twenty (20) calendar days from the date of receipt of a claim to review the claim and make a determination in writing as to the validity of the claim. The director shall notify the claimant in writing of the director's determination. Such notice shall be mailed to the address provided by claimant on the claim form. In the event a claim is determined by the director to be a valid claim, in a manner prescribed by the director a seller may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously collected or received. The seller shall notify director of claimant's choice no later than fifteen (15) days following the date director mailed the determination. In the event claimant has not notified the director of claimant's choice within the fifteen-day period and the seller is still in business, a credit will be granted against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the seller is no longer in business, a refund check will be mailed to claimant at the address provided in the claim form. 
C.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of the section unless the claimant established the right by written records showing entitlement to such refund and the director acknowledged the validity of the claim. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.100 - Actions to collect. 
    Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any such tax collected by a seller which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City of Coquille for the recovery of such amount. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the City of Coquille, when taxes due are more than thirty (30) days delinquent, can submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the City of Coquille has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105, in the event the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty (50) percent of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.110 - Violation infractions. 
A.  All violations of this chapter are punishable as set forth in CMC Section 9.04.060. It is a violation of this chapter for any seller or other person to: 
1.  Fail or refuse to comply as required herein; 
2.  Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made; 
3.  Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records; 
4.  Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director; 
5.  Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or 
6.  Fail, refuse or neglect to remit the tax to the city by the due date. 
B.  Violation of subsections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 shall be considered a violation of the city ordinance. The remedies provided by this section are not exclusive and shall not prevent the city from exercising any other remedy available under the law, nor shall the provisions of this chapter prohibit or restrict the city or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges under state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.120 - Confidentiality. 
    Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit: 
A.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana is sold or provided; or 
B.  The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller's financial information; or 
C.  Presentation of evidence to the court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the director or an appeal from the director for amount due the city under this chapter; or 
D.  The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or 
E.  The disclosure of records related to a business' failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the tax exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The city council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5). 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.130 - Audit of books, records or persons. 
    The city, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return, or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due, may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller's state and federal income tax return, bearing upon the matter of the seller's tax return. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the director or an authorized agent of the director. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the director may immediately seek a subpoena from the Coquille Municipal Court or other court with jurisdiction under the laws of the State of Oregon to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
3.09.140 - Forms and regulations. 
A.  The director is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said medical marijuana tax and in particular and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for: 
1.  A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors; 
2.  The records which sellers providing marijuana and marijuana-infused products are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
Chapter 3.12 - ASSESSMENTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

3.12.010 - Definitions. 
    The terms "improvement" and "improved" and "public improvement" and "proposed improvements," as used in this chapter, in reference to streets shall be considered to include the establishment or the alteration of a grade or elevation of such a street; and, further, the establishment or alteration of such a grade or elevation and the improvement of the street may be done at one and the same time, or separately, as the case may be. 
(Ord. 812, 1969: Ord. 762 § A, 1967) 
3.12.020 - Initiation of proceedings and report from city engineer. 
    Whenever the council shall deem it necessary, upon its own motion or upon the petition of the owners of one-half of the property to benefit specially from the improvement, to make any street, sewer, sidewalk, drain, or other public improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits, then the council shall, by motion, direct the city engineer to make a survey and written report for such project and file the same with the city recorder. Unless the council shall direct otherwise, such report shall contain the following items: 
A.  A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for the payment of any part of the cost thereof; 
B.  Plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done; provided however, that where the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the city engineer may adopt the plans, specifications, and estimates of such agency; 
C.  An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement, including any legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto; 
D.  An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefited properties; 
E.  A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the properties specially benefited; 
F.  The description and assessed value of each lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof, to be specially benefited by the improvement, with the names of the contract purchasers thereof; 
G.  A statement of outstanding assessments against property to be assessed. 
(Ord. 762 § 1, 1967) 
3.12.030 - Council's action on report. 
    After the city engineer's report shall have been filed with the city recorder, the council may thereafter by motion: 
A.  Approve the report; 
B.  Modify the report and approve it as modified; 
C.  Require the city engineer to supply additional or different information for such improvement; or 
D.  Abandon the improvement. 
(Ord. 762 § 2, 1967) 
3.12.040 - Resolution and notice of hearing. 
    After the council shall have approved the city engineer's report as submitted or modified, the council shall, by resolution, declare its intention to make such improvement, provide the manner and method of carrying out the improvement, and shall direct the city recorder to give notice of such improvement by two publications one week apart in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and by mailing copies of such notice by registered or certified mail to the owners to be assessed for the costs of such improvement, which notice shall contain the following items: 
A.  A statement that the retort of the city engineer is on file in the office of the city recorder and is subject to public examination and that the report is by reference thereto made a part of the notice; 
B.  A statement that the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a specified date, which shall not be earlier than ten (10) days following the first publication of notice, at which objections and remonstrances to such improvement will be heard by the council, and that if prior to such hearing there shall be presented to the city recorder valid, written remonstrances of the owners of two-thirds of the property to be specially assessed for such improvement, then the improvement will be abandoned for at least six months, unless the proposed public improvement is a sidewalk or an improvement unanimously declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency; 
C.  A description of the real property to be specially benefited by the improvement; and such description may be made as specified in ORS 223.387 or by a description of the boundaries or the area or district to be assessed; 
D.  The names of the owners of such property; 
E.  The estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the property specially benefited by a statement of such cost set opposite the name of the owner thereof; 
F.  The total cost of the improvement to be paid by special assessments to benefited properties. 
(Ord. 929 § 2, 1976: Ord. 762 § 3, 1967) 
3.12.050 - Manner of doing work. 
    The council may provide in the improvement resolution that the construction work may be done in whole, or in part, by a private contractor, by the city, by any other governmental agency, or by any combination thereof. 
(Ord. 762 § 4, 1967) 
3.12.060 - Hearing. 
    At the time of the public hearing on the proposed improvement, the council shall receive all written remonstrances and oral objections. If written remonstrances shall have been received prior to the hearing from the owners of two-thirds of the property to be specially assessed for such improvement, action shall be suspended for six months; except that if the improvement shall be a sidewalk, or if the council shall unanimously declare the improvement to be needed at once because of an emergency, then the council may proceed with the improvement. The council may, by motion, at the time of the hearing, after hearing written remonstrances and oral objections, if any, order the improvement to be carried out in accordance with the resolution, or the council may, on its own motion, abandon the improvement. 
(Ord. 762 § 5, 1967) 
3.12.070 - Call for bids. 
    The council may, in its discretion, direct the city recorder to advertise for bids for construction of all, or any part, of the improvement project on the basis of the council-approved city engineer's report and before the passage of the resolution, or after the passage of the resolution and before the public hearing on the proposed improvement, or at any time after the public hearing. However, no contract shall be let until after the public hearing has been held to hear remonstrances and oral objections to the proposed improvement. In the event that any part of the work of the improvement is to be done under contract bids, then the council shall determine the time and manner of advertisement for bids, and the contracts shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder; provided, that the council shall have the right to reject all bids when they are deemed unreasonable or unsatisfactory. The city shall provide for the bonding of all contractors for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority, and the provisions thereof in case of default shall be enforced by action in the name of the city. 
    If the council finds, upon opening bids for the work of such improvement, that the lowest responsible bid is substantially in excess of the city engineer's estimate, it may, in its discretion, provide for holding a special hearing of objections to the proceeding with the improvement on the basis of such bid, and it may direct the city recorder to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. 762 § 6, 1967) 
3.12.080 - Assessment. 
A.  Proposed Assessment. After the aforesaid hearing, and after the council has moved to proceed with the improvement, and after the council has apportioned the cost of the improvement (or so much thereof that is to be assessed to the property benefited) upon the property specially benefited by the improvement, the city recorder shall within thirty (30) days prior to the hearing thereon give notice of such proposed assessment by publication thereof in the newspaper, Coquille Valley Sentinel, once each week for two consecutive weeks, making a total of two publications only; such notice to contain the following: 
1.  The specification of the improvement that may be by name only; 
2.  A statement that the proposed assessment is on file in the office of the city recorder; 
3.  The name of the owner of such property; 
4.  A description in accordance with ORS 223.387 of the real property to be assessed or by description of the boundaries of the area or district to be assessed; 
5.  That objection to such assessment may be made in writing, stating the grounds of the objection to the council, and filed with the city recorder prior to the commencement of the meeting of the council at which the assessment is to be considered; 
6.  The time and place of the meeting of the council whereat the. passage of an ordinance assessing the cost of the improvement will be considered. The city recorder shall also mail a copy of such notice, postage prepaid, to such owner. If the address of the owner or owner's agent is unknown, he or she shall mail the notice addressed to the owner or agent at Coquille, Oregon. 
B.  Hearing. At the time specified in the notice or at such subsequent time as the council may fix, the council shall consider the proposed assessments and all objections made thereto, and shall have power, at its discretion and without any further notice, to consider, ascertain and determine the amount to which each lot or part of lot or parts of lands so assessed is benefited by reason of the improvement. The council shall then declare the assessment by ordinance and direct the city recorder to enter a statement thereof in the Docket of City Liens. 
(Ord. 929 § 1, 1976: Ord. 762 § 7, 1967) 
3.12.090 - Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing. 
    The council in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the improvement may: 
A.  Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the benefits derived; 
B.  Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed as is just and reasonable between the properties determined to be specially benefited; 
C.  Authorize payment by the city of all, or any part of the cost of any such improvement when in the opinion of the council the topographical or physical conditions, or unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work involved warrants only a partial payment or no payment by the benefited property of the costs of the improvement. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the council from using any other available means of financing improvements, including federal or state grants-in-aid, sewer charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or any other legal means of finance. In the event that such other means of financing improvements are used, the council may, in its discretion, levy special assessments according to the benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the costs of the improvement. 
(Ord. 762 § 8, 1967) 
3.12.100 - Remedies. 
    Subject to the curative provisions of Section 3.12.170 and the rights of the city to reassess as provided in Section 3.12.180, all proceedings for writs of review and suits in equity may be filed not earlier than thirty (30) days nor later than sixty (60) days after the filing of written objections as provided herein. 
    If notice of the improvement shall not have been sent to the property owner, and if such owner did not otherwise have actual knowledge of the proposed improvement prior to the hearing thereon, he may file written objections with the city recorder alleging lack of jurisdiction, and any other objection he might have, all to be done within thirty (30) days after receiving notice or actual knowledge of the improvement. 
    All proceedings for writs of review and suits in equity shall be founded upon written objections duly and regularly made and filed by the property owner. 
    Such written objections of the property owner may be informal in nature, but shall specifically set forth every objection and the facts in support thereof with sufficient clarity to put the council to a consideration thereof. 
    No provision of this section shall be construed to lengthen any period of redemption or to affect the running of any statute of limitation. Any proceeding on a writ of review or suit in equity shall be abated if proceedings are commenced and diligently pursued by the city council to remedy or cure the alleged errors or defects. 
(Ord. 762 § 9, 1967) 
3.12.110 - Notice of assessment. 
    Within ten (10) days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the city recorder shall send by registered or certified mail a notice of assessment to the owner of the assessed property, and shall publish notice of such assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first publication of which shall be made not later than ten (10) days after the date of the assessment ordinance. The notice of assessment shall recite the date of the assessment ordinance and shall state that upon the failure of the owner of the property assessed to make application to pay the assessment in installments within ten (10) days from the date of the first publication of notice, or upon the failure of the owner to pay the assessment in full within 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance, then interest will commence to run on the assessment and that the property assessed will be subject to foreclosure; and the notice shall further set forth a description of the property assessed, the name of the owner of the property, and the amount of each assessment. 
(Ord. 762 § 10, 1967) 
3.12.120 - Lien records and foreclosure proceedings. 
    After passage of the assessment ordinance by the council, the city recorder shall enter in the docket of city liens a statement as provided by Ordinance No. 798. Upon entry in the lien docket, the amount entered shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels of land, or portions thereof, which have been assessed for the improvement. 
(Ord. 1155, 1983: Ord. 1093, 1981: Ord. 762 § 11, 1967) 
3.12.130 - Errors in assessment calculations. 
    Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the city recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error in fact. If the recorder shall find that there has been an error in fact, he or she shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct such error, and upon enactment of such amendment, the city recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of city liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by registered or certified mail. 
(Ord. 762 § 12, 1967) 
3.12.140 - Deficit assessment. 
    In the event that an assessment shall be made before the total cost of the improvement is ascertained, and if it is found that the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the council may, by motion, declare such deficit and prepare a proposed deficit assessment. The council shall set a time for a hearing of objections to such deficit assessment and shall direct the city recorder to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and mail copies of such notice by registered or certified mail to the owners of property to be assessed for the costs of the improvement. After such hearing, the council shall make a just and equitable deficit assessment by ordinance which shall be entered in the docket of city liens as provided by this ordinance, and notices of the deficit assessment shall be published and mailed and the collection of the assessment shall be made in accordance with Sections 3.12.110 and 3.12.120. 
(Ord. 947, 1976: Ord. 762 § 13, 1967) 
3.12.150 - Rebates. 
    If, upon the completion of the improvement project, it is found that the assessment previously levied upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the costs of such improvements, then the council must ascertain and declare the same by ordinance, and when so declared, the excess amounts must be entered one lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. In the event that any assessment has been paid, the person who paid the same, or his or her legal representative, shall be entitled to the repayment of such rebate credit, or the portion thereof which exceeds the amount unpaid on the original assessment. 
(Ord. 762 § 14, 1967) 
3.12.160 - Abandonment of proceedings. 
    The council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for improvements made under this chapter at any time prior to the final completion of such improvements; and if liens have been assessed upon any property under such procedure, they shall be cancelled, and any payments made on such assessments shall be refunded to the persons paying the same, their assigns or legal representatives. 
(Ord. 762 § 15, 1967) 
3.12.170 - Curative provisions. 
    No improvement assessment shall be rendered invalid by reason of a failure of the city engineer's report to contain all of the information required by Section 3.12.020, or by reason of a failure to have all of the information required to be in the improvement resolution, the assessment ordinance, the lien docket, or notices required to be published and mailed, nor by the failure to list the name of, or mail notice to, the owner of any property as required by this chapter, or by reason of any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps herein specified, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining; and the council shall have the power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. 
(Ord. 762 § 16, 1967) 
3.12.180 - Reassessment. 
    Whenever any assessment, deficit or reassessment for any improvement which has been made by the city has been, or shall be, set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by any court of this state, or any federal court having jurisdiction thereof, or when the council shall be in doubt as to the validity of such assessment, deficit assessment, or reassessment, or any part thereof, then the council may make a reassessment in the matter provided by the laws of the state of Oregon. 
(Ord. 762 § 17, 1967) 
3.12.190 - Publications. 
    The provisions of Sections 3.12.040 and 3.12.110 requiring publication of the description of real property affected by the improvement and property to be assessed may be made by describing such real property by Coos County, Oregon, tax lot number only, thereby avoiding description by metes and bounds or by lot and block, when deemed advisable by the city recorder. 
(Ord. 773, 1967: Ord. 762 § 19, 1967) 
3.12.200 - Period of time to pay assessments. 
    Pursuant to ORS 223.215, property owners whose real property has been assessed for an "improvement" as defined in ORS Chapter 223, providing for assessments for local improvements and methods of enforcing liens and in collecting assessments and financing improvements in cities. (Bancroft Bonding Act), shall have a period not to exceed ten (10) years to pay assessments in equal semi-annual installment payments as provided in said Section 223.215. 
(Ord. 910 § 1, 1975) 
Chapter 3.16 - LIEN SEARCHES 

3.16.010 - Authority. 
    The recorder of the city of authorized and directed to make searches of the lien records of the city and to issue certificates concerning the existence of liens upon property within the city after receiving applications for such certificates and the fees provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 881 § 1, 1973) 
3.16.020 - Certificate contents. 
    The certificate of lien search authorized by this chapter shall contain a description of the property involved; shall set forth any liens that may be recorded in the lien records of the city on the date that such certificate is issued; and shall be directed and issued to the applicants for such certificate. 
(Ord. 881 § 2, 1973) 
3.16.040 - Separate certificates required for each parcel. 
    The city recorder shall issue a separate certificate and shall collect a separate fee for each distinct and contiguous parcel of land for which an application for certificate is made. 
(Ord. 881 § 4, 1973) 
3.16.050 - Liability for errors in certificate. 
    No person, firm or corporation, other than the party to whom a certificate shall be directed and issued, shall be entitled to rely upon any information contained in a certificate of lien of the city; and the city shall assume no responsibility and shall have no liability to any third person as a result of issuing any certificate of lien. There shall be no liability for an error in certificate in excess of the actual loss to the party to whom a certificate has been issued, and such damages shall in no event exceed the amount of the omitted lien or liens existing upon the property in question on the date of the issuance of the certificate. There shall also be no liability where any of the persons to whom a certificate has been issued has knowledge or notice of the lien or has suffered a loss through their own neglect or carelessness. In any case where the city shall be liable for damages in the issuance of a certificate of lien search, it shall, upon payment of such damage, become subrogated to all of the rights of the damaged party and shall be entitled to an assignment of such rights against any and all third parties who may be liable for such damage. 
(Ord. 881 § 5, 1973) 
3.16.060 - Indemnity limit. 
    In no case shall the indemnity provided in Section 3.16.050 exceed the amount of the indemnity reserve fund described in Section 3.16.030. 
(Ord. 881 § 6, 1973) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
Chapter 5.04 - REGISTRATION OF BUSINESSES 

5.04.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Business" means and includes any trade, profession or occupation conducted in the city. 
    "Person" means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, syndicate, society or domestic or foreign corporation. 
(Ord. 1276 § 1, 1990) 
5.04.020 - Business-Registration requirement. 
    Any person engaged in business in the city, who has a business address or business located in the city, is required to register the business with the city at least five days prior to the commencement of operation of the business in the city. 
(Ord. 1276 § 2, 1990) 
5.04.030 - Business registration information. 
    Upon a form provided by the city, any person registering a business to be conducted in the city shall provide the following information: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of owner. If the owner of the business is a corporation, the corporation; 
B.  The primary nature of the trade or operation of the business enterprise; 
C.  If products will be offered for retail sale, a description of the primary nature of the goods or wares for sale; 
D.  The location from which the business will operate; 
E.  The business hours, if any. 
(Ord. 1276 § 3, 1990) 
5.04.040 - Business registration record. 
    Upon receipt of business registration information as provided in Section 5.04.020, the city will maintain a record of businesses registered in the city in accordance with the information received on the business registration forms required. 
(Ord. 1276 § 4, 1990) 
5.04.050 - Nonlicense status. 
    A business registration filed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter does not constitute a license to conduct business in the city. The operation of any business enterprise in the city must be conducted in compliance with all state, federal and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(Ord. 1276 § 5, 1990) 
5.04.060 - Registration fee. 
    A person filing a business registration form in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance shall submit therewith a registration fee of $-0- at the time of filing. 
(Ord. 1276 § 6, 1990) 
5.04.070 - Change in ownership or principal nature of business enterprise. 
    In the event of a change in ownership of the business being operated in the city or a change in the primary nature of the business, whether or not the business remains at the same location, a new business registration shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.020 within five days of the change. 
(Ord. 1276 § 7, 1990) 
5.04.080 - Existing businesses exempt. 
    All businesses existing within the city as of the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be exempt from the requirement of business registration as provided in this chapter, except that an existing business shall be required to comply with the terms of this chapter in the event of the occurrence of a change in ownership or a change in the primary nature of the business enterprise as required by Section 5.04.070. 
(Ord. 1276 § 8, 1990) 
5.04.090 - Violations-Penalties. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry on or transact business as defined in this chapter without first complying with the registration requirements of this chapter. Any person who shall engage in or carry on a business within the corporate limits of the city without first having filed a business registration form as required by this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine in an amount not in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. 1276 § 9, 1990) 
Chapter 5.12 - GARAGE SALES 

5.12.010 - Garage sale defined. 
    "Garage sale" means the public sale of new or used goods within the city limits by an individual or a group of individuals from any private property, including but not limited to garages, porches, carports or yards, when the individual or group of individuals is not in the business of selling goods or not licensed as a second-hand dealer, or when the property from which such sale is to be conducted is not within a zone permitting commercial businesses or when the sale is not otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter or the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 1180 § 1, 1984) 
5.12.020 - Limitation on the number of sales. 
    No individual or group of individuals shall hold or conduct more than two garage sales at any one location within the city limits located within a residential district in any one calendar year. No garage sale shall be conducted for a period longer than three consecutive days. 
(Ord. 1180 § 2, 1984) 
5.12.030 - Sirens. 
    In any residential district in the city where a garage sale is permitted under the terms of this chapter, there shall be only one sign posted on the premises advertising the sale. 
(Ord. 1180 § 3, 1984) 
5.12.040 - Violations-Penalties. 
    Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day of the violation. 
(Ord. 1180 § 4, 1984) 
Chapter 5.16 - ITINERANT MERCHANTS 

5.16.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to protect the public safety and welfare by regulating persons engaged in business as itinerant merchants. 
(Ord. 1346 § 1, 1993) 
5.16.020 - Itinerant merchant defined. 
A.  "Itinerant Merchant" means: 
1.  A person, individually or as principal, agent or employee of another, who goes from place to place or from house to house, carrying for sale and offering or exposing for sale goods, wares, merchandise or services to persons other than merchants; 
2.  A person, individually or as principal, agent or employee of another, who goes from place to place or from house to house, selling or offering to sell for future delivery, by sample or catalog, at retail, goods, wares, merchandise or services to persons who are not merchants; or 
3.  A person individually or as principal, agent or employee of another, who occupies a temporary fixed location, taking orders for future delivery or selling and delivering from stock on hand and doing business in much the same manner as a permanent business. 
B.  Itinerant merchant shall not include: 
1.  Any person who is acting solely as the owner, agent or employee of a wholesale business which regularly conducts business with local retail merchants within the city; 
2.  Any person who is acting solely as the owner, agent or employee of a business with a permanent business location or residence within the Coos County; or 
3.  A charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic organization desiring to solicit, or have solicited in its name, money, donations of money or property or financial assistance of any kind, or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from person, other than members of such organization, on the streets, in office buildings, from house to house, or in public places, for a charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic, purpose. 
(Ord. 1346 § 2, 1993) 
5.16.030 - License required. 
    No person shall engage in business as an itinerant merchant as defined in Section 5.16.020 within the corporate limits of the city without first applying for and obtaining a license. 
(Ord. 1346 § 3, 1993) 
5.16.040 - License application. 
    An applicant for a license shall submit a sworn, written application on a form to be furnished by the city recorder. The application shall include the following information: 
A.  The applicant's true name, permanent address, and an address which the city may use for purposes of notifying the applicant; 
B.  The true name and address of the person appointed as agent for accepting service of process for the applicant; 
C.  The true name and address of a person for whom the applicant is acting as an employee or agent. If the applicant is acting as the agent of a corporation: 
1.  The address of the registered office of the corporation in Oregon, and 
2.  The name and address of the registered agent of the corporation in Oregon; 
D.  A description of the nature of the business operation the applicant will conduct; 
E.  A description of the goods, wares, merchandise or services the applicant will offer for sale; 
F.  The location from which the applicant will operate; 
G.  The length of time the applicant will conduct the business and the hours of operation; 
H.  The past business experience of the applicant; 
I.  Past criminal convictions involving unlawful trade practices as defined by ORS 646.608, fraud, or crimes involving moral turpitude; 
J.  Known consumer complaints made to local or state consumer agencies. 
(Ord. 1346 § 4, 1993) 
5.16.050 - Application and license fee. 
A.  The applicant shall submit with the completed application a nonrefundable fee to cover the cost of administration and investigation in the amount of sixty dollars ($60.00). 
B.  In addition to the administrative and investigative fee described in subsection A of this section, license fees shall be as follows: two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per day, five dollars ($5.00) per month, ten dollars ($10.00) per year. Such fees shall be paid at the time of the issuance of the license. 
    The amount of the fee may be changed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1346 § 5, 1993) 
5.16.060 - Investigation and determination. 
A.  The city recorder shall refer an application to the chief of police for investigation to determine whether the public safety will be properly safeguarded. The investigation shall include the manner in which the applicant proposes to do business, examination of any vehicle or conveyance to be used in connection with the business, and inspection of the place from which the applicant proposes to do business. 
B.  The license and permit shall not be granted if: 
1.  The activity or devise to be licensed would not comply with city ordinances, or state or federal law. 
2.  The licensed activity or device would endanger property or the public health or safety. 
3.  Any false or misleading information is supplied in the application or any information requested is omitted from the application. 
4.  The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving unlawful trade practices as defined by ORS 646.608, fraud or moral turpitude within the last five years. 
5.  The applicant has been the subject of an unreasonable number of consumer complaints in the last five years. 
6.  The applicant has been the subject of an unlawful trade practices suit or investigation under ORS Chapter 646 which resulted in civil penalties assessed against him or her. 
7.  The applicant has failed to comply with any other applicable provision of this chapter relating to the proposed conduct of the business. 
C.  If, as a result of the investigation, the application appears to be satisfactory, the city recorder shall issue a license. 
D.  The city recorder shall keep a full record of all licenses issued. A license shall contain: 
1.  The number of the license; 
2.  The date of issue; 
3.  The nature of the business authorized; 
4.  The amount of the fee paid; 
5.  The expiration date; 
6.  The place of business; 
7.  The name or names of persons authorized to carry on the business. 
E.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city recorder in regard to the denial of an application for license provided in this section shall have the right to appeal to the council of the city. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal with the council within ten (10) days after notice of the decision has been mailed by the city recorder to such person at his or her last known address. The council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee by mailing the notice to the licensee at his or her last known address at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision of the council on such appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. 1346 § 6, 1993) 
5.16.070 - Duration of license. 
A.  The license issued under this chapter shall be in effect for one year. 
B.  No itinerant merchant shall do business or leave any stand or structure associated with their business at the same location for more than six consecutive months and after six consecutive months has expired shall not reestablish their business or place any stand or structure associated with their business at that location for two consecutive months. If an itinerant merchant ceases to operate a business for fourteen (14) consecutive days, the license for that itinerant merchant shall automatically terminate and all stands, signs, storage facilities and structures of any kind associated with the business shall be immediately removed by an agent or employee of the city. 
(Ord. 1346 § 7, 1993) 
5.16.080 - Outside storage prohibited. 
    No outside storage or display of supplies, equipment, stock, wares or other materials associated with the itinerant merchant's business shall occur except while the itinerant merchant is present and open for business. 
(Ord. 1346 § 8, 1993) 
5.16.090 - Maintenance of premises. 
    The itinerant merchant's business premises and any adjacent areas used or under the control of the itinerant merchant shall at all times be kept neat, clean and free of debris. All stands, storage facilities or structures used shall be in good condition and well maintained. 
(Ord. 1346 § 9, 1993) 
5.16.100 - Exhibition of license. 
    The license issued under this chapter shall be worn conspicuously by the person or persons to whom the same shall be issued, on the lapel or other suitable place on the outer clothing, at all times while such person is engaged in the business for which such license is issued. 
(Ord. 1346 § 10, 1993) 
5.16.110 - Transfer of license. 
    No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable. 
(Ord. 1346 § 11, 1993) 
5.16.120 - Proof of insurance. 
A.  The applicant shall submit proof of general liability insurance coverage in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to any one claimant for all claims arising out of a single accident or occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any number of claims arising out of a single accident or occurrence. The applicant shall also submit proof of products liability and errors and omissions insurance coverage in the same amounts, if appropriate to the business proposed to be conducted. 
B.  The proof of insurance coverage required by this section may be satisfied by evidence that the applicant is an additional insured on an existing policy providing coverage in the required amounts. 
(Ord. 1346 § 12, 1993) 
5.16.130 - Appointment of agent for service of process. 
    Before any license herein provided shall be issued, the applicant shall submit with the application for the license an instrument, on the form provided by the city recorder, appointing a person who is a resident of the city as the applicant's true and lawful agent with full power and authority to accept process of service for and on behalf of the applicant with regard to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under the license. The instrument shall contain the applicant's appointed agent's acknowledged consent to accept service, of process for the applicant. 
(Ord. 1346 § 13, 1993) 
5.16.140 - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
    No licensee under this chapter, nor anyone in his or her behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound devise including loudspeakers, radio or amplifying systems upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposed to sell. 
(Ord. 1346 § 14, 1993) 
5.16.150 - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to inspect the itinerant merchant's place of business and the itinerant merchants in their respective territories to determine if this chapter has been or is being complied with and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 1346 § 15, 1993) 
5.16.160 - Conformance with other law. 
    Obtaining the license required by this chapter shall not exempt the licensee from other city ordinance requirements. 
(Ord. 1346 § 16, 1993) 
5.16.170 - License revocation. 
    The license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the common council of the city after notice of hearing for any of the following causes: 
A.  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
B.  Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise; 
C.  Any violation of this chapter; 
D.  Conviction of the licensee for any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
E.  Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare or the public. 
(Ord. 1346 § 17, 1993) 
5.16.180 - Stop order and notice of revocation. 
    If the city manager determines that there are probable grounds for revoking the itinerant merchant's license, he or she may take one of the following actions: 
1.  By written order, direct that the business operations be discontinued immediately pending a determination by the city council. The order shall specify the alleged grounds upon which the order is based and the date the council will act on the matter. No person shall continue to operate as an itinerant merchant after receiving a stop order from the city manager; or 
2.  Notify the licensee of the alleged violation and the date the council will consider the matter. The notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the council meeting. 
3.  If a stop order is issued, the city manager shall submit the matter to the council for consideration at its next regularly scheduled council meeting. If a stop order is not issued, the city manager shall submit the matter to the council for consideration at its next available meeting. The decision of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1346 § 18, 1993) 
5.16.190 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, whether individually or as principal, agent or employee of another, violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day that a violation of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1346 § 19, 1993) 
Chapter 5.20 - MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING BUSINESSES 

5.20.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the term "business of wrecking motor vehicles" means the business of wrecking, dismantling, permanently disassembling, or substantially altering the form of any motor vehicle and/or any business required to be licensed by the state of Oregon under the provisions of ORS 822.100 to 822.150, as now constituted or hereafter amended. The term "building" means a structure or building which shall comply with the provisions of the building code of the city and which shall have, in addition to a roof completely covering the same, solid walls completely around all four sides thereof; provided, however, that such building may have the necessary windows, exits and doors, which shall be so constructed that the same may be completely closed. 
(Ord. 1301, 1991: Ord. 955, 1977: Ord. 5-264 § 1, 1948) 
5.20.020 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on or conduct within the corporate limits of the city the business of wrecking motor vehicles unless and until he or she shall have received a license from the city authorizing the carrying on or conducting of such business as herein provided. 
(Ord. 5-264 § 2, 1948) 
5.20.030 - License fee. 
    Any person, persons, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a license for the purpose of conducting a business of wrecking motor vehicles within the corporate limits of the city shall pay the license fee therefor, which shall be the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year or any fraction of a year. Said license shall expire on December 31st next after the date of such license. 
(Ord. 5-264 § 3, 1948) 
5.20.040 - License not transferable. 
    A license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall not be assignable or transferable by the licensee and shall be effective for the place named in the application and for no other place or location. Upon the sale or transfer of the business conducted by any licensee under the provisions of this chapter, the purchaser thereof shall apply for and obtain a license to conduct a business. A person conducting a business under a license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter desiring to move such business and to continue to conduct such business at some other location within the corporate limits of the city shall apply to the common council in writing for permission to move such business and any such move without such permission shall render void any license theretofore given to such licensee to so conduct the business. All applications made for licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall specify the name of the licensee and the location where the business is to be conducted. 
(Ord. 5-264 § 4, 1948) 
5.20.050 - Outside premises. 
    No motor vehicle parts belonging to or under the control of any person, firm or corporation conducting the business of wrecking motor vehicles within the corporate limits of the city, shall be placed or permitted to remain outside or near any building in which the business is conducted, and the person, firm or corporation conducting such business shall at all times keep the premises on the outside of the building clear and clean. 
(Ord. 5-264 § 5, 1948) 
5.20.060 - Parts left outside premises-Nuisance declared. 
    Any motor vehicle parts placed or left outside of a building on any premises where the business of wrecking motor vehicles is being conducted are declared to be a public nuisance, and the same may be abated summarily by the chief of police in addition to the imposition of any other penalty herein provided. 
(Ord. 5-264 § 6, 1948) 
5.20.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation conducting any motor vehicle wrecking business within the corporate limits of the city without having obtained a license therefor as required by this chapter, or any person who, having obtained such license, shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter upon conviction thereof before the city recorder, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), and thereupon any license theretofore granted to the person so convicted may be revoked at the pleasure of the common council. 
(Ord. 5-264 § 7, 1948) 
5.20.080 - Applicability. 
    None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to or in any manner affect the right of any person not regularly engaged either as a primary occupation or as part-time employment, in the business of wrecking motor vehicles as herein defined, to dismantle or substantially alter the form of his or her own private motor vehicle on his or her own premises without obtaining a license herein required. 
(Ord. 5-264 § 8, 1948) 
Chapter 5.24 - SOCIAL GAMES AND GAMBLING 

5.24.010 - Gambling prohibited. 
    No person shall participate in, operate or assist in operating a gambling game or activity, including a lottery, except for the state lottery operated under the provisions of the Oregon Constitution. No person shall possess any property, instrument or device designated or adapted for use in any such gambling activity. Such property, instrument or device is a nuisance and may be summarily seized by a police officer. Seized property shall be placed in the custody of the chief of police. On conviction of a person owning or controlling such property for a violation of this section, the municipal judge shall order the property confiscated and destroyed. 
(Ord. 1300 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1150 § 1, 1983) 
5.24.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, except when the context indicates otherwise: 
    "Cardroom" means any space, room or enclosure furnished or equipped with a table used or intended to be used as a card table for playing a social game and the use of which is available to the public. This definition shall not apply to a bona fide nonprofit society, club or fraternal, religious, civic or educational organization as defined in Section 5.24.130. 
    "Contest of chance" means a contest, game, gaming scheme or gaming device in which the outcome depends in a material degree on an element of chance, notwithstanding that skill of the contestants also may be a factor. 
    "Employee" means employee of the licensee. 
    "Gambling" means when a person stakes or risks something of value on the outcome of a contest of chance or a future contingent event not under the person's control or influence on an agreement or understanding that the person or someone else will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome. Gambling does not include: 
1.  Social games; 
2.  Bona fide business transactions valid under the law of contracts for the purchase or sale at a future date of securities or commodities and agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance, including but not limited to contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life, health or accident insurance; or 
3.  Bingo or lotto operated by a charitable, fraternal or religious organization when no person other than the organization or a player profits in any manner from the operation of the lottery and when the organization has complied with the provisions of ORS 167.118 and city ordinances and regulations. 
    "House income" means the receipt of anything of value derived from, but not limited to, any of the following: 
1.  Renting space, chips, equipment or other paraphernalia; 
2.  Raised or excessive charges for services, refreshments or any other item sold or rented in a place where a social game is licensed to be conducted or sold or rented to any player of a social game; 
3.  Placing a specific charge on a social game or on a player of a social game; 
4.  Use of any technique or device that inures to the benefit of a person, private business, private club, place of public accommodation, organization, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or any combination of individuals having a collective capacity. 
    "Social game" means: 
1.  A game, other than a lottery, between players in a private home when no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no house income from operation of the game; and 
2.  A game, other than a lottery, between players in a private business, private club, or place of public accommodation when no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no income from operation of the game. 
    "Table" means a device or thing on which one social gambling game is conducted. One or more social gambling games may be conducted on the same table, but not simultaneously, in whole or in part. 
(Ord. 1300 § 2, 1991; Ord. 1150 § 2, 1983) 
5.24.030 - Social games. 
    Social games are authorized to be played by those who have attained the age of majority and may be conducted in a private business, private club, or in a place of public accommodation, subject to the provisions of state and local law. 
(Ord. 1150 § 3, 1983) 
5.24.040 - Application for license. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted, a cardroom in the city where social games are played between private parties and items of value or money may be exchanged based upon the winning or losing of the game without having obtained a valid license from the city. Licenses shall be granted only on approval of the council. 
B.  A person making application for a cardroom license shall be the sole and exclusive owner of the table or tables used or to be used in the cardroom. 
C.  If the cardroom to be licensed is owned by a corporation, the license shall issued in the name of the corporation on written application of its president, vice president, secretary or treasurer. If the cardroom to be licensed is owned by a partnership, a partner owning the majority interest or an equal interest in the partnership shall make the written application and the license shall be issued in the partnership name. 
(Ord. 1380 §§ 1, 2, 1997; Ord. 1227 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1176, 1984; Ord. 1150 § 4, 1983) 
5.24.050 - License investigation. 
    An applicant for a cardroom license shall submit an application under oath to the city recorder. The application shall include the true names and addresses, personal histories and business experiences, fingerprints, photographs and past criminal records of all persons who are financially interested in the business and any other matters the city manager considers necessary. The term "person financially interested" includes all persons who share in the profits of the business. The application also shall be accompanied by a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) nonrefundable investigation fee. Effective January 1, 1984, this fee shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). 
(Ord. 1150 § 5, 1983) 
5.24.060 - Granting and denial of application. 
    The council shall either approve the application and grant the license or deny the application and refuse to grant the license. The license shall not be granted if a person who has an interest in the business has: 
A.  Been convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years; 
B.  Been convicted of five misdemeanors, the last of which was within five years; 
C.  Been convicted of or forfeited bail for a crime involving gambling within the last five years; 
D.  Been involved, directly or indirectly, in a forfeiture proceeding regarding a gambling device as defined in the Oregon Revised Statutes where such gambling device has been ordered destroyed or a bond has been forfeited in lieu of the gambling device being destroyed within the last five years; 
E.  Given false or misleading information or omitted information requested in the application; 
F.  Had a license in the name of the person revoked or suspended three times by the Oregon Liquor Commission, the last of which was in the last five years; 
G.  Been convicted of violation of a law or ordinance involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. 1150 § 6, 1983) 
5.24.070 - Responsibility of licensee. 
    A licensee shall assign a person to each cardroom to supervise the games and ensure that they are played strictly in accordance with this chapter and provisions of the Oregon Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. 1150 § 7, 1983) 
5.24.080 - Employee work permits. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, employees in cardrooms and employees supervising cardroom activities shall obtain work permits from the city. Applications for work permits shall be obtained from the recorder and shall contain information considered necessary to allow a police background investigation. The city manager may deny a permit based on recommendations from city departments when it is documented that employment should not be permitted. A work permit shall not be issued to a person who has not been a resident of Coos County, Oregon, for at least six months preceding issuance of the permit or who has been involved in conduct described in Section 5.24.060 that would lead to refusal to grant a license. An application for a work permit shall be accompanied by an annual permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00), and a work permit shall be valid for one year. An employee holding a valid Oregon Liquor Control Commission work permit shall not be required to obtain the work permit described in this section. 
(Ord. 1150 § 8, 1983) 
5.24.090 - License not transferable. 
    A cardroom license is not assignable or transferable. A change of persons having financial interest in a licensed business shall be reported immediately in writing to the city manager, who shall order an investigation by the police department and the change shall be approved or denied by the council. An application for change of financial ownership shall be accompanied by a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) nonrefundable investigation fee. Effective January 1, 1984, this fee will be sixty dollars ($60.00). 
(Ord. 1150 § 9, 1983) 
5.24.100 - Suspension and revocation of license. 
A.  The city manager shall temporarily suspend a cardroom license or work permit if a person who has an interest in the business has been involved in conduct described in Section 5.24.060 or if such person or an employee violates any section of this chapter. 
B.  A suspension shall be subject to the right of appeal to the council in regular council session. If written notice of an appeal is not filed with the recorder within ten (10) days after the date of the suspension, the suspension shall be final and conclusive. A temporary suspension shall be for thirty (30) days. 
C.  Permanent revocation may be made only by the council, on application of the city manager. Revocation shall take place at a regular council session at least ten (10) days after the licensee has been served with written notice. Notice shall include the time and date of the council meeting and the grounds on which the permanent revocation is sought. Notice is received by the licensee or permittee if the city manager deposits in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, a written notice to the address listed by the licensee or permittee on the application for a license or permit. 
(Ord. 1150 § 10, 1983) 
5.24.110 - Regulations. 
A.  No person shall operate a cardroom in violation of any of the following regulations and rules: 
1.  In one hand or round: 
a.  No player shall bet more than ten dollars ($10.00) in money or other thing of value. 
b.  The amount awarded the winner, except for a poker game as provided in subdivision (1)(c) of this subsection, shall not exceed $10 in money or other thing of value multiplied by the number of players in the game. 
c.  In a poker game, there shall be no more than three raises. 
d.  In a 21-game (blackjack), there shall be no more than three hands per player. 
2.  Licensees and permittees holding or obtaining licenses and permits under the provisions of this chapter agree to be bound by and observe each of the terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Games conducted or operated in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted and operated in full conformity with, and subject to, all provisions of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
4.  Cardrooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. Cardroom licenses and work permits shall be available for inspection during all hours of operation. 
5.  No licensee or permittee shall participate in a card game or procure players, back, farm out, assign or sublet card games lawfully permitted under this chapter on the premises in which the licensee or permittee has any interest or works. 
6.  Playing of all card games shall be arranged to provide free access and visibility to interested persons. Doors leading into the cardroom must remain unlocked during all hours of operation. 
7.  No minor shall be permitted to participate in a card game or to enter or remain on the premises. 
8.  No charge shall be collected from a player for the privilege of participating in a game. 
9.  All players in a game, including the dealer, must use their own money. 
B.  The city manager may require one or more of the above rules to be posted in a cardroom in a conspicuous place and in a readable style. 
(Ord. 1227 § 2, 1987; Ord. 1150 § 11, 1983) 
5.24.120 - Cardroom license fees. 
    The cardroom license fee for any period of a calendar year that is more than six months shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for one table used for social gambling. The cardroom license fee for any period of a calendar year that is six months or less shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for one table used for social gambling. In addition to the cardroom license fee paid for one table used for social gambling, the applicant/licensee shall pay an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional table used for social gambling. All license fees are nonrefundable. Other than as provided herein, there shall be no proration of the cardroom license fee. 
(Ord. 1380 § 3, 1997: Ord. 1227 § 4, 1987: Ord. 1150 § 13, 1983) 
5.24.130 - Exceptions to license. 
    A nonprofit society, club or fraternal, religious, civic or educational organization having adopted bylaws and duly elected directors and members may be granted a cardroom license at an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) when the tables are for the exclusive use of members of the organization and no charge is made for participation. A license, as provided by this section, may be granted only if the organization has been in continuous existence and actively conducting its affairs in the city for a period of two years immediately preceding application for a license and only if the conduct of the cardroom is not the primary reason for existence of the organization. 
(Ord. 1150 § 14, 1983) 
5.24.140 - Suspension and revocation of table license. 
    Suspension of a cardroom license where a licensed table is located shall automatically suspend the table license. 
(Ord. 1150 § 15, 1983) 
5.24.150 - Expiration of table license. 
    All table licenses and applications for table licenses shall expire at midnight December 31st each year. 
(Ord. 1150 § 16, 1983) 
5.24.160 - Names of employees. 
    On request from a law enforcement officer, a cardroom licensee shall make available the full name and address of any cardroom employee or former employee. 
(Ord. 1150 § 18, 1983) 
5.24.170 - Issuance of licenses and permits. 
    The recorder may issue the licenses and permits provided by this chapter on proper application, approval and fee payment. 
(Ord. 1150 § 19, 1983) 
5.24.180 - Renewal. 
    Cardroom licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be renewed by city staff on or before the last working day of any calendar year during which the license is effective without the payment of a new investigative fee, if the application for renewal is the same as the application submitted for the license which is presently effective. Requests for renewal of licenses after the last working day of the year during which the license is effective shall be accompanied by a new investigative fee regardless of whether or not the application is the same as the application submitted for the previous year, and shall be renewed only upon action by the council. 
(Ord. 1227 § 5, 1987: Ord. 1150 § 24, 1983) 
5.24.190 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of, or failure to comply with, a provision of this chapter is punishable, on conviction, by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 1150 § 20, 1983) 
Chapter 5.26 - MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL DEALER'S BUSINESS LICENSE 

5.26.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and phrases shall mean: 
    "City" means the city of Coquille. 
    "Dealer" means any person who: 
1.  Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use, or distribution in the city, but "dealer" does not include any person who imports into the city motor vehicle fuel in quantities of five hundred (500) gallons or less purchased from a supplier who is licensed as a dealer hereunder if that dealer assumes liability for the payment of the applicable license tax to the city; or 
2.  Produces, refines, manufactures, or compounds motor vehicle fuels in the city for export or for use, distribution or sale in the city; or 
3.  Acquires in the city for sale, use or distribution in the city motor vehicle fuels with respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred. 
    "Distribution" in addition to its ordinary meaning, means the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or for delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer. 
    "Highway" means every street, road, way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature, open for use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel. 
    "Motor vehicle" means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel. 
    "Motor vehicle fuel" means and includes gasoline, diesel, mogas, methanol and any other flammable or combustible gaseous, liquid, or solid substance, by whatever name such substance, is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles except a substance, the chief uses of which, as determined by the tax administrator, is for purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the highways. 
    "Person" means and includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other business entity. 
    "Service station" means any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. 
    "Tax administrator" means the city manager, the city manager's designee, or any person or entity with whom the city manager contract to perform those duties. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.020 - Tax imposed. 
    A business license tax is imposed on every dealer. The tax imposed shall be paid monthly to the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to exercise all supervisory and administrative powers with regard to the enforcement, collection and administration of the business license tax, including all powers specified in the ORS 319.010 to 319.430. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.030 - Amount and payment. 
    In addition to any fee or taxes otherwise provided for by law, every dealer engaging in the city in the sale, use or distribution of motor vehicle fuel, shall: 
A.  Not later than the 25th day of each calendar month, render a statement to the tax administrator on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator of all motor vehicle fuel sold, use or distributed by him or her in the city as well as all such fuel sold, used or distributed in the city by a purchaser thereof upon which sale, used or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the applicable license tax during the preceding calendar month. 
B.  Pay a license tax computed on the basis of three cents per gallon of such motor fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such statement in the manner and within the time provided in this code. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.040 - License requirements. 
    No dealer shall sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until he or she has secured a dealer's license as required herein. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.050 - License applications and issuance. 
A.  Every person, before becoming a dealer in motor vehicle fuel in this city, shall make application to the tax administrator for a license authorizing such person to engage in business as a dealer. 
B.  Applications for the license shall be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator. 
C.  Application shall be accompanied by a duly acknowledged certificate containing: 
1.  The business name under which the applicant transacts business; 
2.  The address of applicant's principal place of business and location of distributing stations in and within three miles of the city; 
3.  The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the several persons constituting the firm or partnership or, if a corporation, the name under which the corporation is authorized to transact business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent, as well as primary transport carrier. 
D.  If an application for a motor vehicle fuel dealer's license is complete and accepted for filing, the tax administrator shall issue to the dealer a license in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe to transact business in the city, provided, however, that the tax administrator may refuse to issue such license if it finds that the applicant meets any of the conditions for refusal to issue a license under state law. A license issued hereunder is not assignable, and is valid only for the dealer in whose name it is issued. 
E.  The tax administrator shall retain all completed applications with an alphabetical index thereof, together with a record of all licensed dealers. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.060 - Failure to secure license. 
A.  If a dealer sells, distributes or uses any motor vehicle fuel without first filing the certificate and obtaining the license required by Section 5.26.050, the license tax on all motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that dealer shall be immediately due and payable. 
B.  The tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine, from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable, the amount of tax due, shall assess the dealer for the tax in the amount found due, together with a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the tax, and shall make its certificate of such assessment and penalty. In any suit or proceeding to collect the tax or penalty or both, the certificate shall be prima facie evidence that the dealer therein named is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty stated. 
C.  Any tax or penalty assessed pursuant to this section may be collected in the manner prescribed in Section 5.26.100 with reference to the delinquency in payment of the fee or by an action at law. 
D.  In the event any suit or action is instituted to enforce this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney's fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.070 - Suspension and revocation of license. 
    The tax administrator may, to the extent permitted by law suspend, and upon ten (10) days written notice revoke the license of any dealer who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter. The tax administrator shall mail, by certified mail addressed to the dealer at his or her last known address appearing in the files of the tax administrator, a notice of intent to cancel. The notice of revocation shall include the reason for cancellation. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.080 - Cancellation of license. 
A.  The tax administrator may, upon written request of a dealer, cancel a license issued to that dealer. The tax administrator shall, upon approving the dealer's request for cancellation, set a date not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request, after which the license shall no longer be effective. 
B.  The tax administrator may, after thirty (30) days' notice has been mailed to the last known address of the dealer, cancel the license of dealer upon finding the dealer is no longer engaged in the business of a dealer. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.090 - Remedies cumulative. 
    Except as otherwise provided in Sections 5.26.100 and 5.26.110, the remedies provided in Sections 5.26.060 through 5.26.080 are cumulative. No action taken pursuant to those sections shall relieve any person from the penalty provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.100 - Payment of tax and delinquency. 
A.  The license tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the tax administrator on or before the 25th day of each month. 
B.  Except as provided in subsections C and D of this section, if payment of the license tax is not paid as required by subsection A of this section, a penalty of one percent of such license tax shall be assessed and immediately due and payable. 
C.  Except as provided in subsection D of this section, if the payment of the tax and penalty, if any, is not made on or before the 1st day of the next month following that month in which payment is due, a further penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax shall be assessed. Said penalty shall be in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection B of this section and shall be immediately due and payable. 
D.  Penalties imposed by this section shall not apply if a penalty has been assessed and paid pursuant to Section 5.26.060. The tax administrator may for good cause shown waive any penalties assessed under this section. 
E.  If any person fails to pay the license tax or any penalty provided for by this section, the tax and/or penalty shall be collected from that person for the use of the city. The tax administrator shall commence and prosecute to final determination in any court of competent jurisdiction as action at law to collect the same. 
F.  In the event any suit or action is instituted to collect the business license tax or any penalty provided for by this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney's fees at trail or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.110 - Monthly statement of dealer. 
    Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall provide to the tax administrator on or before the 25th day of each month, on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, a statement of the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by the dealer during the preceding calendar month. The dealer or the dealer's agent shall sign the statement. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.120 - Failure to file monthly statement. 
    If a dealer fails to file any statement required by Section 5.26.110, the tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by such dealer for the period unreported, and such determination shall in any proceeding be prima facie evidence of the amount of fuel sold, distributed or used. The tax administrator shall immediately assess the dealer for the license tax upon the amount determined, adding thereto a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax. The penalty shall be cumulative to other penalties provided in this code. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.130 - Billing purchasers. 
    Dealers in motor vehicle fuel shall render bills to all purchasers of motor vehicle fuel. The bills shall separately state and describe the different products sold or shipped thereunder and shall be serially numbered except where other sales invoice controls acceptable to the tax administrator are maintained. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.140 - Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag. 
    No person shall receive and accept motor vehicle fuel from any dealer, or pay for the same, or sell or offer the motor vehicle fuel for sale, unless the motor vehicle fuel is accompanied by and invoice or delivery tag showing the date upon which motor vehicle fuel was delivered, purchased or sold and the name of the dealer in motor vehicle fuel. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.150 - Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk. 
    Every person operating any conveyance for the purpose of hauling, transporting or delivering motor vehicle fuel in bulk shall, before entering upon the public highways of the city with such conveyance, have and possess during the entire time of the hauling or transporting of such motor vehicle fuel, an invoice, bill of sale or other written statement showing the number of gallons, the true name and address of the seller or consignor, and the true name and address of the buyer or consignee, if any, of the same. The person hauling such motor vehicle fuel shall, at the request of any officer authorized by law to inquire into or investigate such matter, produce and offer for inspection the invoice, bill of sale or other statement. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.160 - Exemption of export fuel. 
A.  The license tax imposed by Section 5.26.020 shall not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel: 
1.  Exported from the city by a dealer; or 
2.  Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of five hundred (500) gallons or less for export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer shall be required to report such exports and sales to the city in such detail as may be required. 
B.  In support of any exemption from license taxes claimed under this section other than in the case of stock transfers or deliveries in the dealer's own equipment, every dealer must execute and file with the tax administrator an export certificate in such form as shall be prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, containing a statement, made by some person having actual knowledge of the fact of such exportation, that the motor vehicle fuel has been exported from the city, and giving such details with reference to such shipment as the tax administrator may require. The tax administrator may demand of any dealer such additional data as is deemed necessary in support of any such certificate, and failure to supply such data will constitute a waiver of all right to exemption claimed by virtue of such certificate. The tax administrator may, in a case where the tax administrator believes no useful purpose would be served by filing of an export certificate, waive the filing of the certificate. 
C.  Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle shall not be considered as exported from the city. 
D.  No person shall, through false statement, trick or device, or otherwise, obtain motor vehicle fuel for export as to which the city tax has not been paid and fail to export the same, or any portion thereof, or cause the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof not to be exported, or divert or cause to be diverted the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof to be used, distributed or sold in the city and fail to notify the tax administrator and the dealer from whom the motor vehicle fuel was originally purchased of his or her act. 
E.  No dealer or other person shall conspire with any person to withhold from export, or divert from export or to return motor vehicle fuel to the city for sale or use so as to avoid any of the fees imposed herein. 
F.  In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel in individual quantities of five hundred (500) gallons or less for export by the purchaser, the dealer shall retain in his or her files for at least three years, an export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such information as is prescribed by the tax administrator. This certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which is applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.170 - Sales to armed forces exempted. 
    The license tax imposed by Sections 5.26.020 and 5.26.030 shall not be imposed on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the Armed Forces of the United States for use in ships, aircraft or for export from the city; but every dealer shall be required to report such sales to the tax administrator in such detail as may be required. A certificate by an authorized officer of such armed forces shall be accepted by the dealer as sufficient proof that the sale is for the purpose specified in the certificate. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.180 - Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed. 
    Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the fuel tank of such vehicle, motor vehicle fuel for his or her own use only and for the purpose of operating such motor vehicle without securing a license or paying the tax provided in Sections 5.26.020 and 5.26.030 or complying with any of the provisions imposed upon dealers herein, but if the motor vehicle fuel so brought into the city is removed from the fuel tank of the vehicle or used for any purpose other than the propulsion of the vehicle, the person so importing the fuel into the city shall be subject to all the provision herein applying to dealers. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.190 - Refunds. 
    Refunds will be made pursuant to applicable Chapter 319 of the Oregon Revised Laws. Claims forms for refunds may be obtained from the tax administrator's office. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.200 - Examinations and investigations. 
    The tax administrator, or duly authorized agents, may make any examination of accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel or other petroleum product or products within this city, and such other investigations it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. If the examinations or investigations disclose that any reports of dealers or other persons theretofore filed with the tax administrator pursuant to the requirements herein, have show incorrectly the amount of gallonage of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing thereon, the tax administrator may make such changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or other persons, or may make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its examinations or investigation. The dealer shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of the examination or investigation if the action discloses that the dealer paid ninety-five (95) percent or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination or investigation. In the event that such an examination or investigation results in an assessment by and an additional payment due to the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per year from the date of the original tax payment was due. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.210 - Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this code, any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid filed by a dealer must be so taken or filed within three years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the city. 
B.  Except in the case of a fraudulent report or neglect to make a report, every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this code shall be served on dealers within three years from the date upon which such additional taxes become due, and shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 5.26.100. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.220 - Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel. 
    The tax administrator or duly authorized agents of the tax administrator may at any time during normal business hours examine the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provision of this code. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.230 - Record to be kept by dealers. 
    Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall keep a record in such form as may be prescribed by the tax administrator of all purchases, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle fuel. The record shall include copies of all invoices or bill of all such sales and shall at all times during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the tax administrator or authorized officers or agents of the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.240 - Records to be kept three years. 
    Every dealer shall maintain and keep, for a period of three years, all records of motor vehicle fuel used, sold and distributed within the city by such dealer, together with stock records, invoices, bills of lading and other pertinent papers as may be required by the tax administrator. In the event such records are not kept within the state of Oregon, the dealer shall reimburse the tax administrator for all travel, lodging, and related expenses incurred by the tax administrator in examining such record. The amount of such expenses shall be assessed in addition to the tax imposed by Section 5.26.020. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
5.26.250 - Use of tax revenues. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, net revenue shall mean the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter remaining after providing for the cost of administration and any refunds and credits authorized herein. 
B.  The net revenue shall be used only for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, maintenance, operation, and use of public highways, roads, streets and sidewalks within the city. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 2007) 
Chapter 5.27 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS LICENSE 
Article 1. - Telecommunications Operations License 

5.27.010 - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Affiliate" means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or, controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person. 
    "Cable Acts" means the Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as hereafter amended. 
    "Cable operator" means an entity providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the city as that term is defined in the Cable Acts. 
    "Cable service" shall have the same meaning as defined in the Cable Acts. 
    "Excess capacity" means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, maintenance hole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way, that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities, including that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the public utility commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment. 
    "FCC or Federal Communications Commission" means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level. 
    "Licensee" means any entity granted a license hereunder. 
    "Overhead facilities" means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications, facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities. 
    "Person" means any individual or entity engaging in activities regulated by this chapter. 
    "Public street" means any highway, street, alley or public right-of-way dedicated for motor vehicle travel under jurisdiction and control of the city. 
    "Public utility easement" means any easement granted to the city, acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for access for public utility facilities for construction, operations, and maintenance purpose. 
    "Public way" includes all public streets owned by the city and public utility easements granted to the city, as those terms are defined herein, but only to the extent of the city's right, title, interest or authority to grant permission to occupy and use such streets and easements. 
    "Tax administrator" means the city administrator of the city or designee. 
    "Telecommunications carrier" includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service. 
    "Telecommunications facilities or system" means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications service. 
    "Telecommunications provider" includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities. 
    "Telecommunications service" means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming or any other information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium. 
    "Underground facilities" means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities. 
    "Usable space" means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the public utility commission. 
    "Utility" means any telecommunications utility as defined in ORS 759.005(1), and telecommunications, carrier, telecommunications provider or other entity providing [telecommunications services]. 
    "Utility facility" means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility services. The term shall include all such things owned by the utility and all such things as the utility shall have a property interest in, including things held by the utility or on its behalf under a lease, rental agreement or indefeasible right of use for a term of years. 
    "Utility services" means all services provided by a utility to customers located within the city limits of the City of Coquille or provided to customers wherever located using facilities physically within the city limits of the City of Coquille. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.020 - Telecommunications utility license required. 
    A telecommunications utility license shall be required of any utility who desires to provide telecommunications services to persons in the city or to persons or areas outside the city using facilities located within the city. No utility shall provide services within the city nor shall such utility provide services outside the city using facilities located within the city unless licensed as provided herein. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with city ordinances. Utilities who utilize facilities of another licensed utility for the distribution of their services shall be required to have a separate license. The purpose of licensing under this article is to: 
A.  Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the utilities who offer telecommunications services within the city, or that own or operate utility facilities within the city; 
B.  Assist the city in enforcement of this chapter; 
C.  Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license, permit or other fees or charges that may be due the city; 
D.  Assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, and, to the extent authorized by law, with state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.030 - License application. 
    Any utility that is required to have a telecommunications utility license shall file an application, using the form provided for such purpose, with the city, which shall include the following information: 
A.  The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant. 
B.  A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee. 
C.  Information to establish that the applicant has obtained or has applied for all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the services. Such approvals include, without limitation, any land use decisions. In the event any other required government approval is not obtained any license granted hereunder shall be subject to modification to reflect the absence of such approval upon the city's discovery of, or notice of the absence of required information. 
D.  Identification of any adverse circumstances affecting the use of the public way, and a description of efforts to mitigate such circumstances. 
E.  All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.040 - Determination by the city. 
    Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application under Section 5.27.160 hereof, the city shall, if the application conforms with the requirements of law, issue the license. 
    If the application is denied, the denial shall be in writing and state the reasons for denial. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.050 - Effect of utility license. 
A.  The license granted hereunder shall authorize and permit the licensee, subject to other provisions of Coquille ordinances and other applicable provisions of state and federal law, to operate in the city and provide the telecommunications services covered by the license. In addition to a grant of authority to operate within the city, and subject to other requirements of law regarding the activities involved in the placement of facilities in the public ways of the city, the license shall authorize the licensee to maintain facilities in, and occupy, the public ways of the city for so long as the licensee shall comply with the provisions of this code, and continue to hold any and all licenses and permits required by state and federal law for the provision of such services as covered by this license; provided, however that all work, construction, placement or operation of such facilities shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Coquille Code, including the standard construction specification. Nothing in such license shall authorize the licensee to use the facilities or property of another, which use, if any shall be subject to agreement with the owner of such facility or property and any applicable provisions of law. Nothing in such license shall operate or be construed as an approval of such business or a regulation of the practices of such business. 
B.  The city reserves the right, in every event, without limitation, to: 
1.  Construct, install, maintain and operate any public improvement, work or facility in, on, over or under the public ways; 
2.  Perform or authorize or direct the performance of any work that the city may find desirable or convenient in, on, over or under any public way; or 
3.  Vacate, alter, or close any public way; provided, however, that no vacation shall obligate a utility to remove or abandon any facility located within such public way; or 
4.  Require, in the public interest, the removal or relocation, temporarily or permanently, of facilities maintained by the utility in the public ways of the city. The utility shall remove and relocate such facilities within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving notice in writing to do so from the city. Such removal or relocation shall be without cost or expense to the city, provided, however, that when such removal or relocation is required for the convenience or benefit of any private person, or non-governmental agency or instrumentality, utility shall be entitled to reimbursement for the reasonable cost thereof from such person, agency or instrumentality, to the extent permitted by law. 
C.  Whenever the city shall perform or cause or permit to be performed, any work in the public way or the vicinity of the public way where such work may disturb or interfere with a utility's facilities, the city shall, or shall require its permittee, to notify, in writing, the utility sufficiently in advance of such contemplated work to enable utility to take such measures, including removal or relocation of such facilities, as may be deemed necessary to protect such facilities, at its own expense. 
D.  The possession of a utility license from the city shall not provide the licensee with any right or privilege to alter or avoid any charge or cost allocation for the relocation of utility facilities, nor shall a license provide a different or greater claim for compensation, than otherwise apportioned by law or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.060 - Nonexclusive grant. 
    No license granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to conduct business in the city or to occupy or use the public ways of the city for delivery of utility services or any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.070 - Rights granted. 
    No license granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to conduct authorized activities within the city to offer telecommunications services and, where appropriate, to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.080 - Term of grant. 
    Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.090 - Coordination of activities. 
    Wherever possible, all holders of a license are directed to coordinate their activities affecting the public ways and shall be obliged to participate in coordination meetings to be held by the city for the purpose of facilitating such cooperation and coordination. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.100 - Amendment of license. 
    A new license application and grant shall be required of any utility that desires to extend additional or different services in the city which are not included in a license previously granted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.110 - Renewal applications. 
    A licensee that desires to renew its license under this article shall, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than ninety (90) days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the city for renewal of its license which shall include the information required for initial licensing. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.120 - Renewal determinations. 
    Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under Section 5.27.110 hereof, the city shall issue a written determination applying the following standards, as applicable, and, if the application conforms with the requirements of law, grant the application: 
A.  Demonstrated legal qualifications, financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
B.  Compliance with requirements of applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
C.  The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other Coquille ordinances. 
    If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for non-renewal. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.130 - Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. 
    No license shall be renewed until any existing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the licensee has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Article 2. - Utility License-Fees and Compensation 

5.27.140 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the city related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.150 - Application and review fee. 
A.  Any applicant for a license including a renewal or amendment of an existing license, pursuant to Article 1 of this chapter shall pay a fee fixed by resolution of the council. 
B.  The application and review fee shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to Article 1 of this chapter. 
C.  An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied within sixty (60) days of its application and review fee written request, shall be refunded the balance of this deposit under this section, less: 
1.  The non-refundable portion of the application and review fee, as fixed by resolution of the council, or 
2.  All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the application, whichever is greater. 
D.  The council may elect to establish a graduated scale of application fees, reflecting the relative scope of utility activities within the city. Any applicant seeking to qualify for a reduced fee shall provide the necessary documentation at the time of application showing eligibility for any fee reduction. The decision of the city administrator regarding the applicability of a fee reduction shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.160 - Other city costs. 
    In addition to the application and review fee, all license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefore, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.170 - Compensation for city property. 
    If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property other than the public ways for the installation of facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the city and shall be separate and distinct from any fees and taxes imposed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.180 - Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax. 
    The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this article, and any compensation charged and paid for city property provided for in Section 5.27.170, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a utility, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.190 - Penalties and interest for late payment. 
    If any fee provided for herein shall not be timely paid, a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of such fee shall be assessed and due as of the date the underlying fee was due. Interest on fees and penalties shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, commencing with the fifteenth (15th) day after the fee or penalty shall be due. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
Article 3. - Telecommunications Utility License Fee 

5.27.200 - Telecommunications provider fee imposed. 
    There is hereby imposed a fee in the amount of seven percent of gross revenue upon the privilege of conducting a utility business and providing telecommunications services required to be licensed under Section 5.27.020, upon any telecommunications provider required to be licensed, as defined herein, in consideration of the authority of such provider to conduct such business. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.210 - Minimum fee. 
    In no event shall the fee due for any calendar year be less than: 
A.  In the case of a telecommunications provider providing services within the City of Coquille, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
B.  In the case of a telecommunications provider not providing services within the City of Coquille, the greater of the product of the number of linear feet of public ways occupied by the facilities of the taxpayer and three dollars ($3.00) per linear foot, or five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
C.  Licensees who can show that their gross annual revenues for services provided within the City of Coquille are less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may apply for an exemption from the payment of the license fee. Where the tax administrator can determine from the evidence provided that the applicant for an exemption is providing less than the threshold amount of services receiving a concomitantly small advantage derived from doing business within the city, and where the administrative costs to the city of processing the license fee payments would exceed the benefit to the city, the tax administrator may grant an exemption. Such an exemption shall be good only for the calendar year granted. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.220 - Returns. 
A.  For purposes of calculating fees due under this article, every telecommunications provider subject to licensing and fees shall pay such fee on the basis of a calendar year, and shall file, quarterly, before the forty-fifth (45th) day following the end of a calendar quarter, a return certified by an officer of the provider showing the amount of fee due and accompanied by the amount due. 
B.  Such return shall show the amount of gross revenue of the utility within the city for the period covered by the payment computed on the basis set out in this article, and shall show any offsets, deductions or credits against the revenue or the amount of fee due. The compensation for the period covered by the statement shall be computed on the basis of the gross revenue so reported. If the licensee fails to pay the entire amount of compensation due the city through error or otherwise, the difference due the city shall be paid by licensee within fifteen (15) days from discovery of the error or determination of the correct amount, with interest at the rate of nine percent per annum, compounded monthly. Any overpayment to the city through error or otherwise shall be offset against the next payment due from the licensee. 
C.  In the event a licensee files a return claiming the minimum fee provided by Section 5.27.210 shall be due, the licensee shall nonetheless file a return as provided in subdivision B hereof and shall, if claiming under Section 5.27.210(B), file a report duly certified by an engineer, licensed to practice within in State of Oregon, setting forth the calculation of the number of linear feet of public way occupied by the licensee. After the first such report, the licensee claiming under Section 5.27.210(B), may substitute for the engineer's report a statement from a person knowledgeable about such matters, attesting that no additional installations have been made, if such a statement can be made. 
D.  The city may audit any return filed by the licensee, and require the licensee to submit such information as shall reasonably be required to establish the accuracy of any payment of fee or return documenting the amount of fee due. In the event such audit shall disclose a discrepancy in favor of the city in excess of five percent or the amount paid, there is hereby imposed a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the difference between the amount paid and the amount found, upon audit, to be due. 
E.  Acceptance by the city of any payment due under this article shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the city of any rights to conduct such audit, nor shall the acceptance by the city of any such payments preclude the city from later establishing that a larger amount was actually due, or from collecting any balance due to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.230 - Gross revenue. 
    For purpose of this article, gross revenue shall mean any and all revenue, of any kind, nature or form, without deduction for expenses; all inflows or enhancements of assets or settlements of its liabilities (or a combination of both) of whatsoever kind and nature derived by the licensee and, any affiliates, subsidiaries or parent of the licensee on account of goods or service from the licensee's ongoing operations delivered within the City of Coquille. Gross revenue shall include any and all subsidies, discounts, rebates or other considerations or forbearances by the licensee associated with the delivery of such goods and services within the City of Coquille. In determining gross revenues for the calculation of fees, the city shall consider mobile telecommunications services to occur within the city if they are used by a customer whose place of primary use is within the city. As used in this section, "place of primary use" means the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. The city shall apply this provision consistently with the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 USC 116 to 126. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.240 - Exemptions and credits. 
    If any licensee is a party to a franchise, public way use agreement, or other contract with the city which requires the payment of a fee for the use of the public ways of the city, any payments made under such agreement during the filing year shall be credited against any fee due hereunder to the extent the revenue upon which such payments are based is subject to taxation hereunder. Revenues not included in the franchise or other agreement but otherwise earned because of transactions in the city shall remain subject to the license fee. 
A.  If a taxpayer asserts that any other provisions of local, state or federal law imposes a limit upon the revenue subject to taxation that can be imposed in connection with the use of public ways, such taxpayer shall file a return which: 
1.  Itemizes the gross revenue subject to taxation under this article; 
2.  Itemizes the portion of such revenue that is subject to the limitation claimed to exist under other provisions of local, state or federal law. 
B.  The tax liability of a taxpayer claiming a limitation on revenue subject to taxation shall be the sum of: 
1.  The fee due hereunder on that portion of the taxpayer's revenue not subject to the limitation; and 
2.  On the portion of revenue subject to limitation, the lesser of: 
a.  The fee due under this article; or 
b.  The tax due under the other provision of local, state or federal law. 
C.  Any licensed utility shall be allowed, as a credit against taxes due hereunder, the reasonable value of any and all services rendered to or goods provided to the city without fee, if any, during the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.250 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  If any payment due hereunder shall not be timely made, there is imposed a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the amount due. 
B.  Interest on any payment not timely made, and upon all penalties imposed, shall accrue at the annual rate of nine percent, compounded daily, for each day beyond the due date, until the date paid. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
5.27.260 - Lien. 
    The fee imposed by Section 5.27.200, together with the interest and penalties provided by Section 5.27.250 and the filing fees paid to the Department of Records of Coos County, Oregon, and auditing or other costs which may be incurred when the fee becomes delinquent under Section 5.27.220 shall be, and until paid remain, a lien from the date of its recording with the Department of Records of Coos County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all real property or tangible personal property of the licensee located within the City of Coquille and may be foreclosed on and sold as necessary to discharge the lien, if the lien has been so recorded. Notice of lien may be issued by the tax administrator whenever the operator is in default in the payment of the fee, interest and penalty, and shall be recorded with the department of records and a copy sent to the delinquent licensee. The personal property subject to the lien and seized by any deputy of the tax administrator may be sold by the tax administrator at public auction after ten (10) days notice thereof published in a newspaper in the city. 
A.  Any such lien as shown on the records of the department of records shall, upon the payment of the fees, penalty and interest for which the lien has been imposed, [be] released by the tax administrator when their full amount has been paid to the city. The person making the payment shall receive a receipt therefore stating that the full amount of the fees, penalties, and interest have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
Chapter 5.28 - TAXICABS 

5.28.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context otherwise clearly indicates: 
    "Driver" means any person who drives a taxicab whether such person is the operator of the taxicab or is employed by the operator hereof. 
    "Operator" means any person owning or engaging in the business of operating one or more taxicabs. 
    "Person" includes all natural persons of either sex, corporations, partnerships and associations. 
    "Taxicab" means any motor or self-propelled vehicle used to carry passengers for hire, which operates over the streets of the city and/or over public streets, roads, and highways within a three mile area from the limits of the city, but not on a fixed route or schedule, excepting ambulances, a map of the service area being attached hereto. 
    "Taxicab stand" means any place along the street of the city which is reserved by the city for the exclusive use of taxicabs. 
(Ord. 1089 § 1, 1991) 
5.28.020 - Operator's license. 
    Every operator must obtain a license under the following requirements: 
A.  If a natural person, be over the age of twenty-one (21) years; 
B.  If a corporation, limited partnership, or association, be authorized to conduct business under the laws of the state of Oregon; 
C.  Make application, in writing, to the city council of the city, stating substantially as follows: 
1.  Name and post office address of the applicant. (If a partnership or joint venture, the application must so state and contain the names and addresses of all parties thereto), 
2.  The class and carrying capacity of each vehicle to be operated under the operator's license, 
3.  The date, year, model, serial number, and state license number of each vehicle, 
4.  The business name under which the operator will do business, 
5.  Evidence of insurance as hereinafter required, 
6.  Reference as to character and reputation as a law-abiding citizen and of financial responsibility; 
D.  The council may revoke any operator's license for violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any other ordinance or violations of state laws regulating traffic or intoxicating liquor by his or her drivers. 
(Ord. 1406 §§ 1, 2, 2000; Ord. 1089 § 2, 1991) 
5.28.030 - Taxicab drivers. 
A.  Every taxicab driver shall obtain a permit from the chief of police containing: 
1.  The present likeness of the taxicab driver in the form of a photograph; 
2.  The permit number; 
3.  The name and address of the driver; 
4.  The taxicab driver's Oregon driver's license number; 
5.  The signature of the taxicab driver. 
B.  The permit shall be displayed prominently in the taxicab at all times by the taxicab. It is unlawful to drive a taxicab with other than the taxicab driver's permit displayed. 
C.  Every taxicab driver shall at all times possess at least a valid Class C driver's license as defined by ORS 807.031(4), and shall have a validly issued commercial driver's license of the appropriate classification as specified by ORS 807.031 in the event that the taxicab driver, in the performance of his or her duties, is called upon to operate a vehicle for which a commercial driver's license is required under the provisions of Oregon state law. 
D.  A taxicab driver's permit may be suspended by the city manager upon proof of conviction of the violation of an ordinance of the city or any state law regulating traffic or the use of a motor vehicle, whether or not the violation involves the operation of a taxicab. 
E.  No taxicab driver shall knowingly deceive any passenger who may ride with him or her, or who may desire to ride with him or her, as to his or her destination or distance traveled or to be traveled. 
F.  The taxicab driver shall promptly notify the nearest police station within twenty-four (24) hours of all property of value left in his or her vehicle by any passenger. 
G.  No taxicab driver shall drive or operate the same while intoxicated, or operate the same in a careless or reckless manner, or use any profane or obscene language. 
H.  The council may revoke any taxicab driver's permit for cause as in this section set forth and defined. 
(Ord. 1282 §§ 1, 2, 1991; Ord. 1280 § 4, 1990; Ord. 1089 § 3, 1991) 
5.28.040 - Fees. 
    There shall be no license fee for a license issued under this chapter. All licenses issued hereunder expire on December 31st of the year issued. 
(Ord. 1089 § 4, 1991) 
5.28.050 - Taxicab stands. 
A.  The council may, from time to time, by resolution designate and thereby exclude the stands from the metered zone of the city. 
B.  Each operator, upon making application in writing for a taxicab stand, shall present with the application the written consent of the proprietor of the business establishments in front of which the taxicab stand is to be located. 
C.  It is unlawful for persons other than the operator to cause or allow any vehicle operated or controlled by him or her to be upon the street in any parking space designated as a taxicab stand. 
(Ord. 1089 § 5, 1991) 
5.28.060 - Insurance. 
    The operation of all taxicabs shall be covered with public liability insurance insuring the taxicab, operator and driver with minimum limits of liability coverage in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The operator of the taxicab shall maintain on file with the city a certificate evidencing insurance coverage in compliance with this section at all times when the license provided for in this chapter is in effect. 
(Ord. 1280 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1089 § 6, 1991) 
5.28.070 - Hours of operation. 
    Hours of operation for a taxicab service in the city shall be from eight a.m. to five p.m. and may be extended if the operator so desires. Service shall be provided Monday through Friday and may be provided on Saturday and Sunday at the operator's option. A schedule of hours of operation shall be presented for council approval at the first council meeting after obtaining the operator's license from the city. 
(Ord. 1089 § 7, 1991) 
5.28.080 - Subsidy. 
    The city may offer a subsidy to a taxicab operation to insure a viable service to residents of the city. 
(Ord. 1089 § 8, 1991) 
5.28.090 - Fares. 
    The fares to be charged for riders of taxicabs operating in the city and licensed under this chapter shall be subject to the approval of the common council of the city. Prior to the time of the operation of a taxicab service in the city the operator of the service shall present to the common council of the city at their regular meeting a fare structure to be approved by the common council of the city. At any time that the operator of a taxicab service proposes to raise the fares for riders, the new fare structure shall be presented to the common council of the city for their approval prior to their adoption by the taxicab operator. 
(Ord. 1091, 1991: Ord. 1089 § 11, 1991) 
5.28.100 - License/permit revocation procedure. 
A.  Any action taken by the city to revoke or suspend any license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be taken by notice, in writing, mailed to the operator and/or taxicab driver at the address shown on the last application submitted by the license/permittee in the offices of the city, mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall state the nature of the action to be taken, the reasons therefor and that the permittee/licensee may appeal the action to the city council by filing notice of appeal in writing within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice required hereby. The written request for appeal shall include the current mailing address of the permittee/licensee and must be received by the offices of the city no later than fifteen (15) days after the date on the city's notice of suspension of revocation. 
B.  As soon as practical after receiving the written request for appeal, there shall be scheduled before the city council a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the city council. The date for hearing the appeal shall be not more than thirty (30) days after the date the city receives the request for appeal. A written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing on the appeal shall be mailed to the permittee/licensee at least five days prior to such appeal hearing date. The suspension/revocation action of the city shall be stayed until the hearing on the appeal, except where the action is based upon conviction for violation of a motor vehicle law or ordinance or for lapse of a certificate of insurance coverage, in which case the appeal shall not stay the action of suspension or revocation. 
C.  If the permittee/licensee appears at the time scheduled for the hearing on the appeal, the city council shall hear the appeal in an informal manner for the purposes of determining all facts necessary from all parties involved. The permittee/licensee may appear in person or by authorized representative. At the conclusion of the hearing on the appeal, the city council by motion and order in the minutes of the meeting shall have authority to ratify, amend or reverse the earlier actions of the city. The decision of the city council on the appeal as provided for herein shall be the final action of the city and shall be binding on all parties. The action of the city on the appeal may be effective immediately or as soon thereafter as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
D.  In the event the permittee/licensee fails to appear following notice of the time fixed for the hearing of the appeal, the appeal shall be summarily denied and the action of the city shall be effective immediately. 
E.  As soon as is reasonably possible after the conclusion of the hearing on the appeal, the city shall notify the permittee/licensee in writing of the action taken on the appeal and the effective date of any action on the permit or license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1280 § 5, 1990: Ord. 1089 § 13, 1991) 
5.28.120 - Violations-Penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and for a continuing violation, the fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) may be imposed for each day the violation has occurred. 
(Ord. 1280 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1089 § 9, 1991) 
Chapter 5.30 - TRANSIENT LODGING TAX 

5.30.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the transient lodging tax ordinance of the City of Coquille. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.020 - Definitions. 
    Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
    "Accrual accounting" means a system of accounting where the operator enters the rent due from a transient on the operator's records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid. 
    "Cash accounting" means a system of accounting where the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on the operator's records until the rent is paid. 
    "City council" means the city council of the City of Coquille, Oregon. 
    "Entitled to occupancy" means the person so entitled is obligated to pay rent to the operator of the motel for each day during which the person has the right of occupancy in the motel. This term does not mean the person simply has reservations for a room, but that the person is obligated to pay rent for the room for each day such right exists. 
    "Finance director" means the City of Coquille Finance Director, or his or her designee. 
    "Motel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy for thirty (30) days or less for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes, by way of illustration and not limitation, any motel, inn, tourist home or house, hotel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, space in mobile home or trailer parks, or similar structure or portions thereof so occupied. 
    "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or rooms in a motel, or space in a mobile home or trailer park or portion thereof for lodging or sleeping purposes. 
    "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the motel in any capacity. Where the operator performs functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered compliance by both. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, municipal or other public corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or other group or entity in law or fact. 
    "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a motel, valued in money; or the monetary value of goods, labor, credits, property, or other consideration given in exchange instead of money, without any deduction. 
    "Rent package plan" means the consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient lodging tax under this chapter shall be the charge made for rent when food is not a part of a package plan. 
    "Tax" means the transient occupancy tax hereinafter imposed, either as the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which the operator is required to report collections. 
    "Tenancy" means the letting of real estate as a landlord to tenant pursuant to a lease agreement creating a residential landlord-tenant relationship. 
    "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to exercise occupancy in a motel for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the motel shall not be included in determining the thirty-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any such individual so occupying space in a motel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. An individual who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.030 - Tax imposed. 
    For the privilege of occupancy in any motel, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of seven percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the motel at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on the operator's records when rent is collected, if the operator keeps his records on the cash accounting basis, or when earned, if the operator keeps his records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. If for any reason the tax is not paid to the operator of the motel, the finance director may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services, and commodities other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations, and parking space in mobile home parks or trailer parks. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.040 - Collection of tax by operator-Rules for collection. 
A.  Every operator renting rooms in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempt under the terms of this chapter, shall collect the tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city. 
B.  In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.050 - Operator's duties. 
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from each transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator's records and any receipt tendered by the operator. No operator of a motel shall advertise or shall enter into agreement providing that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that when added, any part will be refunded, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.060 - Exemptions. 
    The tax shall not be imposed upon: 
A.  Any individual in actual occupation in a motel for more than thirty (30) successive calendar days; 
B.  Any individual whose rent has a value less than two dollars ($2.00) per day; 
C.  Any individual who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who rents such facilities incidental to the owner's use thereof; 
D.  Any individual whose rent is paid for occupancy in a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home, or home for aged people; 
E.  Any individual whose rent is paid for occupancy in a public dormitory owned and operated by a public educational institution when such occupancy is executed for educational purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.070 - Registration of operator-Form and contents-Execution. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a motel in the City of Coquille shall register with the city on a form provided by the finance director. Persons starting business must register within fifteen (15) calendar days after commencing business. Registration shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the operator's place or places of business, and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the finance director may require. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.080 - Returns and payments. 
A.  The tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time that rent is paid. Such tax collected by any operator is due and payable to the finance director as follows: 
1.  For the first twelve (12) months following registration as an operator of a motel in the city, payment for any given month will be made by the last day of the following month; or 
2.  Whenever the operator has been delinquent in two or more consecutive payments, for a period designated by the finance director, payment for any given month will be made by the last day of the following month; or 
3.  For all other operators, payment will be made on a quarterly basis, with payment for each quarter to be made by the last day of the month following the close of the quarter. The quarters are: 
1st quarter January, February, March 2nd quarter April, May, June 3rd quarter July, August, September 4th quarter October, November, December  
B.  Taxes are delinquent if not paid by the last day of the month following the close of the period referenced in subsection A of this section. 
C.  Returns shall be filed in such form as the finance director may prescribe and are due at the time the tax is paid. Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The finance director may require returns to show the total occupancies upon which tax was collected or otherwise due. 
D.  The operator shall deliver the return, together with remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the finance director at the City of Coquille finance office either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, date of postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.090 - Delinquency penalties. 
A.  An operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit the tax prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax due, in addition to the tax. 
B.  An operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who fails to pay a delinquent remittance before the expiration of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent of the tax due, plus the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent first penalty. 
C.  If the finance director determines that nonpayment is due to fraud or intent to evade the tax, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the tax shall be added in addition to the penalties provided in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  In addition to the penalties provided in subsections A, B, and C of this section, an operator who fails to remit the required tax shall pay interest on the tax due at the rate of one percent per month, without proration for portions of a month, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Each penalty imposed and all interest accrued shall be merged with and become a part of the tax required to be paid. 
F.  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the finance director may bring any action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.100 - Deficiency determinations-Fraud, evasion, operator delay. 
A.  Deficiency Determination. If the finance director determines that an operator's returns are incorrect, the finance director may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information within, or that may come within, the finance director's possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice of the finance director's determination, as hereinafter provided. Penalties and interest on deficiencies shall be assessed as provided in CMC 5.30.090. 
1.  In making a deficiency determination, the finance director may offset overpayment, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayment. 
2.  The finance director shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of the finance director's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. 
B.  Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax, or to make within the time provided in this chapter any report and remittance of the tax, or any portion thereof, the finance director shall proceed, in such manner as the finance director may deem best, to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance director has determined the tax due based on such information, the director shall proceed to assess against such operator the tax and interest provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the finance director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed, such determination and notice to be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the finance director of any fraud, intent to evade, or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten (10) days after the finance director has given notice thereof, and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid by such date. 
C.  Costs of Determining Tax. All costs to the city in determining the actual tax due from any operator shall be added to, and become a part of, the amount owed by the operator upon written notice to the operator, served personally or by mail. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.110 - Redetermination and refund. 
A.  Any operator against whom a determination is made under CMC 5.30.100 or any person against whom the tax has been imposed may file a petition for redetermination or refund within ten (10) days of the date notice is given to the operator under CMC 5.30.100(A) or within one year to the date the tax is collected from the person, as the case may be. The petition shall be verified and shall state the specific reason the redetermination is merited or refund is due. If a petition is not filed within such time period, the determination or imposition of the tax becomes final and binding. 
B.  If a petition is filed within the allowable period, the city manager shall reconsider the determination or imposition and, if the operator or person has so requested in the petition, shall give the operator or person a hearing after not less than two weeks' notice of the time and place for the hearing. The city manager may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary. 
C.  The city manager may decrease or increase the amount of the determination or imposition as a result of the hearing and, if an increase is determined, such increase shall be payable immediately after hearing. 
D.  The order or decision of the city manager upon a petition becomes final ten (10) days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof unless an appeal is filed with the city council, in writing, within the ten (10) days after service of such notice. 
E.  No petition, or appeal therefrom, shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.120 - Security for collection of tax. 
    The finance director, whenever deemed necessary to ensure the compliance with this chapter, may require an operator to deposit with the city cash, bond, or other security deemed acceptable by the city attorney. The amount of such cash, bond, or other security shall be fixed by the finance director, but it shall not be greater than twice the operator's estimated average quarterly liability for the period for which the operator files returns or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is less. Pursuant to CMC 5.30.150, the operator has a right to appeal any decision of the finance director made pursuant to this section to the transient occupancy tax appeal board by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within ten (10) days after service of notice of requirement to provide such security. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.130 - Administration. 
A.  Records Required from Operators-Form. Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of at least three years after they come into being. 
B.  Examination of Records-Investigations. The finance director may examine, during normal business hours, the books, papers, and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator after notification to the operator, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of the tax required to be paid. 
C.  Confidential Character of Information Obtained. No person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter shall make known in any manner whatsoever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any operator, except as follows: 
1.  The disclosure to, or the examination of, records and equipment by another City of Coquille official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provision of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
2.  The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the finance director may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby. 
D.  Tax Imposed. The tax imposed pursuant to Section 5.30.030 shall take effect only after the finance director has developed the necessary forms and documents to administer the tax. The finance director shall declare when the tax shall take effect, and give not less than fifteen (15) days notice of that date before the tax may take effect. The finance director's decision as to the effective date of the tax and the type of notice to provide shall be final and not subject to review. 
E.  Severability. If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
F.  Effective Date. This chapter shall become effective May 18, 2015, after its adoption by the council and approval by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.140 - Disposition and use of transient lodging tax funds. 
    In accordance with state law (ORS 320.350), seventy (70) percent of proceeds from any new or increased local lodging tax must be used for tourism promotion or tourism related facilities. Thirty (30) percent is unrestricted in its use. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.150 - Transient occupancy tax appeal board. 
    A transient occupancy tax appeal board is hereby created to be composed of members of the Coquille City Council. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The board shall keep a record of its transactions and shall not receive any compensation for their services on the board. The board shall have the power to: 
A.  Hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions made pursuant to this chapter. The board may affirm, modify, or reverse such orders or decisions, and may prescribe such forms, rules, and regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of a decision or order, the board may take such evidence and make such investigation as it may deem necessary and give notice of its determinations. Such determination shall become final sixty (60) days thereafter; 
B.  Approve, modify, or disapprove all forms, rules, and regulations prescribed by the finance director in the administration and enforcement of this chapter; 
C.  Make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.160 - Violations. 
    It is unlawful for any operator to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance director or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
5.30.170 - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. 
(Ord. No. 1494, 5-18-2015) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMALS GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1501, adopted May 16, 2016, amended Ch. 6.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6.04, §§ 6.04.010-6.04.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 5-239 §§ 1-4, 1937; and Ord. 930 § 1, 1976. 

6.04.010 - Classification of violations; penalties. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, infractions under this title are classified as violations and shall be further classified as class A, B, C, D, or E. 
B.  Violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this title is punishable upon conviction by a fine as follows: 
1.  Class A violation, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
2.  Class B violation, not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
3.  Class C violation, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
4.  Class D violation, not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
5.  Class E violation, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
C.  Each day that such violation shall continue and persist after due notice of the violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
D.  The court may order restitution in addition to any penalty or fine. The court may also order community services in lieu of a penalty or fine if the defendant demonstrates an inability to pay. The court may place the defendant on probation, suspend the fine upon satisfactory completion of the conditions of probation and utilize alternative means to dispute resolution to include, but not limited to, diversion programs or mediation if so available. 
E.  Treatment as Violation. The city may elect to treat any criminal offense under State of Oregon law as a class A violation either before or at the time of a first appearance. 
(Ord. No. 1501, 5-16-2016) 
6.04.020 - Compliance with chapter provisions. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, company, association or corporation to raise or keep chickens, ducks, geese, or any other poultry or domestic fowls within the City of Coquille, Oregon; except as is hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 5-239 § 1, 1937) 
(Ord. No. 1501, 5-16-2016) 
6.04.030 - Animal enclosures to be maintained. 
    All such chickens, ducks, geese, or any other poultry or domestic fowls shall be kept in a suitable enclosure constructed of wire or other suitable material of sufficient height and construction to prevent such fowl from escaping therefrom. No place wherein such fowl are kept shall be permitted to be or become filthy or unsanitary or in any condition giving off or likely to give off foul or noxious odors, or in any condition which would breed or tend to breed flies or vermin or which is likely, by reason of its condition, location or otherwise, to imperil the health of any occupant of the city. Any place in which such fowl are kept which is not maintained as above provided is declared to be a public nuisance; and the common council of the city, upon finding any such place to be kept as a public nuisance, shall have the power so to declare and abate the same in a summary manner. 
(Ord. 5-239 § 2, 1937) 
(Ord. No. 1501, 5-16-2016) 
6.04.040 - Improper management of animals. 
    A person commits the violation of improper management of an animal if the person is the owner or keeper of an animal and within the city: 
A.  Fails to promptly remove in a sanitary manner any waste deposited by the animal on public property or on the property of another; or 
B.  Allows animal excrement to accrue on the person's property to such a degree that a person of normal sensibilities would be bothered; or 
C.  Fails to prevent such animal from running at large on public property or on the property of others. When off the property of the owner or keeper, dogs shall be restrained by a dependable leash and controlled by a person physically capable of controlling the animal. 
D.  Fails to remove an animal carcass owned or controlled by him or her from a public property or exposed on a private property, for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove or dispose of the carcass. 
E.  A sightless person who has charge or control of a guide dog, or a police dog in the performance of law enforcement duties, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
F.  No person shall ride, lead or take a horse, donkey, mule or pony upon a sidewalk in the city or upon the grounds of the Coquille Community Center. 
    Violation of this section is a class E violation. 
(Ord. No. 1501, 5-16-2016) 
Chapter 6.05 - PIGEONS AND WILD BIRDS 

6.05.010 - Findings. 
    The large number of pigeons and other wild birds including, but not limited to, doves, ducks, and geese have at the present time become a nuisance, causing defacement, deterioration, litter, and damage to public and private property. The ordinance codified in this chapter seeks to prohibit the feeding of wild pigeons and other wild birds on public streets and public and private property accessible to the public, and thereby discourage the maintenance and breeding of wild birds in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1508, 10-1-2018) 
6.05.020 - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Person means natural person, firm, corporation or association. 
    Private property with public access means commercial or other private property access by the public. 
    Public property means any real property owned by the state, county or local governmental entity within the city. 
    Public street means any public thoroughfare, including the right-of way for vehicular traffic, gutter, curb, parking and sidewalk. 
    Wild birds includes pigeons, doves, ducks, geese and other wild birds. 
(Ord. No. 1508, 10-1-2018) 
6.05.030 - Feeding of pigeons or wild birds declared a nuisance. 
    It is a nuisance for any person to feed any wild bird as defined in this chapter, on any public street or private property with public access, within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1508, 10-1-2018) 
6.05.040 - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction hereof, shall be punishable under code Section 6.04. The first conviction shall be a class E violation, the second conviction within a year shall be a class D violation and the third and subsequent convictions within a year, shall be a class C violation. 
(Ord. No. 1508, 10-1-2018) 
6.05.050 - Exclusions. 
    This chapter specifically excludes domesticated birds allowed to be raised in compliance with Section 6.04.020. 
(Ord. No. 1508, 10-1-2018) 
Chapter 6.08 - DOGS 

6.08.010 - Definitions. 
    "Animal solid waste," for the purposes of this chapter, means the end result of a biological process whereby food and other consumable materials are rendered into a waste product by an animal. 
    "Dog," as used in this chapter, means male and female domesticated quadruped animal of the family Canis familiars or any cross breed which is owned or kept as a pet or companion by humans, licensed or not. 
    "Running at large," as used in this chapter, shall be considered when any dog is off or outside the premises belonging to the owner or keeper of such dog, and not in company of and under the control of its owner or keeper. 
(Ord. 1430 § 2, 2001: Ord. 1125 § 1, 1982) 
6.08.020 - Running at large prohibited. 
    The running at large of dogs within the city upon any premises other than those of the owner or keeper of the dog, or the streets or alleys of Coquille, is prohibited at all times. 
(Ord. 1125 § 2, 1982) 
6.08.030 - License required. 
    All dogs must be licensed at all times as required by ORS Chapter 609. 
(Ord. 1125 § 3, 1982) 
6.08.040 - Police department authority-Impoundment-Boarding fee. 
    The police department of the city shall have charge of the enforcement and carrying into effect of this chapter. It shall impound any dogs detained for violation of this chapter with the Coos County animal shelter through the Coos County animal control officer. Any pick-up and any boarding fee charged to the owner will remain as Coos County funds to be applied for the maintenance of the shelter and its personnel. 
(Ord. 1125 § 4, 1982) 
6.08.050 - Impoundment fee. 
    Any dog found running at large shall be impounded, whether licensed or not and its owner shall be subject to citation into the court with a fine imposed of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. 1125 § 5, 1982) 
6.08.060 - Impoundment-Retention allowed under state law. 
    Any dog impounded under the authority of this chapter will be retained for the time and after that period of time will be disposed of, as required and allowed under ORS 609.090. 
(Ord. 1125 § 6, 1982) 
6.08.070 - Impoundment-Release to owner. 
    Any dog impounded under the authority of this chapter shall be released to its owner upon payment of any pick-up and boarding fees charged by the Coos County animal shelter and any and all fines imposed by the municipal court. If any dog be impounded for lack of a license, then a license must be obtained in addition to any other fees and/or fines. 
(Ord. 1125 § 7, 1982) 
6.08.080 - Dog depositions. 
    It shall be unlawful for a dog owner to allow a dog, except seeing eye dogs, to deposit solid waste matter on any improved public or private property other than that of the dog owner or keeper. It shall be a defense to this section if the dog owner or keeper immediately removes the solid waste. 
(Ord. 1430 § 3, 2001) 
6.08.090 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. 1430 § 4, 2001) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapter 8.04 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

8.04.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number: 
    "Ashes" is the residue from the burning of wood or other combustible materials. 
    "Collector" means the person authorized and designated by the city to collect, handle, transport and dispose of refuse. 
    "Garbage" is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    "Refuse" is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and abandoned automobiles. 
    "Rubbish" is nonputrescible soild waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, tin, cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
(Ord. 753 § 1, 1966) 
8.04.020 - Disposal in proper containers required. 
    All garbage, putrescible refuse and dead animals within the city shall be stored in containers which are watertight, equipped with tight-fitting covers, suitable handles and which are maintained in a clean, sanitary manner and good state of repair. No such garbage, putrescible refuse, or dead animals shall be accumulated and remain undisposed of within the city for a longer period than seven days. 
    No person shall place or cause to be placed any refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the city, except it be in proper containers for collection, or under express approval granted by the common council. Nor shall any person throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
(Ord. 753 §§ 2, 3, 1966) 
8.04.030 - Transportation on city streets. 
    No person shall transport or convey refuse upon or over any street, alley or public way within the city unless such refuse is in a covered watertight container; provided, however, nonputrescible, innocuous substances may be conveyed upon or over such streets, alleys or public ways if adequate provision is made against sifting, spilling or littering by a cover or by lashing. 
    No person shall permit refuse to become spread, scattered, lodged or left upon any street in the city while such refuse is being transported or conveyed upon or over a street, alley or public way within the city. 
(Ord. 753 §§ 4, 5, 1966) 
8.04.040 - Franchise required to collect refuse. 
    It is unlawful for any person to collect or haul refuse in the city for hire unless such person shall have first received a franchise therefor from the city for such service. 
(Ord. 753 § 6, 1966) 
8.04.050 - Franchise-City's right to grant. 
    The city shall have the right to grant an exclusive franchise for the collection and removal of refuse from the city for a term not to exceed ten (10) years. In granting such a franchise, the common council shall take into account the following: 
A.  The knowledge on the part of the applicant of the refuse collection removal and disposal business; 
B.  The ability of the applicant to furnish all required and necessary equipment and personnel required in the conduct of such business; 
C.  The financial responsibility of the applicant; 
D.  The capacity of the applicant to indemnify the city and its inhabitants against a failure on his or her part to fulfill the terms of the franchise or against any injuries occurring to the city or any of its inhabitants in the performance of such franchise; 
E.  The prior experience of the applicant in the operation of a refuse collection removal and disposal business. 
    If, in the judgment of the council, more than one applicant qualifies for the franchise on the basis of the foregoing considerations, the council shall grant the franchise to the applicant offering the most favorable financial return to the city in consideration of its grant to such person of such franchise. 
(Ord. 753 § 7, 1966) 
8.04.060 - Franchise holder to make services available to all inhabitants. 
    The franchise holder shall make its services available to all of the inhabitants of the city without discrimination as to cost, frequency of service, or type of service, except that the holder of such franchise shall have the right to make reasonable rules and regulations relating to the service performed by the franchise holder, subject to the approval of the council. 
(Ord. 753 § 8, 1966) 
8.04.070 - Charges for collection. 
    The franchise holder may make reasonable charges for refuse collection service, which charges shall not be greater than those approved by the council and stated in the franchise. The rates may be changed during the term of the franchise if approved by the city council and after public hearing before the council. 
(Ord. 753 § 9, 1966) 
8.04.080 - Liability insurance required. 
    The franchise holder shall acquire and maintain public liability insurance with an insurance company acceptable to the council which will cover his or her business operation including each vehicle operated by him or her as follows: 
A.  For bodily injury: not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one person, nor less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each accident. 
B.  For property damage: not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) damage to property of third persons including the property of the city. 
    Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be conditioned upon the franchise holder's agreement to indemnify and save the city harmless against any liability or damage which may arise or occur from any injury to persons or property as a result of the franchise holder's operation of such refuse collection removal and disposal business. 
(Ord. 753 § 10, 1966) 
8.04.090 - Collection vehicles. 
    Every vehicle used by a franchise holder in the collection, removal and disposal of refuse within the city shall be of a type approved by the city council. When such a vehicle becomes unsuitable for the purpose for which it was intended by reason of its becoming unsafe, dilapidated, unsightly or obsolete, the city council may order the franchise holder to replace such vehicle within a reasonable time. All vehicles used in the refuse collection removal and disposal business shall be kept at all times in good and safe operating condition and in a clean and sanitary condition. If any vehicle used by the franchise holder is not being maintained in a reasonably clean and sanitary condition, or if it is not being maintained in a good and safe operating condition, the city council may order the vehicle removed from service until the objection stated by the city council has been eliminated. 
(Ord. 753 § 11, 1966) 
8.04.100 - Compliance with state regulations. 
    The franchise holder shall conduct its business at all times in conformity with the laws of the state of Oregon, the rules of the state Board of Health, and all other public authorities having regulatory powers relating to health and sanitation. 
(Ord. 753 § 12, 1966) 
8.04.110 - Notice of violation. 
    Upon order of the city council, the city manager shall notify the franchise holder of any violation or violations of the terms of his or her franchise or this chapter; particularly specifying the violation and, in the event the franchise holder has not remedied such violation within fifteen (15) days thereafter, the city council may at its option terminate the franchise and any rights and privileges of the franchise holder arising thereunder. 
(Ord. 753 § 13, 1966) 
8.04.120 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person who shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of refuse within the city without first having obtained a franchise as provided in this chapter; and any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Every day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Franchise holders shall be subject to the penalties provided herein for the violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 753 § 14, 1966) 
8.04.130 - Revocation of franchise. 
    In the event a franchise holder's franchise is revoked or the franchise holder ceases the collection of refuse in the city, the city may provide for the collection of refuse itself or may authorize a third person, firm or corporation to collect the same on a temporary basis until the franchise holder resumes collection of refuse or, in the event of a franchise revocation as aforesaid, until a new franchise is granted. In such event, the franchise holder shall reimburse the city for all out-of-pocket expenses sustained by the city in the collection of refuse as defined herein. 
(Ord. 753 § 15, 1966) 
Chapter 8.08 - NUISANCES 
Article 1. - General Provisions 

8.08.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Person" means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
    "Person in charge of property" means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of any construction project. 
    "Person responsible" means the person responsible for abating a nuisance and shall include: 
1.  The owner; 
2.  The person in charge of property, as defined in this section; 
3.  The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a nuisance as defined in the ordinance codified in this chapter or another ordinance of this city. 
    "Public place" means a building, way, place or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public. 
(Ord. 950 § 1, 1976) 
8.08.020 - Chapter provisions not exclusive-Summary abatement. 
    The procedure provided by the ordinance codified in this chapter is not exclusive but is in addition to procedure provided by other ordinances; and the chief of the fire department, the chief of police, or any other city official may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and which imminently endangers human life or property. 
(Ord. 950 § 51, 1976) 
8.08.030 - Classification of violations; penalties. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, infractions under this title are classified as violations and shall be further classified as class A, B, C, D, or E. 
B.  Violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this title is punishable upon conviction by a fine as follows: 
1.  Class A violation, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
2.  Class B violation, not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
3.  Class C violation, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
4.  Class D violation, not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
5.  Class E violation, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
C.  Each day that such violation shall continue and persist after due notice of the violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
D.  The court may order restitution in addition to any penalty or fine. The court may also order community services in lieu of a penalty or fine if the defendant demonstrates an inability to pay. The court may place the defendant on probation, suspend the fine upon satisfactory completion of the conditions of probation and utilize alternative means to dispute resolution to include but not limited to, diversion programs or mediation if so available. 
E.  Treatment as Violation. The city may elect to treat any criminal offense under State of Oregon law as a class A violation either before or at the time of a first appearance. 
(Ord. 950 §§ 52, 53, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 1502, 5-16-2016) 
Article 2. - Animals 

8.08.040 - Dangerous animals. 
    No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit an animal which is dangerous to the public health or safety to be exposed in public. If the animal is exposed in public, it may be taken into custody by the city and disposed of in accordance with the procedures provided by ordinance for the impoundment of dogs; except that before the animal is released by the city, the municipal judge must find that proper precautions will be taken to insure the public health and safety. 
(Ord. 950 § 2, 1976) 
8.08.050 - Removal of carcasses. 
    No person shall permit an animal carcass owned or controlled by him or her to remain upon public property, or to be exposed on private property, for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove or dispose of the carcass. 
(Ord. 950 § 3, 1976) 
8.08.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1502, adopted May 16, 2016, repealed § 8.08.060, which pertained to animals at large and derived from Ord. 950 § 4, 1976. 
Article 3. - Nuisances Affecting Public Health 

8.08.070 - Unsafe and nuisance property. 
    No person shall cause, or permit on property owned or controlled by him or her, a nuisance affecting public health. A person commits the violation of nuisance if the person maintains an area of real property which is unsafe, unsanitary, or an eyesore as the result of abandoned materials or debris of any kind, including substances that have accumulated as the result of fires, vandalism, weather conditions or neglect affecting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare. The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this chapter. 
A.  Privies. Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the city, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with the health division regulations. 
B.  Debris. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the city. 
C.  Stagnant Water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests. 
D.  Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water. 
E.  Food. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption. 
F.  Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor, or which are in an unsanitary condition. 
G.  Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises. 
H.  Cesspools. Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary condition or which cause an offensive odor. 
I.  Slaughterhouses, etc. Slaughterhouses, tanneries or pigsties. 
J.  No owner or person in charge of property shall permit a cellar door or grate located in or upon a sidewalk or public pathway to remain open except when such entrance is being used, and when being used, there are adequate safeguards for pedestrians using the sidewalks. 
    Violation of this section is a class E violation. 
(Ord. 950 § 11, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 1502, 5-16-2016) 
Article 4. - Nuisances Affecting Public Safety 

8.08.080 - Creating a hazard. 
    No person shall create a hazard by maintaining or leaving in a place accessible to children a container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot be easily opened from the inside. 
(Ord. 950 § 15, 1976) 
8.08.090 - Attractive nuisances. 
A.  No owner or person in charge of property shall permit thereon: 
1.  Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children; 
2.  Lumber, logs or piling placed or stored in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children; 
3.  An open pit, quarry, cistern or other excavation without safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children. 
B.  This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing children. 
(Ord. 950 § 16, 1976) 
8.08.100 - Snow and ice. 
    No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public sidewalk shall permit: 
A.  Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first two hours of daylight after the snow has fallen; 
B.  Ice to remain on the sidewalk for more than two hours of daylight after the ice has formed unless the ice is covered with sand, ashes or other suitable material to assure safe travel. 
(Ord. 950 § 17, 1976) 
8.08.110 - Scattering rubbish. 
    No person shall deposit upon public or private property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle traveling upon a public way. 
(Ord. 950 § 18, 1976) 
8.08.120 - Trees. 
A.  No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk shall permit trees or bushes on his or her property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to keep all trees and bushes on his or her premises, including the adjoining parking strip, trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk and not less than ten (10) feet above the roadway. 
B.  No owner or person in charge of property shall allow to stand a dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property. 
(Ord. 950 § 19, 1976) 
8.08.130 - Fences. 
A.  No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence thereon, or permit barbed wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way; except such wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high. 
B.  No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person. 
(Ord. 950 § 20, 1976) 
8.08.140 - Surface waters-Drainage. 
A.  No owner or person in charge of a building or structure shall suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk. 
B.  The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 950 § 21, 1976) 
Article 5. - Nuisances Affecting Public Peace 

8.08.150 - Radio and television interference. 
A.  No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television receiver of good engineering design. 
B.  This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. 950 § 31, 1976) 
8.08.160 - Junk. 
A.  No person shall keep any junk outdoors on any street, lot or premises, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed, except doors used for ingress and egress. 
B.  The term "junk," as used in this section, includes all old motor vehicles, old motor vehicle parts, abandoned automobiles, old machinery, old machinery parts, old appliances or parts thereof, old iron or other metal, glass, paper, lumber, wood or other waste or discarded material. 
C.  This section shall not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed junkyard or automobile wrecking house. 
(Ord. 950 § 32, 1976) 
8.08.170 - Weeds and noxious vegetation declared nuisance. 
    The growth or maintenance of weeds upon lots and parcels of land, and abutting rights-of-way in the city during the summer season, or at any other time of year when deemed a fire, health or traffic hazard, is declared to be a nuisance. The growth or maintenance of noxious vegetation upon lots and parcels of land, and abutting rights-of-way in the city at any time is declared to be a nuisance. 
    The owner or occupant of land within the city shall remove or otherwise eliminate and keep removed or otherwise eliminated from such land all brush, weeds, briers, thistles, grass or other rank or noxious vegetable growth that exceeds ten (10) inches in height and encroaches on or is a reasonable, visible detriment to surrounding property owners. Any parcel over five thousand (5,000) square feet shall keep such material at least ten (10) feet from the neighbor's property line. 
(Ord. 1184, 1984; Ord. 950 § 33, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 1504, 8-1-2016) 
Article 6. - Unenumerated Nuisances 

8.08.180 - Unenumerated nuisances. 
A.  The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in this chapter are declared public nuisances; and such acts, conditions or objects may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in Articles 1 and 7 of this chapter. 
B.  In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated within this chapter, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 950 § 45, 1976) 
Article 7. - Abatement Procedure 

8.08.190 - Notice. 
A.  Upon determination by the city manager that a nuisance exists, the city manager shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance. 
B.  At the time of posting, the city recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail to the person responsible at the person's last known address. 
C.  The notice to abate shall contain: 
1.  A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists; 
2.  A direction to abate the nuisance within ten (10) days from the date of the notice; 
3.  A description of the nuisance; 
4.  A statement that, unless the nuisance is removed, the city may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible; 
5.  A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant imposition of a fine or jail sentence; 
6.  A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the city recorder within ten (10) days from the date of the notice. 
D.  If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner, stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property. 
E.  Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the persons posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting. 
F.  An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient. 
G.  In lieu of posting such notice and forwarding such notice by registered or certified mail as above provided in subsections A and B of this section, the city manager may cause the notice to abate to be served personally and in person, by a police officer of the city, upon the owner or person in charge of the premises where the nuisance exists. The officer so serving the notice shall make his or her return on a copy thereof and file the same with the city recorder of the city, and no further notice shall be required. 
(Ord. 1128 § 1, 1982: Ord. 950 § 46, 1976) 
8.08.200 - Notice of violation. 
A.  Upon receipt of a notification of a nuisance violation, the person or persons responsible shall be allowed forty-eight (48) hours to commence the abatement, remedy or removal of the nuisance and shall employ sufficient labor to abate, remedy or remove such nuisance as expeditiously as possible not to exceed a period of ten (10) days. If forty-eight (48) hours is impracticable due to public safety concerns, officials shall arrange for the immediate abatement, remedy or removal of the nuisance and the person or person responsible shall reimburse the expense in addition to and not in lieu of any other penalty allowed at law. Within ten (10) days after the posting and mailing of such notice, as provided in Section 8.08.190, the person responsible shall remove the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists. 
B.  A person responsible, protesting that no nuisance exists, shall file with the city recorder a written statement which shall specify the basis for so protesting within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of notification of a nuisance violation. 
    Violation of this section is a class D violation; however, bail in lieu of appearance may not be posted. 
(Ord. 950 § 47, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 1502, 5-16-2016) 
8.08.210 - Joint responsibility. 
    If more than one person is a person responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance, or for the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance. 
(Ord. 950 § 48, 1976) 
8.08.220 - Abatement by the city. 
A.  If, within the time allowed, the nuisance has not been abated by the person responsible, the city manager may cause the nuisance to be abated. 
B.  The officer charged with abatement of the nuisance shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance. 
C.  The city recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in physically abating the nuisance and shall include therein a charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or ten (10) percent of those expenses, whichever is greater, for administrative overhead. 
(Ord. 1225, 1987; Ord. 950 § 49, 1976) 
8.08.230 - Assessment of costs. 
A.  The city recorder shall forward to the owner and the person responsible, by registered or certified mail, a notice stating: 
1.  The total cost of abatement, including the administrative cost; 
2.  That the costs as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice; 
3.  That if the owner or the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a notice of objection may be filed with the city recorder not more than ten (10) days after the date of the notice. 
B.  No sooner than ten (10) days after the date of the notice, the council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and make a decision on the objections to the costs assessed. 
C.  If the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as decided by the council, shall be made by resolution and shall be entered in the docket of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated. 
D.  The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the current rate for street assessments. The interest shall begin to run from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket. 
E.  An error in the name of the owner or the person responsible or a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment will not void the assessment, and it shall remain a valid lien against the property. 
(Ord. 1128 § 2, 1982: Ord. 950 § 50, 1976) 
8.08.240 - Summary abatement process. 
A.  The city may summarily abate any violation or nuisance on any property or premises which a code compliance officer, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, determines poses an imminent danger or threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. In the event a code compliance officer makes such a determination, it shall be set out in writing and at a minimum include information on the following: 
1.  The location of the property where the violation constituting the imminent threat or danger is located; 
2.  The nature of said violation or condition; and 
3.  The attempts, if any, to contact the owner of the property and the reason(s) why said owner or responsible person did not abate the violation. 
B.  In the event the code compliance officer makes the above written determination, the city need not provide pre-abatement notice consistent with Section 8.08.190; however, the city shall provide notice to the owner of the property within ten (10) days after the city's abatement of the violation. Said notice shall include the following: 
1.  A copy of the written determination noted in Section 8.08.240.A; 
2.  A brief description of the action(s) the city took to abate the violation; and 
3.  The costs, if known, incurred by the city to abate the violation. 
C.  The code compliance officer shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property in accordance with all laws, including search and seizure laws, to investigate or cause the removal of a violation. The city shall have the authority to dispose of all seized property in any lawful manner and shall, if practical, attempt to obtain salvage value for material that has a fair market value in excess of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per item. 
(Ord. No. 1504, 8-1-2016) 
Chapter 8.12 - DISCARDED VEHICLES 

8.12.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    "Chief of police" includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the city. 
    "Costs" means the expense of removing, storing, or selling a junked vehicle. 
    "Discarded" means any vehicle which is in one or more of the following conditions: 
1.  Inoperative; 
2.  Wrecked; 
3.  Dismantled; 
4.  Partially dismantled; 
5.  Abandoned; or 
6.  Junked. 
    Discarded vehicles may be deemed to include major parts thereof including but not limited to bodies, engines, transmissions, rear ends, fenders and hoods. 
    "Person in charge of property" means any agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, owner or person having possession, control or title of property where a vehicle is located. 
    "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    "Vehicle owner" means any individual, firm, corporation, or unincorporated association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or any interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle. 
(Ord. 965 § 1, 1977) 
8.12.020 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    The open accumulation and storage of a discarded vehicle is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property; to promote blight, deterioration and unsightliness; to invite plundering; to create fire hazards; to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of a discarded vehicle on private or public property is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 965 § 2, 1977) 
8.12.030 - Prohibited action. 
    It is unlawful to store or permit the storing of a discarded vehicle upon any private property within the city unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a building or unless it is in connection with a business enterprise dealing in junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the city. 
(Ord. 965 § 3, 1977) 
8.12.040 - Police duty. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the chief of police, whenever a discarded vehicle is found upon private property to: 
1.  Make an investigation to discover the owner of the vehicle and the person in charge of the property upon which such vehicle is located and give written notice to them by personal service or by registered or certified mail that the vehicle is in violation of this chapter. 
2.  If the owner of the vehicle is not found, to place a notice upon the windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen. 
B.  The notice shall state that a certain discarded vehicle is in violation of this chapter and that within ten (10) days of the day of the sending or posting of the notice: 
1.  The vehicle must be removed from the city or to storage yard of a business enterprise dealing in junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the city; 
2.  The vehicle must be completely enclosed within a building. 
C.  The notice shall also state that the alternative to compliance with subsection B of this section is to petition the city recorder and request appearance in writing before the city council within ten (10) days of sending or posting of the notice and show cause why such vehicle should not be immediately abated as provided in this chapter. 
D.  The notice shall also state that failure to comply with this chapter authorizes the city to remove the vehicle and charge the cost. 
(Ord. 965 § 4, 1977) 
8.12.050 - Entry upon private property. 
A.  The chief of police is authorized at all reasonable times to enter upon private property and examine any vehicle for the purpose of determining whether or not it is in a discarded condition. However, before entering upon private property, the chief of police shall obtain the consent of an occupant thereof or a warrant of the municipal court authorizing his entry for the purpose of inspection except when an emergency exists. 
B.  No search warrant shall be issued under the terms of this chapter until an affidavit has been filed with the municipal court showing probable cause for such inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, citing this chapter as the basis for such inspection, whether it is an inspection instituted by complaint or other specific or general information concerning the vehicle in question or the property on which it is situated. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or attempt to prevent the chief of police from entering upon private premises and inspecting any vehicle when an emergency exists or the chief exhibits a warrant authorizing entry. 
(Ord. 965 § 5, 1977) 
8.12.060 - Hearing by city council. 
    Pursuant to a request, the city council shall fix a time for a hearing to show cause why a vehicle should not be immediately abated. It shall receive the evidence and testimony of the chief of police and other interested persons concerning the existence, location and condition of the vehicle. After the hearing, the council may authorize and order the vehicle removed by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The council shall make its order in the form of a resolution which declares the vehicle to be a public nuisance. The resolution may order the removal of more than one vehicle and may consolidate the hearings and orders relating to more than one vehicle. The persons receiving the notice specified in Section 8.12.040 shall be sent copies of the resolution of the council. In addition, the council may impose conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle where, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. It shall refuse to order the removal of the vehicle where the vehicle, in the opinion of the council, is not subject to the provisions of this chapter. The council shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence in the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. 965 § 6, 1977) 
8.12.070 - Abatement by city and appraisal. 
A.  Ten (10) days after the giving of notice required in Section 8.12.040, or ten (10) days after adoption of a resolution declaring a vehicle to be a public nuisance as set forth in Section 8.12.060, the city shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and may remove the vehicle by use of city employees or duly authorized independent contractors. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow such persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  After removing the vehicle, the city shall cause it to be appraised. 
(Ord. 965 § 7, 1977) 
8.12.080 - Low value vehicle. 
A.  If the vehicle is appraised at one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, or if it is an abandoned vehicle appraised at a value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less but more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the chief of police shall file with the Department of Motor Vehicles an affidavit describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle, and stating that the vehicle will be junked or dismantled. The chief of police may without notice and public auction dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale. 
B.  The certificate of sale shall be substantially as follows: 
CERTIFICATE OF SALE 
This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No. ____________ entitled "An Ordinance for the Impounding and Disposition of Discarded Vehicles," I did on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ sell to ____________ for the sum of $ ____________ cash, the following described personal property, to wit: 
(brief description of the property) 
and in consideration of the payment of the said sum of $ ____________ , receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property. 
Dated this ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
Note: The city of Coquille assumes no responsibility as to the condition of title of the above-described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the city is limited to the return of the purchase price. 
(Ord. 1407 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1130 § 1, 1982: Ord. 965 § 8, 1977) 
8.12.090 - Public sale notice. 
A.  If the vehicle is appraised over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the chief of police shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of sale. The notice of sale shall state: 
1.  The sale is of discarded property in possession of the city; 
2.  A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, license number, I.D. number, and any other information which will aid in accurately identifying the vehicle; 
3.  The terms of the sale; 
4.  The date, time and place of the sale. 
B.  The notice of the sale shall be published two times. The first publication shall be made not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the proposed sale, and the second shall be made not less than three days prior to the date of the proposed sale. 
(Ord. 1407 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1130 § 2, 1982: Ord. 965 § 9, 1977) 
8.12.100 - Public sale. 
A.  If a vehicle is appraised over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the chief of police shall hold a sale at the time and place appointed within the view of the vehicle to be sold. 
B.  The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder, providing that if no bids are entered, or those bids which are entered are less than the costs incurred by the city, the chief of police may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to such costs. 
C.  At the time of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which shall be delivered to the purchaser and the copy thereof filed with the city recorder of the city. 
D.  The certificate of sale shall be substantially as follows: 
CERTIFICATE OF SALE 
This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No. entitled "An Ordinance for the Impounding and Disposition of Discarded Vehicles" and pursuant to due notice of the time and place of sale, I did on the day of ;daterule;, 19 ____________ , sell at public auction to ____________ for the sum of $ ____________ cash, he being the highest and best bidder, and that being the highest and best sum bid therefor, the following-described personal property, to wit; 
(brief description of the property) 
And in consideration of the payment of the said sum of $ ____________ , receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property. 
Dated this ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
Note: the city of Coquille assumes no responsibility as to the condition of title of the above-described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the city is limited to the return of the purchase price. 
(Ord. 1407 § 3, 2000: Ord. 1130 § 3, 1982: Ord. 965 § 10, 1977) 
8.12.110 - Redemption before sale. 
A.  A vehicle, impounded under the provisions of this chapter, may be redeemed by its owner or by the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was removed, before a sale or disposition has taken place, by applying to the police department, whereupon he or she shall: 
1.  Submit evidence of his or her ownership or interest in the vehicle, satisfactory to the chief of police, that such claim is rightful; 
2.  Pay the costs due and owing at the time the application to redeem is made; 
3.  Give evidence that the nuisance character of the vehicle will not be allowed to be resumed. 
B.  Upon compliance with subsection A of this section, the chief of police shall execute a receipt and cause the vehicle to be returned. 
(Ord. 965 § 11, 1977) 
8.12.120 - Assessment of costs. 
A.  After disposing of the discarded vehicle and deducting the money, if any, received from any sale of the vehicle from the costs, the city recorder shall give notice as specified in Section 8.12.040 to the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was removed: 
1.  Of the unpaid costs of abatement; 
2.  That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the real property unless paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice; 
3.  That if the person in charge of the property objects to the cost of the abatement indicated he may file a written notice of objection with the city recorder within twenty (20) days from the date of the notice. 
B.  Within forty (40) days after the date of the notice, objections to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the council. 
C.  If the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs shall be made by resolution of the city council and shall be entered in the docket of city liens, and upon such entry being made shall constitute a lien upon the real property from which the nuisance was removed or abated. 
D.  The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum. Such interest shall accrue from date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket. 
E.  An error in the name of the person in charge of the property shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void. The assessment shall remain a valid lien against the property. 
(Ord. 1144 § 1, 1983; Ord. 965 § 12, 1977) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE 
Chapter 9.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1503, adopted May 16, 2016, amended Ch. 9.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.04, §§ 9.04.010-9.04.060, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1296 §§ 1, 15-20, 1991. 

9.04.001 - Purpose and authority. 
A.  The purpose of this title is to establish certain civil violations under the City of Coquille municipal code and to provide for the enforcement of those violations in the Coquille Municipal Court. This title is adopted to protect the health, safety or welfare of the City of Coquille. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this title: 
    "Alcoholic beverage" and "alcoholic liquor" means any liquid or solid containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and capable of being consumed by a human being. 
    "Attempt" a person is guilty of an attempt to commit a violation when the person intentionally engages in conduct which constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of the violation. 
    "City official" or "official" means an officer or employee of the City of Coquille who is responsible for carrying out specific provisions of the Coquille Municipal Code. 
    "Dangerous weapon" means any weapon, device, instrument, material or substance which under the circumstances in which it is used or threatened to be used, is readily capable of causing death or serious physical injury, or any device, substance or material either by design or by intent that resembles a dangerous weapon. 
    "Defendant" means the person against whom an action is filed under this title. 
    "Firearm" means any means of a weapon, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile and is readily capable of use as a weapon. For purposes of this section, the term also includes those commonly referred to as "BB guns" and "paintball guns." 
    "Fireworks" means any combustible or explosive composition or substance, or any combination of such compositions or substances, or any other article that was prepared for the purpose of providing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion or detonation. 
    "Guardian" means the natural or adoptive parent or parents having legal custody of the child or any other adult person who has been entrusted with the care and supervision of a child and who has legal custody of the child pursuant to court order. 
    "Intentionally or with intent" when used with respect to a result or to conduct described by a section defining an offense, means that a person acts with a conscious objective to cause the result or to engage in the conduct so described. 
    "Knowingly" when used with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by a statute defining an offense, means that a person acts with an awareness that his conduct is of a nature so described or that a circumstance so described exists. 
    "Law enforcement officer" means a City of Coquille police, State of Oregon police or any county sheriff, municipal police officer or such other persons as may be so designated under the laws of the State of Oregon to perform law enforcement functions. 
    "Litter" means all waste material including but not limited to rubbish, waste, cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
    "Public or public place" means a place to which the general public has access and includes, but is not limited to, hallways, lobbies, and other parts of apartments designed for actual residence and highways, streets, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds, and premises used in connection with public passenger transportation. 
    "School age child" means a child between the ages of five and eighteen (18) years; provided, however, for the purpose of this title, a child shall be deemed five years of age only if the child reaches such age prior to September 1, of the current school year. 
    "Truant" means absence from school without an excused absence. 
    "Violation" means a civil offense in which the remedy involved is punishable by a fine. A violation is not a crime. Punishment may be in addition to a fine as long as the punishment does not include a term of imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.020 - Jurisdiction. 
    The Coquille Municipal Court is vested with jurisdiction to enforce all provisions of this title as amended from time to time, against any person violating the same within the jurisdiction of the City of Coquille. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.030 - Duties and authority of officers. 
    It shall be the duty of law enforcement officers to enforce the provisions of this title. A citation may be issued if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person or persons to be charged are in actual violation of a provision of this title. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.040 - Complaints by private citizens. 
    Any person may seek to have a citation issued for violation of this title by filing a complaint with a law enforcement officer by alleging under oath and upon personal knowledge, material facts, which if proven, would constitute a violation, provided that such person can testify at trial to material facts in the case. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.050 - Nuisance abatement. 
    No provisions in this title shall preclude the abatement of a nuisance as provided in the general nuisance ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.060 - Offenses outside city limits. 
    Where permitted by Oregon law, an act made unlawful by this title shall constitute an offense when committed on any property owned or leased by the city, even though outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.070 - Soliciting or confederating to violate ordinances. 
    No person shall solicit, aid, abet, employ or engage another, or confederate with another, to violate a provision of this title or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.080 - Attempt to commit offenses. 
    A person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this title or any ordinance of the city, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating such act, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.090 - Classification of violations; penalties. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, infractions under this title are classified as violations and shall be further classified as class A, B, C, D, or E. 
B.  Violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this title is punishable upon conviction by a fine as follows: 
1.  Class A violation, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
2.  Class B violation, not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
3.  Class C violation, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
4.  Class D violation, not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
5.  Class E violation, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
C.  Each day that such violation shall continue and persist after due notice of the violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
D.  The court may order restitution in addition to any penalty or fine. The court may also order community services in lieu of a penalty or fine if the defendant demonstrates an inability to pay. The court may place the defendant on probation, suspend the fine upon satisfactory completion of the conditions of probation and utilize alternative means to dispute resolution to include but not limited to, diversion programs or mediation if so available. 
E.  Treatment as Violation. The city may elect to treat any criminal offense under State of Oregon law as a class A violation either before or at the time of a first appearance. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.100 - Rules of procedure. 
A.  A citation substantially conforming to the requirements of this section may be used for citing violations of this title. 
B.  A citation shall contain the following: 
1.  Complaint; and 
2.  Summons. 
C.  A complaint shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the court, the name of the city in whose name the action is being brought, and the name of the defendant(s). 
2.  A statement of the violation in such a manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so and the time and place of the alleged violation; 
3.  A verification that the complainant swears or affirms that he or she has reasonable grounds to believe and does believe, that the person or persons cited have violated a provision of this title; and 
4.  The identity and law enforcement agency of the citing officer. 
D.  A summons shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and location of the court, the name of the person or persons cited, the date on which the citation was issued, and the time at which the person cited is to appear in court; 
2.  A statement of the violation in such manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so and the date and place the violation is alleged to have occurred; 
3.  A notice to the person or persons cited that a complaint will be filed with the court based on the violation; and 
4.  The maximum amount of penalty, if any, fixed for the violation, and a statement notifying the person that a money judgment may be entered up to the maximum amount of the penalty along with other costs allowed by law if the defendant fails to appear. 
5.  The amount set as bail pursuant to Section 9.04.190. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.110 - Delivery and filing of the summons and complaint. 
    A law enforcement officer shall cause a summons to be served on the person cited and shall file the complaint along with proof of service of the summons with the court. Proof of service shall contain the time, place and manner of service. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.120 - Arraignment and motions during arraignment. 
    An arraignment shall be conducted in open court upon the defendant's first appearance in court unless the defendant is granted a continuance to seek assistance of counsel, to determine which plea to enter, or for other good or sufficient reason. The court judge (judge) shall advise each defendant of his right to have the arraignment continued upon his request for good cause, which may be made at any time prior to pleading guilty, no contest or not guilty. If no such request is made, the judge may proceed with the arraignment in accordance with the section. 
A.  A defendant may appear in person or by counsel. A defendant may be represented by counsel or a court advocate, but they shall not be provided at the city's expense. 
B.  Before the defendant is called upon to plead guilty, no contest or not guilty, the following proceedings shall be conducted by the judge: 
1.  The complaint shall be read to the defendant or the substance of the charge contained in the complaint shall be stated; 
2.  The defendant shall be advised of the maximum penalty that the judge may order if the defendant is convicted; 
3.  The judge shall inform the defendant of the following rights: the right to counsel at the defendant's own expense and the right to a reasonable continuance to obtain counsel; the right to be informed of the charges against him; the right to have the court compel witnesses against him to appear and testify; the right to cross-examine and question the witnesses against him; the right to call witnesses on his own behalf and to have the court issue subpoenas within its jurisdictional limits notifying the witnesses to appear; the right to a trial by the judge; and the right to testify or not to testify on his or her own behalf; and 
4.  The court shall advise the defendant that he or she may plead guilty, no contest, or not guilty. Upon a plea of guilty or no contest, judgment shall be entered. Upon a plea of not guilty, the court shall set a trial date pursuant to this title. 
C.  At any trial for a violation, the city attorney may aid a law enforcement officer or designated public safety officer in preparing evidence and obtaining witnesses, but shall not appear unless the defendant retains counsel. The court shall give the city attorney timely notice if defense counsel is to appear at trial. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.130 - Pleas. 
A.  The defendant shall: 
1.  Appear in court at the time indicated in the summons; or 
2.  Deliver to the court a written request for a hearing prior to the time indicated in the summons; or 
3.  Deliver to the court a written waiver of hearing and plea of guilty or no contest along with the bail set forth in the summons prior to the time indicated in the summons. 
B.  If a defendant enters a plea of not guilty, the judge shall set the matter for trial without a jury. 
C.  If a defendant pleads no contest or guilty, the judge shall determine that the plea was made voluntarily with the defendant understanding the nature of the charge and explaining fully to the defendant his right to trial by the judge, his right to engage counsel and the maximum penalty possible for the violation(s) charged. Upon acceptance of a plea of no contest or guilty, the judge may sentence immediately or at a later date. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.140 - Subpoena. 
A.  A subpoena shall be issued by the judge. It shall state the name of the court and the title, if any, of the proceedings, and shall command each person to whom it is directed to attend, give testimony and/or make available tangible materials at the time and place specified therein. 
B.  A subpoena may be served by a law enforcement officer or by any person, not a party, who is eighteen (18) years of age or over. Service of a subpoena shall be made by delivering a copy thereof to the person ordered to appear. 
C.  Proof of service of a subpoena is made in the same manner as proof of service of a summons under this title. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.150 - Court-ordered trial; judgment on failure to appear. 
A.  The court shall proceed to make a determination without a hearing in the following circumstances: 
1.  The defendant fails to appear at the time, date and place specified in the citation; or 
2.  The defendant appeared at the time, date and place specified in the citation and requested a hearing or was ordered by the court to appear at a subsequent hearing and the person fails to appear at the time, date and place set for the hearing or subsequent hearing on the matter; 
B.  A finding under this section shall be based on the citation and on any evidence the court determines to be appropriate. 
C.  Upon making a determination under this section, the court may enter judgment and may impose the penalty along with a money judgment for costs, assessments and any restitution authorized by ordinance or law. 
D.  If the court orders restitution, the court need not make a determination of the defendant's ability to pay. The defendant may seek review of his or her ability to pay by filing a written request with the court within one year after entry of judgment. The court shall set a hearing on the matter and may reduce the amount of restitution ordered if the defendant establishes at the hearing that he or she is unable to pay the restitution in whole or in part. 
E.  If judgment is entered under this section after the defendant has failed to appear, on motion by the defendant and upon such terms as are just, the court may relieve the defendant from the judgment, upon showing that the failure to appear was due to mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect. The motion must be made within a reasonable time, but in no event more than one year after entry of judgment in the matter. 
F.  No judgment may be entered under this section for failure to appear unless the summons contained a statement notifying the defendant that a money judgment may be entered against the defendant up to the maximum amount of the penalty, along with other costs allowed by law if the defendant fails to appear. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.160 - Discovery. 
A.  Upon request by the defendant, the law enforcement officer or public safety officer shall disclose to the defendant the following material and information within his or her possession and control: 
1.  The names and addresses of persons whom the city intends to call as witnesses at trial, together with relevant written or recorded statements or memoranda of any oral statements made by such persons; 
2.  Any written or recorded statements or memoranda of any oral statements made by the defendant or co-defendant if the trial is to be a joint trial; 
3.  Any reports or statements of experts made in connection with the particular case, including results of examinations and of scientific tests, experiments and comparisons which the city intends to offer into evidence; or 
4.  Any books, papers, documents, photographs, or tangible objects which the city intends to offer into evidence at trial or which were obtained from or belong to the defendant. 
B.  Upon request by the city, the defendant shall disclose to the city the following material and information within the possession and control of the defendant: 
1.  The names and addresses of persons whom the defendant intends to call as witnesses at trial, together with relevant written or recorded statements or memoranda of any oral statements made by such persons; 
2.  Any reports or statements of experts made in connection with the particular case, including results of examinations and of scientific tests, experiments and comparisons which the defendant intends to offer into evidence; or 
3.  Any books, papers, documents, photographs, or tangible objects, which the defendant intends to offer into evidence at trial. 
C.  All discovery requests shall be made not less than twenty (20) days and all exchange of discovery must be completed not less than ten (10) days prior to trial. 
D.  The following material and information shall not be subject to discovery under this section: 
1.  Work product, legal research, records, correspondence, reports or memoranda to the extent that they contain opinions, theories or conclusion of the city attorney, the law enforcement officer, the security officer or other official in connection with the investigation, prosecution of the violation, or such documents to the extent they contain opinions, theories, or conclusions of the defendant or defendant's attorney in connection with the defense of the violation; and 
2.  The identity of confidential information unless the court finds that failure to disclose the identity of the information would substantially interfere with the defendant's ability to prepare a defense. 
E.  The court may order any party who refuses to comply with a discovery required under this section to permit inspection of the material, grant a continuance, refuse to permit the witness to testify, refuse to receive into evidence material not disclosed, or enter such other order appropriate under the circumstances. Upon a showing of good cause, the court may, after in camera examination, enter an order that specified disclosures be denied, restricted or deferred or to make such other order it deems appropriate under the circumstances. The court shall make a record of such examination, which shall then be sealed and preserved in the records of the court. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.170 - Trial without jury; commencement; burden of proof; proof of mental state not an element, hearing of evidence. 
A.  The trial shall be by the court without a jury, and shall be scheduled pursuant to the court's regular judicial days. 
B.  The city shall have the burden of proving the alleged violation by a preponderance of the evidence. 
C.  For purposes of this title only, surveillance tapes created by a law enforcement or regulatory agency shall be admissible upon submission of the tape with an affidavit of the custodian of records, establishing that: 
1.  The tape is a permanent copy of video taken by a video surveillance system; 
2.  The video surveillance system was in good working order at the time the video was recorded; 
3.  The tape was made in accordance with a duly authorized regular business practice; 
4.  The affiant reviewed the video surveillance tape and certifies that the copy presents a true and fair account of the incident portrayed in the tape. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the court may admit the affidavit of any witness into evidence in lieu of taking testimony orally in court. The court shall allow testimony by affidavit only upon finding that the failure of the witness to personally appear does not substantially impair the ability of the defendant to present a defense. 
E.  All evidence which the court deems proper and necessary for reaching a true and just verdict or in reaching a decision on the admissibility of any evidence, may be admitted. The court may avail itself of any materials, books or documents prior to ruling. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.180 - Records. 
    Records of youth involved in proceedings under this title shall be physically sealed when the youth reaches the age of twenty-one (21) years. Upon reaching the age of twenty-one (21) years, a person, or the person's legal representative, may petition the court to have such court records destroyed. The court, on its own motion, may order such records be destroyed five years after the youth reaches the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.190 - Posting bail in lieu of appearance. 
A.  A defendant, over the age of eighteen (18) on the date of an alleged offense, may post bail in the amount of forty (40) percent of the maximum penalty for the cited violation in any case alleging a violation of a class C, D, or E violation, prior to the date set for first appearance on the citation, in lieu of appearing on the date set for hearing. Bail will be forfeited and applied in satisfaction of the fine on said violation. No further fine or penalty will be assessed. 
B.  No bail will be permitted to be posted for class A or class B violations or for any matter in which the defendant is alleged to have been under the age of eighteen (18) at the time of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.04.200, 9.04.210 - Reserved. 
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY 

9.08.010 - Obstructing of building entrances. 
    No person shall remain in or around any entrance to any building to such an extent that the person's presence obstructs any entrance to any building. 
(Ord. 1409 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1296 § 5, 1991) 
9.08.020 - Unnecessary noise. 
    No person shall create or assist in creating or permit the continuance of unreasonable noise in the city. The following enumeration of violations of this section is not exclusive but is illustrative of some unreasonable noise: 
A.  The keeping of an animal which by loud and frequent or continued noise disturbs the comfort and repose of a person in the vicinity; 
B.  The use of an engine, thing or device which is so loaded, out of repair, or operated in such a manner as to create a loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise; 
C.  The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled; 
D.  The construction, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of a building other than between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m., except upon special permit granted by the city; 
E.  The use or operation of an automatic or electric piano, phonograph, tape deck, CD player, television, stereo system, radio, loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device so loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof, or in such manner as renders the same a public nuisance, provided, however, that upon application to the council, permits may be granted to responsible persons or organizations to broadcast programs of music, news, speeches or general entertainment; 
F.  Any other conduct which violates the state noise control regulations set forth in Oregon Administrative Rules, Chapter 340, Division 35 (the regulations) or which creates sound in excess of the limits prescribed by the regulations. 
(Ord. 1409 §§ 3, 5, 2000; Ord. 1296 § 7, 1991) 
9.08.030 - Compression brake use. 
    No operator of a motor vehicle within the city limits of the city shall apply or use a compression brake on a motor vehicle braking system, commonly known as a "jake brake" or "exhaust brake," except as may be necessary in case of an emergency to stop to avoid imminent injury to person(s) or property. 
(Ord. 1296 § 8, 1991) 
9.08.040 - Disorderly conduct at fires. 
A.  No person at or near a fire shall obstruct or impede the fighting of the fire, interfere with fire department personnel or fire department apparatus, behave in a disorderly manner, or refuse to observe promptly an order of a member of the fire or police department. 
B.  For purposes of this section, members of the fire department are endowed with the same powers of arrest as are conferred upon peace officers for violations of city ordinances. 
(Ord. 1296 § 10, 1991) 
9.08.050 - Drinking in public places. 
    No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or on a street, alley, mall parking lot or structure, motor vehicle, public grounds or other public place unless such place has been licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission; provided, however, consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted in a place so designated by resolution of the common council. 
(Ord. 1296 § 11, 1991) 
9.08.060 - Use or possession of alcoholic beverages. 
A.  A person commits the violation of use or possession of alcoholic beverages if the person uses or possesses alcoholic beverages: 
1.  On the premises of any city buildings, lands or properties, except: 
a.  The private areas of housing, 
b.  Any specific area or lands, buildings or properties licensed or permitted for the service of alcohol by the city. 
2.  While such person is under the age of twenty-one (21) years and attempts to purchase, purchases or acquires alcoholic liquor. Except when such minor is in a private residence accompanied by the parent or guardian of the minor and with such parent's or guardian's consent, no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall have personal possession of alcoholic liquor. 
    Violation of this section is a class C violation. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.08.070 - Fireworks. 
A.  A person commits a fireworks violation if the person sells or uses fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city, except as hereby provided: 
1.  Only those fireworks allowed by the State of Oregon are approved for use in the city; 
2.  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) must have the immediate supervision of an adult; 
3.  Improper or unsafe use will result in the confiscation by law enforcement of all fireworks in the possession of the person; and 
4.  Officials may make subsequent restrictions on the use of fireworks based on public safety, weather conditions and fire concerns. 
    Violation of this section is a class E violation. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.08.080 - Littering. 
    A person commits the violation of littering if he: 
A.  intentionally, carelessly, or recklessly throws, scatters, spills, drops, discards or otherwise disposes of any litter anywhere within the jurisdiction of the city, except in authorized public waste disposal grounds or an authorized receptacle made available for such purpose, or 
B.  Without lawful permission, stores or allows to accumulate any wrecked, junked or unserviceable vehicles, appliances or implements anywhere within the city. 
C.  Whenever litter is blown, scattered, spilled, thrown or dropped from a vehicle, the operator thereof shall be presumed to have committed such offense. 
    Violation of this section is a class E violation. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.08.090 - Interference with judicial process. 
    A person commits the violation of interference with judicial process if that person: 
A.  Except as provided by law or procedure, interferes with or attempts to influence any decision of the court or arrest, investigation, prosecution or settlement of any case; or 
B.  Unlawfully detains or otherwise interferes with a witness or party to an action while such person is going to or from a court proceeding or attending court; or 
C.  Knowingly certifies falsely to matters in connection with the issuance of a citation or the filing of a complaint under this title. 
    Violation of this section is a class C violation. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.08.100 - Tampering with a witness. 
A.  A person commits the violation of tampering with a witness if the person knowingly induces or attempts to induce a witness in any official proceeding to offer false testimony or unlawfully withhold any testimony or if the person knowingly induces or attempts to induce a witness to absent himself from any official proceeding to which the person has been legally summoned. 
    Violation of this section is a class B violation. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.08.110 - Tampering with public records. 
A.  A person commits the violation of tampering with public records, if, without lawful authority, that person knowingly destroys, mutilates, conceals, removes, makes a false entry in or falsely alters any public record. 
    Violation of this section is a class D violation. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.08.120 - Simulating legal process. 
A.  A person commits the violation of simulating legal process if that person knowingly issues or delivers to another any document that in form and substance falsely simulates civil or criminal process. 
    Violation of this section is a class D violation. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
9.08.130 - Public indecency. 
A.  A person commits the violation of public indecency if, while in, or in the view of, a public place that person performs an act of sexual intercourse, an act of deviate sexual intercourse, an act of exposing his genitals with intent of arousing the sexual desire of their self or another person or an act of exposing their genitals to a child under the age of fourteen (14). 
    Violation of this section is a class C violation. 
(Ord. No. 1503, 5-16-2016) 
Chapter 9.12 - PROPERTY OFFENSES 

9.12.010 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1503, adopted May 16, 2016, repealed § 9.12.010, which pertained to open cellar doors or grates, and derived from Ord. 1296 § 6, 1991. 
9.12.020 - Obstruction of fire hydrants. 
    No owner of property adjacent to a street upon which is located a fire hydrant shall place or maintain within eight feet of such fire hydrant any bush, shrub or tree, or other obstruction. 
(Ord. 1296 § 9, 1991) 
9.12.030 - Vending goods on streets or sidewalks. 
    No person shall use or occupy any portion of a street or sidewalk for the purpose of vending goods, wares or merchandise by public outcry or otherwise, unless a license has first been obtained. 
(Ord. 1296 § 12, 1991) 
9.12.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1503, adopted May 16, 2016, repealed § 9.12.040, which pertained to animals on sidewalks, and derived from Ord. 1296 § 13, 1991. 
9.12.050 - Posted notices. 
    No person shall affix a placard, bill or poster upon personal or real property, private or public, without first obtaining permission from the owner thereof or from the proper public authority. 
(Ord. 1296 § 14, 1991) 
Chapter 9.16 - SPECIFIED CRIME PROPERTY NUISANCES 

9.16.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Costs" means those costs actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of real property, court costs, and other expenses incurred in enforcing this chapter. 
    "Enforcement officer" means the chief of police for the city or his or her designee. 
    "Owner" means any person holding or claiming to bold title to real property, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee in possession, a vendee under a land sale contract, or a beneficiary under a deed of trust; any person having or claiming to have lawful care, custody, control or possession of real property by any method or manner whatsoever; an occupant of any real property who is engaging in any criminal activity on the real property which may be the basis for a determination the property is specified crime property, and who is known by the person holding or claiming title to the real property or who otherwise has or claims to have lawful care, custody, control or possession of the property to be engaging or to have engaged in such criminal activity. 
    "Person" means any natural person, association, partnership or corporation, or other form of legal entity or entity in fact capable of owning or using property. 
    "Real property" means any real property, including, but not limited to, lots, parcels, buildings, houses, rooms, structures or any separate part or portion thereof, whether temporary or permanent. 
    "Specified crime property" means any kind of real property where a crime involving controlled substances as defined in ORS Chapter 475, gambling as defined in ORS 167.117, or prostitution by ORS 167.007 has occurred or is occurring. 
    "Tenant" means a residential tenant, as defined by the Oregon Residential Landlord and Tenant Act, and any other person holding real property under the terms of a lease. 
(Ord. 1376 § 1, 1996) 
9.16.020 - Specified crime property prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any real property to be used or maintained as specified crime property within the city. 
B.  It is unlawful for any owner to use or maintain or to allow the use or maintenance of real property as specified crime property. 
C.  It is unlawful for an owner to use or occupy or to allow or permit any person to use or occupy, by lease or otherwise, any real property during any period such property is subject to an order of closure pursuant to Section 9.16.030. 
(Ord. 1376 § 2, 1996) 
9.16.030 - Preliminary notice. 
A.  When the enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to believe real property has been or is being used or maintained in violation of Section 9.16.020, the property shall be a nuisance, and the enforcement officer may institute proceedings against the owner for the closure of the real property and the imposition of civil penalties. 
B.  The enforcement officer shall provide preliminary notice of the institution of proceedings in the following manner: 
1.  The enforcement officer shall notify the owner in writing that the structure is believed to be specified crime property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the structure; 
b.  A statement the structure is specified crime property, along with specific findings supporting this determination. The findings shall contain a concise description of the conditions establishing a violation of this chapter. 
2.  A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at least ten (10) days prior to the filing of a complaint. Service of the notice shall be made by personal delivery or by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the owner at the address as it appears on the tax rolls and the address as it appears on the last recorded instrument of conveyance, if different from the address specified on the tax rolls, and to the owner's actual address, if known to be different from the above. 
3.  A copy of the notice shall be served on the occupant or occupants of the real property not less than ten (10) days prior to filing of the complaint. Notice shall be made by mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, or by personal delivery to the occupant or occupants at the real property. 
4.  A copy of the notice may be posted at the real property if ten (10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner; and no response has been received by the city during that time. 
5.  The enforcement officer shall send a copy of the notice to the district attorney for Coos County, as well as any other documentation supporting closure and the imposition of civil penalties. 
C.  After notice has been given pursuant to this section, the city manager may authorize the filing of a complaint. Nothing in this section shall limit the power of the city manager to enter into an agreement with the owner for the voluntary abatement of conditions giving rise to the violation. 
(Ord. 1376 § 3, 1996) 
9.16.040 - Complaint-Burden of proof-Defense-Stay of proceedings. 
A.  An action shall be commenced by the filing of a complaint in Coos County Circuit Court alleging facts constituting a violation and nuisance, containing a legal description of the real property and alleging that the owner has been notified of the violation at least ten (10) days prior to the filing of the complaint. 
B.  The city shall have the initial burden to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, this real property is specified crime property. 
C.  Evidence of the real property's general reputation and the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting the real property shall be admissible and competent. 
D.  It is a defense to an action seeking closure of the real property that the owner, at the time in question, could not in the exercise of responsible care or diligence determine that the real property was being used or maintained as specified crime property. 
E.  If, prior to trial, the owner and the city enter into an agreement stipulating to the abatement of the conditions giving rise to the complaint, the court upon motion by the city may stay proceedings for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. The owner may thereafter petition the court for additional periods of time as may be necessary to complete the actions stipulated to in the agreement. If the owner is not diligently pursuing the actions stipulated to in the agreement, the city may apply for release of the stay at any time prior to the end of the stay. 
(Ord. 1376 § 4, 1996) 
9.16.050 - Emergency closures. 
    If the enforcement officer determines real property is an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare by virtue of activity which would establish a violation of this chapter, the city may apply to the court for a preliminary injunction ordering closure of the real property. In such event, no preliminary notice required under Section 9.16.030 need be given. 
(Ord. 1376 § 5, 1996) 
9.16.060 - Closure order and civil penalties-Costs. 
A.  If real property is determined to be specified crime property, the court may order closure of such property for a period of up to one year, and assess a civil penalty against the owner of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day the owner had knowledge of activities or conditions constituting the violation. A person shall be deemed to have had knowledge at a date no later than the date preliminary notice is provided pursuant to Section 9.16.030. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider the following factors: 
1.  The actions taken by the owner or owners to mitigate or correct the problem at the real property; 
2.  The financial condition of the owner; 
3.  Whether the problem at the real property was repeated or continuous; 
4.  The magnitude or gravity of the problem; 
5.  The economic or financial benefit accruing or likely to accrue to the owner as a result of the failure to correct conditions at the real property; 
6.  The cooperativeness of the owner with the city; 
7.  The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition; 
8.  Any other factors deemed material by the court. 
B.  If an order of closure is granted, the city may physically secure the real property against use or occupancy if the owner fails to do so within the time specified by the order. All costs reasonably incurred by the city in such action shall be a lien upon the property. 
C.  The city shall prepare a statement of costs, which shall be served on the owner and filed with the court. If no objection to the statement is filed with the court within fourteen (14) days of the date of service, the statement of costs shall be entered as part of the judgment, and a certified copy filed as a lien against the real property in the city's lien docket. Liens shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum, commencing with the date of entry of judgment or order of closure. 
(Ord. 1376 § 6, 1996) 
9.16.070 - Relocation costs. 
    Any tenant required to relocate by a closure order is entitled to reasonable relocation costs, to be paid by the owner, if the tenant moved into the real property after either: 
A.  The owner received preliminary notice of the institution of proceedings under Section 9.16.030; or 
B.  The owner was served with summons and complaint for a preliminary injunction under Section 9.16.050. 
    In any action to recover relocation costs, the tenant shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees associated with recovery. 
(Ord. 1376 § 7, 1996) 
9.16.080 - Relief from closure order. 
A.  The owner of real property may obtain relief from a closure order if the owner: 
1.  Appears and pays all costs associated with the proceedings; 
2.  Files a bond; in an amount not less than the tax-assessed value of the structure; and keeps such bonds in force for a period of not less than one year; and 
3.  Enters into a stipulation with the city to immediately abate the conditions, to make every effort to prevent the same or similar conditions from occurring at any time. 
B.  If the owner violates any term of the stipulation entered into according to subsection A of this section; the entire bond shall be forfeited. 
(Ord. 1376 § 8, 1996) 
Chapter 9.20 - WEAPONS 

9.20.010 - Discharging firearms. 
    Except as set out in Section 9.20.030, no person, other than a peace officer acting in the line of duty or a person acting in lawful defense of person or property, shall discharge a firearm within the city limits. 
(Ord. 1409 § 1, 2000: Ord. 1296 § 2, 1991) 
9.20.020 - Discharging air guns. 
    Except on a person's own property or as set out in Section 9.20.030, no person shall discharge an air gun within the city limits. 
(Ord. 1296 § 3, 1991) 
9.20.030 - Designated locations to discharge firearms. 
    Nothing herein shall prohibit the common council of the city from designating locations within the city limits at which the discharging of firearms or air guns may be allowed. No such location shall be approved by the council unless adequate provisions are made for public safety and noise containment. 
(Ord. 1296 § 4, 1991) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Short title. 
    This title may be cited as the city uniform traffic ordinance. 
(Ord. 1375 § 1, 1997) 
10.04.020 - Definitions. 
A.  In addition to those definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code, the following words and phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean as follows: 
    "Bus stop" or "taxicab stand" means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by buses or taxis loading or unloading passengers. 
    "Holiday" means Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed by the council to be a holiday. 
    "Loading zone" means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specific hours of specified days. 
    "Vehicle" means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including tractors, fork-lift trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning equipment, and any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power, notwithstanding that the vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the motor vehicle laws of Oregon. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means, such as, but not limited to, skateboards and bicycles. 
    "Officer" means a patrol person employed by the city or any authorized law enforcement officer, including, but not limited to, the city employee designated to enforce parking regulations. 
    "Owner" means the person in whose name title to a vehicle is issued or in whose name the vehicle is registered, and who is entitled to possession and use of the vehicle and/or the person, lessor or lessee of a vehicle who is entitled to the possession and use of the vehicle under an agreement. 
    "Person" means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
    "Street" means every public way, road, highway, alley, thoroughfare and place, including bridges, viaducts and other structures. 
    "Traffic lane" means that area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic. 
B.  As used in this title, the singular includes the plural; and the masculine includes the feminine. 
(Ord. 1375 § 2, 1997) 
10.04.030 - Powers of the council. 
A.  Subject to state law, the city council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated herein or by another ordinance. 
B.  The council may, by resolution, establish or alter traffic controls which shall become effective upon the installation of appropriate signs, signals or other markings. Powers of the council shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Designation of through streets; 
2.  Designation of one-way streets; 
3.  Designation of truck routes; 
4.  Designation of parking meter zones; 
5.  Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage; 
6.  Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city streets than specified by state law; 
7.  Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones; 
8.  Revision of speed limits in parks; 
9.  Designation of parking zones and time limits for parking. 
C.  The city council has the power to act, by resolution, to establish, amend or change a system for the use of parking permits, which permits shall allow parking for time periods in excess of time limits established by other actions of the city council and shall further have authority to establish, amend or change, as part of the parking permit system, procedures for the use of parking permits and fees for the costs of parking permits authorized by this title. 
D.  The city council may, by resolution, establish, amend or change a schedule of fines for illegal, prohibited or improper parking. 
(Ord. 1375 § 3, 1997) 
10.04.040 - Duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager or his/her designate shall exercise the following duties: 
A.  Implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the council and his, her own orders by installing, maintaining, removing and altering traffic control devices. Such installation shall be based on the standards contained in the Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways; 
B.  Establish, remove or alter the following classes of traffic controls: 
1.  Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes, 
2.  Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left, or U-turns, and the time when the prohibition applies, 
3.  Parking areas and time limitations, including the form of permissible parking (e.g., parallel or diagonal); 
C.  Issue oversize or overweight vehicle permits. 
(Ord. 1375 § 4, 1997) 
10.04.050 - Public danger. 
    Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the city manager or his or her designate may install temporary traffic control devices deemed by him or her to be necessary. 
(Ord. 1375 § 5, 1997) 
10.04.060 - Basis of standards. 
    The regulations of the city manager or his or her designate shall be based upon: 
A.  Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations; 
B.  Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission; 
C.  Other recognized traffic control standards. 
(Ord. 1375 § 6, 1997) 
10.04.070 - Authority of police and fire officers. 
A.  It shall be the duty of police officers and others designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this title. 
B.  In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the police and fire department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1375 § 7, 1997) 
10.04.080 - Violations-Penalties. 
A.  Violation of Sections 10.08.010 through 10.08.060 and 10.12.010 is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
B.  Violation of Sections 10.08.070 through 10.08.090 and 10.12.020 through 10.12.120 is punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
C.  Except as specified in this title, the minimum fine and minimum bail for the violation of overtime parking regulations and resolutions heretofore adopted by the common council shall be five dollars ($5.00). 
D.  Violation of a provision identical to a state statute is punishable by fine or bail not to exceed the penalty prescribed in the state statute. 
E.  Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, the common council shall have authority to change the minimum fine or bail by resolution. 
(Ord. 1375 § 36, 1997) 
Chapter 10.08 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Crossing private property. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services. 
(Ord. 1375 § 8, 1997) 
10.08.015 - Truck routes. 
A.  Motor Truck Traffic Prohibited. 
1.  Except as provided in subsection 2., no person shall operate any motor truck upon any public street or alley within the city unless such street or alley has been designated as a truck route. 
2.  Motor trucks being operated on public streets for the following specific purposes are exempt from the restriction imposed by subsection 1. above: 
a.  Picking up or discharging goods at any business establishment or residence in the city; 
b.  Going to or from a business in the city for the purpose of fuel, service, or repair; 
c.  Servicing utility facilities or construction sites in the city; or 
d.  Traveling to or from the driver's residence while unloaded. 
    Such exempted vehicles shall depart from and return to the nearest available truck route for each exempted trip, they shall not cut through non-truck route areas between stops. 
3.  For purposes of this section, "motor truck" means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property and having a gross weight in excess of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds, excluding emergency governmental vehicles and city franchised vehicles. 
B.  Truck Routes Established. Those streets, roads, and highways located within the limits of the City of Coquille are hereby designated as truck routes: 
1.  Mill Street; 
2.  Adams Street from Highway 42 to Third Street; 
3.  Third Street from Adams Street to Central Avenue/Boulevard; 
4.  Central Avenue/Boulevard from Third Street to the Coquille city limits; 
5.  Fairview Road from Central Avenue to the Coquille city limits. 
C.  Other Requirements. In addition to the state motor vehicle laws prohibiting parking, no person shall park or stand: 
1.  A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of thirty (30) consecutive minutes. 
2.  Any loaded motor truck on any street within a residential district within the city; excepting, however, certain service vehicles, utility company trucks when actually going to, performing or coming from work which normally falls within the scope of the utility companies' construction, maintenance and repair work, and moving vans when actually engaged in moving or transporting goods. 
3.  Within that area between the curb or the curb line and the abutting property line commonly known as the planting strip, or on or over a sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 1489, § 1(Exh. A), 10-7-2013) 
10.08.020 - Unlawful riding. 
A.  No operator shall permit a passenger and no passenger shall ride on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise. 
B.  No person shall ride on the outside of a truck, the side rails or hood; however, riding in the bed of the truck is permitted in accordance with state law. 
C.  No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion upon a street. 
(Ord. 1375 § 9, 1997) 
10.08.030 - Sleds on streets. 
    No person shall use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds or similar devices, except where authorized. 
(Ord. 1375 § 10, 1997) 
10.08.040 - Damaging sidewalks and curbs. 
A.  The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
B.  No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb or move a motor vehicle or device moved by a motor vehicle upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be held responsible for the cost of repair. 
(Ord. 1375 § 11, 1997) 
10.08.050 - Removing glass and debris. 
    A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street. 
(Ord. 1375 § 12, 1997) 
10.08.060 - Obstructing streets. 
    No person shall park or leave on a street, parking strip, sidewalk or curb, any vehicle part, trailer, box, merchandise of any description, or any other thing that impedes traffic or obstructs the view, except as is allowed by this or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 1375 § 14, 1997) 
10.08.070 - Pedestrians must use crosswalks. 
A.  No pedestrian shall cross a street other than within a crosswalk in blocks where crosswalks are marked. 
B.  Where there is no marked crosswalk, pedestrians shall cross a street at the closest intersection. 
(Ord. 1375 § 28, 1997) 
10.08.080 - Pedestrian walking. 
    Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon the adjacent roadway. 
(Ord. 1375 § 29, 1997) 
10.08.090 - Funeral processions. 
A.  A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which is both legal and practical. 
B.  The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control purposes. 
C.  All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their lights turned on. 
D.  No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession. 
E.  No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession. 
F.  Each driver in the procession shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. 
(Ord. 1375 § 30, 1997) 
10.08.100 - Moving railway cars. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, except as hereinafter provided, to get onto or off any moving railway car or train within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person or employee of a railway company, whose regular business, in whole or in part, is to handle freight for a railway company or any person or employee whose employment requires that person or employee to assist in handling cars or trains for a railway company or anything transported or to be transported on the company's trains or cars. 
B.  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be adjudged to pay a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) and not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. 1408 § 1, 2000; Ord. 930 § 1, 1976: Ord. 4-87 §§ 1, 2, 1905) 
Chapter 10.12 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Unlawful vehicles or personal property on streets. 
    No person shall park or place or permit to be parked or placed on a street or other public property, without permission of the council, a vehicle or personal property for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours in a commercial area and seventy-two (72) hours in any other area. Failure to move a vehicle or other personal property for a period of twenty-four (24) hours in a commercial area and seventy-two (72) hours in any other area shall constitute prima facie evidence of unlawful vehicle parking or unlawful placing of personal property on streets. 
(Ord. 1375 § 13, 1997) 
10.12.020 - Method of parking. 
A.  Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible within a single marked space. 
B.  The operator who first begins maneuvering a motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street shall have priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to interfere. 
C.  Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers the vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. 
(Ord. 1375 § 15, 1997) 
10.12.030 - Prohibited parking or standing. 
    No person shall park or stand: 
A.  A vehicle in violation of the Oregon Vehicle Code or in violation of a lawfully erected parking limitation sign or marking; 
B.  A vehicle in an alley, except for a stop of not more than thirty (30) consecutive minutes for loading or unloading persons or material; 
C.  A vehicle upon any parkway, except where authorized by the city. 
(Ord. 1468 § 2, 2008; Ord. 1375 § 16, 1997) 
10.12.040 - Prohibited parking. 
    No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a street for the principal purpose of: 
A.  Displaying the vehicle for sale; provided, however, an automobile dealer selling new cars at an established place of business in the city may, at the time of the introduction of new models of vehicles that such dealer sells, but for not more than two of such items per year nor more than three business days during each of such times, display the new model vehicles at a regular vehicle parking place, not to exceed six parking stalls upon the street adjacent to the car dealer's place of business. Advertising for the sale of such model or models of new vehicles may be displayed on the vehicle. 
1.  Prior written notice shall be given to the Coquille police department of the intent to exercise the privilege granted to the dealer hereunder, 
2.  Time limits for parking shall be suspended during the exercise of the privilege granted hereunder; 
B.  Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
C.  Displaying advertising from the vehicle, except when authorized. 
(Ord. 1375 § 17, 1997) 
10.12.050 - Use of loading zones. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. 
(Ord. 1375 § 18, 1997) 
10.12.060 - Unattended vehicles. 
    Whenever a police officer shall find a motor vehicle parking or standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station. The officer shall affix a notice to the vehicle indicating where the owner of the vehicle can pick up the key. 
(Ord. 1375 § 19, 1997) 
10.12.070 - Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs. 
    The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily storing the taxicab outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. 1375 § 20, 1997) 
10.12.080 - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus in a bus stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space. 
(Ord. 1375 § 21, 1997) 
10.12.090 - Extension of parking time. 
    Where maximum parking time limits are designated by sign, movement of a vehicle within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking. Continued parking beyond the single limit for any parking space shall constitute a separate offense for each period or portion of a single limit for any such parking space during which the vehicle remains parked. 
(Ord. 1375 § 22, 1997) 
10.12.100 - Exemption. 
    The provision of this title that regulate the parking or standing of vehicles do not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle of the city, county, state or a public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street; 
B.  A vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail; 
C.  A vehicle of a disabled person who complies with the provisions pertaining to disabled persons as set forth in the Oregon Vehicle Code; 
D.  Emergency vehicles performing their duty. 
(Ord. 1375 § 23, 1997) 
10.12.110 - Prior parking regulations. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, all parking resolutions heretofore duly enacted under authority of city are and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1375 § 24, 1997) 
10.12.120 - Citation of illegally parked vehicle. 
    Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this title or state law, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number, and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a traffic citation. The citation shall instruct the operator to answer to the charge by appearing before the court on the date specified in the citation or that the operator may waive the appearance by paying the penalty assessment (bail) imposed on or before the court date during the hours and at a place specified in the citation. 
(Ord. 1375 § 31, 1997) 
10.12.130 - Failure to comply with parking citation. 
A.  First Notice. If the operator does not respond to a parking citation affixed to the vehicle in either manner described in Section 10.12.120, the city shall double the bail and mail a notice to the owner of the vehicle informing the owner of the parking violation and that the bail indicated in the parking citation has been doubled. The notice shall further inform the owner that if the citation is disregarded for a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice, the bail will be doubled a second time. 
B.  Second Notice. If the owner does not pay the bail pursuant to the first notice described in subsection A of this section, the bail shall be doubled a second time and a second notice indicating the increased amount of bail shall be sent to the owner. The notice shall inform the owner that the twice-doubled bail must be paid within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice or the owner must personally appear. Failure to pay within the time period stated in this subsection or failure to appear shall be deemed a guilty plea, and a fine in an amount equal to twice the amount of the bail imposed under this subsection shall be levied by the municipal court. The second notice shall also state that such fine shall be assigned to a professional collection agency for collection. 
(Ord. 1385 §§ 2, 3, 1998: Ord. 1375 § 32, 1997) 
10.12.140 - Owner responsibility. 
    The owner of a vehicle placed in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, except when the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner's consent. 
(Ord. 1375 § 33, 1997) 
10.12.150 - Registered owner presumption. 
    In a prosecution of a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a presumption that the defendant was then the owner in fact. 
(Ord. 1375 § 34, 1997) 
10.12.160 - Impoundment of vehicles. 
A.  Whenever a vehicle is placed in a manner or location that constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to public safety, a police officer shall order the owner or operator of the vehicle to remove it. If the vehicle is unattended, the officer may cause the vehicle to be towed and stored at the owner's expense. The owner shall be liable for the costs of towing and storing, notwithstanding that the vehicle was parked by another person or that the vehicle was initially parked in a safe manner but subsequently became an obstruction or hazard. 
B.  The disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under authority of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.12 enacted relating to the impoundment and disposition of discarded vehicles in the city. 
C.  The impoundment of a vehicle will not preclude the issuance of a citation for violation of a provision of this title. 
D.  Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the expense of the vehicle owner. 
E.  Whenever a police officer observes a vehicle in violation of a provision of this title or state law, if the owner of the vehicle has in excess of fifteen dollars ($15.00) in outstanding fines levied against the owner, the officer may, in addition to issuing a citation, cause the vehicle to be impounded. A vehicle so impounded shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges have been paid. Vehicles impounded under authority of this subsection shall be disposed of in the same manner as is provided in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 1375 § 35, 1997) 
Chapter 10.16 - IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "City" means the city of Coquille. 
    "Department of Transportation" means the Oregon Department of Transportation, or other registration authority analogous to the Department of Transportation in any state other than Oregon. 
    "Person" means an individual; a corporation, partnership or other legal entity, and entity in fact. 
    "Police department" means the police department of the city. 
    "Police officer" means an employee or reserve of the police department officially designated by the department as an officer. 
(Ord. 1384 § 1, 1998) 
10.16.020 - Towing and impounding without notice. 
    A police officer, without prior notice to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle, may cause a motor vehicle to be towed and impounded under the following circumstances: 
A.  When the police officer reasonably believes the operator is driving the motor vehicle uninsured or without other means to prove financial responsibility as required by ORS 806.010; 
B.  When the motor vehicle is illegally parked on a public street, private street, parking lot, or in a restricted space, zone or traffic lane where parking is limited or prohibited to designated classes of vehicles or during designated period of time, or where the motor vehicle at any time interferes with the intended use of such restricted space, zone or traffic lane; 
C.  When the operator of the motor vehicle does not possess or cannot produce a valid operator's license; 
D.  When the motor vehicle is in the possession of a person taken into custody by the police officer and no other reasonable disposition of the motor vehicle is available; 
E.  When the motor vehicle has not been registered or the operator is unable to produce a valid registration card; 
F.  When a police officer has good cause to believe the motor vehicle is stolen; 
G.  When a vehicle is left on public right of way in such a location or manner as to create a hazard or obstruction to traffic. 
(Ord. 1384 § 2, 1998) 
10.16.030 - Towing and impounding after notice. 
    A police officer may provide written notice of intent to impound when the officer reasonably believes the vehicle is abandoned as provided in Section 10.16.020(G). Notice shall be sent to the owner of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation, and must state that the vehicle will be towed unless the owner removes the vehicle within five days of the date of mailing; notice of intent to impound shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the vehicle, and must state the vehicle will be towed on a date not later than five days after the date of posting. Failure to provide notice under this section shall not affect the validity of any action taken to tow and impound an abandoned vehicle pursuant to Section 10.16.020. 
(Ord. 1384 § 3, 1998) 
10.16.040 - Inventory of vehicle. 
A.  Time of Conducting Inventory. The contents of any vehicle which is to be towed and impounded shall be inventoried by the police officer. The police officer shall conduct a complete inventory of the contents of the vehicle. The inventory shall be conducted prior to towing, impounding and/or seizing the vehicle except where there is a reasonable suspicion that the safety of the police officer or other person is at risk, in which case the inventory shall be made as soon as safely practical. 
B.  Purpose of Inventory. The inventory shall be made for the following purposes only: 
1.  To promptly identify personal property for the protection of such property while the vehicle is impounded, towed or seized; 
2.  To prevent false claims for lost or stolen property; 
3.  To locate toxic, flammable, explosive or other dangerous substances. 
C.  Area of Vehicle to be Inventoried. The inventory shall be conducted throughout the passenger, engine compartments and storage areas of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, accessible areas under or within the dashboard areas, pockets in the doors or the back of the front seats, in any consoles between seats, and under floor mats and seats. 
D.  Property to be Inventoried. Inventories of the following property shall be made: 
1.  Of all personal property in plain view or in open containers; 
2.  All open containers and any contents therein found in any unlocked compartments, including the trunk, glove box and car-top carriers; 
3.  All open containers and any contents therein found in any locked compartments; 
4.  All closed containers and any contents therein. As used in this subsection, "closed container" means any container secured in such a manner that a reasonable person would know or should know that access requires permission. 
E.  Written Inventory List. The police officer shall prepare a written list of property inventoried contemporaneously with the inventory. The inventory list shall be signed, dated, including the time the inventory was started and completed. A copy of the inventory shall be filed with the police department. A copy shall be left with the vehicle, and a copy shall be tendered to the person in possession or control of the vehicle if that person is present at the time of impounding, towing or seizing of the vehicle. A copy shall also be provided with the required notice under Section 10.16.070. 
F.  Notice. Within forty-eight (48) hours after a vehicle has been towed, impounded or seized, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the police department shall determine the identity of the owner of the vehicle through the Department of Transportation records and send the owner, and the person in control of the vehicle if present at the time of impounding, towing or seizing of the vehicle, a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the following: 
1.  That the vehicle has been towed and impounded and that the contents of the vehicle are in the custody of the police department; 
2.  The reason why the vehicle has been towed and why it and its contents have been impounded; 
3.  The location of the vehicle and the address and telephone number that may be used to obtain information regarding the charges that must be paid before the vehicle or its contents will be released and the procedures for procuring such release; 
4.  That the vehicle and its contents are subject to towing and storage charges, the amount of the charges that have accrued as of the date of the notice, the rate of the daily storage charges and that the daily storage charges will continue to accrue; 
5.  That the vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed upon presenting proof of ownership or right to possession of the contents to the police department and paying any fee to the police department as specified in Section 10.16.070, and paying to the person who towed and is storing the vehicle and/or its contents all towing and storage charges; 
6.  That the person who towed and is storing the vehicle and/or its contents has a lien on the vehicle for the towing and storage charges, and will retain possession of the vehicle and its contents until the charges are paid and, if the charges remain unpaid for more than thirty (30) days, may have the vehicle and/or its contents sold to satisfy the lien; 
7.  That the vehicle and/or its contents may be sold or otherwise disposed of if a person entitled to possession of the vehicle and/or its contents does not reclaim the vehicle and/or its contents within thirty (30) days of the date the vehicle and its contents were towed and impounded. 
(Ord. 1384 § 4, 1998) 
10.16.050 - When notice not required. 
    No notice is required as provided under subsection F of Section 10.16.040 under the following circumstances: 
A.  The vehicle does not display license plates or other identification by which registration or ownership of the vehicle can be determined; and 
B.  The identity of the owner of the vehicle is not available from the Oregon Department of Transportation records or other registration authority, or the identity and address of the owner cannot be otherwise reasonably determined. 
(Ord. 1384 § 5, 1998) 
10.16.060 - Effect of notice. 
    If the owner of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation do not contact the city, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the date the notice is provided, or thirty (30) days from the date of towing and impoundment if no notice is required, then the vehicle shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle. 
(Ord. 1384 § 6, 1998) 
10.16.070 - Release of vehicle. 
    A vehicle towed and impounded shall be released to a person entitled to lawful possession upon payment to the city of a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Upon payment of the fee, the city shall authorize the person storing the vehicle to release the vehicle upon payment of towing and storage charges. Entitlement to lawful possession shall be established by the owner presenting proof of current ownership, proof of insurance and financial responsibility and proof of a valid operator's license; provided, however, if the person seeking release does not have a valid operator's license, the person may be accompanied by a licensed driver, who shall operate the vehicle after release. If the person seeking release is the holder of a validly perfected security interest, then entitlement to lawful possession shall be established by presentation of a certified copy of the document creating the security interest, along with a copy of a letter to the owner, with proof of mailing, providing notice that the vehicle will be released to the secured party. 
(Ord. 1384 § 7, 1998) 
10.16.080 - Hearing to contest the validity of towing and impoundment. 
A.  A request for hearing must be filed with the police department by the owner of the vehicle within ten (10) days of receipt of the Notice under Section 10.16.040. The request must be in writing, and shall state with particularity the basis of the owner's objection to the towing and impoundment of the vehicle. Failure to timely file a request for hearing shall be a waiver of right to hearing. 
B.  Hearing shall be held within four calendar days of a timely filed request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays before an impartial hearings officer appointed by the city. The city shall have the burden of proving the validity of the towing and impoundment by a preponderance of the evidence. 
C.  If the hearings officer finds the towing and impoundment of the vehicle was improper, the vehicle shall be ordered release to the person entitled to possession, and the city shall pay charges for towing and storage. 
D.  Appeal of the decision by the hearings office shall be by Writ of Review under ORS 34.010-34.100. 
(Ord. 1384 § 8, 1998) 
10.16.090 - Towing and storage liens. 
A.  A person who tows and impounds a vehicle pursuant to this chapter shall have a lien on the vehicle for just and reasonable towing and storage charges, may retain the vehicle until the charges are paid, or, if the charges are unpaid for the time specified herein, may have the vehicle sold to satisfy the lien. The lien shall be a possessory chattel line as provided in ORS 87.152 and shall be perfected and foreclosed in the manner provided in ORS 87.152-87.212. 
B.  A person who tows a vehicle pursuant to this chapter is immune from civil liability for towing the vehicle, unless loss, damage or injury to the vehicle is the result of the person's negligent or wilful acts. 
(Ord. 1384 § 9, 1998) 
10.16.100 - Disposition of vehicles and contents. 
A.  If a vehicle is not reclaimed within thirty (30) days after it is impounded, the City may dispose of the vehicle and its contents. 
B.  At least ten (10) days prior to disposing of the vehicle and/or its contents the city shall give the person who towed and is storing the vehicle written notice of the city's intent to dispose of the vehicle under this section. 
C.  At any time after thirty (30) days from the date that notice has been provided pursuant to Section 10.16.040, or thirty (30) days after the date the vehicle was towed if no notice required pursuant to Section 10.16.050, the city may initiate proceedings to sell the vehicle and its contents. The sale may be at private or public auction. 
D.  The city shall have the vehicle appraised by a person who has been issued an appraiser's certificate by the Oregon Department of Transportation. That person shall photograph the vehicle and shall notify the Department of Transportation that the city will be disposing of the vehicle. 
E.  Notice of sale of the vehicle shall be given to the owner and any lessors and security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation, by registered or certified mail at least thirty (30) days prior to the sale. In addition, the city shall post a notice of sale in a public placed located within the Coquille City Hall. The notice of sale shall contain a specific description of the vehicle, the name of the owner, the amounts due under this ordinance for towing, storage and any other charges, and the time, place and manner of sale. If the vehicle is appraised at a value of two thousand five hundred dollars $2,500.00 or greater, notice of sale shall be printed once a week for two successive weeks in a daily or weekly newspaper generally circulated in Coos County. 
F.  A person holding a security interest may, prior to sale, obtain release of the vehicle by providing entitlement to possession as required by Section 10.16.070, by paying the amounts due under this ordinance under Section 10.16.070 and by paying the towing and storage charges. 
G.  If through no fault of the city's, a person holding a security interest in the vehicle fails to obtain release of the vehicle as provided herein, the person's security interest is extinguished. 
H.  If the city fails to notify a person holding a properly perfected security interest of the sale as required by this section, then the vehicle remains subject to the security interest, and any subsequent purchaser takes the vehicle subject to the security interest. 
I.  Disposal. 
1.  If the vehicle is appraised at a value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, the city may dispose of the vehicle and its contents by sale to a person who holds a valid wrecker's certificate issued under ORS 822.110, or may dispose of the vehicle at public auction. 
2.  If the vehicle is appraised at a value less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) but more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the city may dispose of the vehicle and its contents by sale to a person who holds a valid wrecker's certificate issued under ORS 822.110 if: 
a.  The owner of the vehicle, any lessor or holder of a security interest shown in the records of the Department of Transportation signs a release, under oath, disclaiming any interest in the vehicle; or 
b.  The owner of the vehicle, any lessor or holder of a security interest shown in the records of the Department of Transportation have been provided with notice as provided in Section 10.16.040 of this chapter, and have failed to sign a release or reclaim the vehicle. 
3.  Except as provided in subsection (I)(2) of this section, where the vehicle is appraised at a value less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) but more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the vehicle shall be sold at public auction. 
4.  If the vehicle is appraised at a value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, the city shall sell the vehicle at public auction. 
J.  Upon sale and payment of the purchase price, the city shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate. The original certificate of sale shall be delivered to the purchaser and the copy shall be retained by the city. The certificate of sale shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the date of sale, the purchase price paid, a description of the vehicle and a stipulation that the sale is without any warranty as to the condition or title of the vehicle. The purchaser shall be notified that the purchaser might be required to apply for a salvage title under ORS 819.010. The purchaser shall be entitled to be issued title and a registration card for the vehicle, or to be issued a salvage title to the vehicle. 
K.  Return of Sale and Proceeds of Sale. 
1.  When a vehicle is sold pursuant to this section, the city shall provide a return of sale to the Department of Transportation setting forth a description of the vehicle, the purchase price, the name and address of the purchaser, the costs incurred in the sale, and the costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle. 
2.  The city shall deduct from the proceeds of the sale the costs incurred in the sale and the costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle; provided, however, that the city shall only disburse proceeds to the person who towed and stored the vehicle if that person properly perfected their lien under ORS 87.176. 
3.  The city's finance officer shall then deposit the proceeds from the sale in a fund specifically designated for such purpose, and shall file a copy of the return of sale, along with a copy of any notices required by this section in the records of the city. 
4.  At any time within two years after the sale of a vehicle, the former owner or former security interest holder may recover the proceeds, minus costs incurred in the sale and costs of removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle, and fees charged pursuant to Section 10.16.070 of this chapter, together with interest at the statutory rate, by filing a claim with the city, proving the person's ownership or security interest in the vehicle as of the date of the sale. 
5.  If no person has filed a claim within two years of the date of sale, then the proceeds shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. 1384 § 10, 1998) 
Chapter 10.20 - BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES, SCOOTERS AND MOTORIZED SCOOTERS 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Operating rules. 
    In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this title and state law pertaining to bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, scooters and motorized scooters, a person shall: 
A.  Not leave a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or motorized scooter so as to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance. A person shall not leave these objects in violation of the provisions of this title or state law relating to the parking of vehicles; 
B.  Not ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or motorized scooter upon a sidewalk within the C-1 zoning district (commercial/business district) of the city, or on the sidewalks, porch, parking areas and driving areas of the Coquille Community Services Building. 
(Ord. 1451 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 1375 § 25, 1997) 
10.20.020 - Renting of bicycles, scooters or motorized scooters. 
    No person shall rent or offer a bicycle, scooter or motorized scooter for rent unless the bicycle, scooter or motorized scooter is equipped in accordance with the Oregon Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1451 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 1375 § 26, 1997) 
10.20.030 - Impounding of bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, scooters and motorized scooters. 
A.  No person shall leave a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or motorized scooter on public or private property without the consent of the person in charge or the owner thereof. 
B.  A bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or motorized scooter left on public property for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours may be impounded by the police department. 
C.  In addition to any citation issued, a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or motorized scooter placed in violation of this chapter may be immediately impounded by the police department. 
D.  If a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or motorized scooter is impounded under the provisions of this title and the owner of such objects can be readily determined, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No impounding fee shall be charged to the owner of a stolen bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or motorized scooter which has been impounded. 
E.  A bicycle impounded under this title which remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with the city's procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property. 
F.  Except as provided in subsection D of this section, a fee of two dollars shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section. 
(Ord. 1451 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 1375 § 27, 1997) 
[Text continues pg. 115] 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.04 - JURISDICTION OVER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter: 
    "City" means the city of Coquille, Oregon. 
    "Person" means individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company, and similar entities. 
    "Public rights-of-way" includes, but is not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including subsurface and air space over these areas. 
    "Within the city" means territory over which the city now has or acquires jurisdiction for the exercise of its powers. 
(Ord. 1377 § 1, 1997) 
12.04.020 - Jurisdiction. 
    The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public rights-of-way within the city under the authority of the city charter and state law. 
(Ord. 1377 § 2, 1997) 
12.04.030 - Scope of regulatory control. 
    The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means. 
(Ord. 1377 § 3, 1997) 
12.04.040 - City permission requirement. 
    No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises, licenses and permits. 
(Ord. 1377 § 4, 1997) 
12.04.050 - Obligations of the city. 
    The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1377 § 5, 1997) 
Chapter 12.08 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Right to harvest crops grown on right-of-way. 
A.  The owner, contract purchaser, or lessee of real property that abuts a street right-of-way shall be entitled to have the exclusive use and possession of all fruit and vegetable crops grown thereon, and to have such use and possession free from interference from any other person. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with such owner's, contract purchaser's, or lessee's use, possession, and enjoyment of such fruit and vegetables and the trees or plants on which the same grow. 
C.  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as a license or grant to plant any of the trees or shrubs within the prohibitions of Chapter 12.16, or to maintain anything within the boundaries of such street right-of-way in violation of any ordinance of the city. 
D.  Upon conviction of a violation of this section or any part hereof, a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be levied. 
(Ord. 930 § 1, 1976: Ord. 849 §§ 1-4, 1971) 
12.08.020 - Objects on sidewalks. 
A.  Obstructions on Sidewalks. Other than as authorized by Section 9.12.030, or except as allowed pursuant to subsection B of this section, no person, firm or corporation shall place objects on sidewalks in the commercially zoned areas of the city. 
B.  Permitted Objects on Sidewalks. Self-service dispensers of newspapers, decorative plants, plant holders, benches and freestanding or temporary signs, including sandwich boards, may be placed on sidewalks in commercially zoned areas of the city if a permit has first been obtained from the city manager, or designee. In issuing, denying or revoking such permit, the city manager, or designee, shall first determine whether the location and size of any such object will obstruct the free-flow of pedestrian traffic, whether the placement of such object has the consent of the adjoining property owner and ground floor occupant, whether the placement and use of such object will be aesthetically displeasing to the general public, and whether the placement will create a public or private danger to the patrons of the city. In no event shall the unobstructed portion of the sidewalk be less than six feet wide. 
C.  Appeal to the City Council. Any person adversely affected by the denial or revocation by the city manager, or designee, as set forth in subsection B of this section, may appeal to the city council from such ruling. Such appeal must be by written notice filed with the city recorder within ten days from the date of such ruling. The city council shall have the power to affirm, overrule or modify any such ruling. 
(Ord. 1339 §§ 1-3, 1993) 
Chapter 12.12 - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context requires otherwise: 
    "Person" means a natural person, firm, corporation or other legal entity. 
    "Sidewalk" means the part of the street right-of-way between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines that is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(Ord. 1138 § 1, 1983) 
12.12.020 - Duty to repair and clear sidewalks. 
    It is the duty of an owner or occupant of land adjoining a street to maintain in good repair, and remove obstructions from, the adjacent sidewalk. 
(Ord. 1138 § 2, 1983) 
12.12.030 - Liability for sidewalk injuries. 
A.  The owner of real property responsible for maintaining the adjacent sidewalk shall be primarily liable to any person injured because of any negligence of such owner in failing to maintain the sidewalk in good condition. 
B.  If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to persons or property caused by the failure of a person to perform the duty which this section imposes, the person shall compensate the city for the amount of damages thus paid. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 1138 § 3, 1983) 
12.12.040 - Standards and specifications. 
    Sidewalks shall be constructed, altered and repaired in accordance with the standards and specifications established by the city council. 
(Ord. 1138 § 4, 1983) 
12.12.050 - Submission of plans. 
    No person shall construct, alter or repair a sidewalk without first submitting the plans and specifications for the proposed work to the public works director and obtaining his or her approval. After determining that the proposed work conforms to the applicable standards and specifications established under Section 12.12.030, the public works director shall give his or her approval for the proposed work. 
(Ord. 1138 § 5, 1983) 
12.12.060 - Supervision of work. 
    The construction, alteration or repair of sidewalks shall be under the supervision of the public works director. The public works director may inspect any materials and construction details as in his or her judgment may be necessary to insure compliance with the applicable standards and specifications. 
(Ord. 1138 § 6, 1983) 
12.12.070 - Required sidewalk repairs. 
A.  When the council determines that a sidewalk needs repair, it shall, by resolution, direct the public works director to issue a notice. 
B.  The notice shall require the owner of the property adjacent to the defective sidewalk to complete the repair of the sidewalk within thirty (30) days after the service of notice. The notice shall also state that if the repair is not made by the owner, the city may repair the sidewalk, and the cost of the repair will be assessed against the property adjacent to the sidewalk. 
C.  The public works director shall cause a copy of the notice to be served personally upon the owner of the property adjacent to the defective sidewalk, or the notice may be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If after diligent search the owner is not discovered, the public works director shall cause a copy of the notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, and such posting shall have the same effect as service of notice by mail or by personal service upon the owner of the property. 
D.  The person serving the notice shall file with the recorder a statement stating the time, place and manner of service of notice. 
(Ord. 1138 § 7, 1983) 
12.12.080 - Objections to required repairs. 
    An owner may object to notice of required sidewalk repairs by giving notice in writing to the public works director within ten (10) days of the owner's receipt of notice sent in accordance with Section 12.12.070. Upon receipt of the notice by the public works director, a hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the common council. The common council shall conduct a hearing to consider the objections raised and may amend its prior resolution by motion only as the common council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 1138 § 8, 1983) 
12.12.090 - City may make repairs. 
    If repair of the sidewalk is not completed within thirty (30) days after the service of the notice to repair, the public works director may repair or complete the repair of the sidewalk or the public works director may hire a contractor or contractors to complete the work as directed by the resolution of the common council. On completion of the repair of the sidewalk, the public works director shall submit a report to the council. The report shall contain an itemized statement of the cost of the repair and the proportionate share of the cost of each lot or parcel of land adjacent to the sidewalk on which the repair has been made. 
(Ord. 1146 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1138 § 9, 1983) 
12.12.100 - Assessment for repairs by city. 
A.  If the city completes the construction or repair as provided in Section 12.12.090, the city shall forward a notice to the owner, by registered or certified mail, stating: 
1.  The total cost of construction or repair, including the administrative costs; 
2.  That the costs as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice; 
3.  That if the owner objects to the cost of construction or repair as indicated, a notice of objection may be filed with the city not more than ten (10) days from the date of the notice. 
B.  No sooner than thirty (30) days after the date of the notice, the council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and make a decision on the objections to the costs assessed. 
C.  If the costs of construction or repair are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as decided by the council, shall be made by ordinance and shall be entered in the docket of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the property and may be collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of street improvement assessments. 
(Ord. 1146 § 2, 1983: Ord. 1138 § 10, 1983) 
12.12.110 - Construction of sidewalks. 
A.  The cost of constructing a sidewalk shall be borne by the owner of the property on which the sidewalk abuts. 
B.  If a property owner petitions the council for an order to build a sidewalk on the part of the street abutting on his property, agrees to pay cash or to make application to pay the cost in installments as provided by the Bancroft Bonding Act (ORS 223.205 et seq.), waives the right of remonstrance, service and publication of notice of construction and the calling of bids, and consents to the assessment of the property upon which the sidewalk is to abut, the Council may order the construction of the requested improvement, if in its judgment the improvement should be made. 
(Ord. 1304, 1991; Ord. 1138 § 11, 1983) 
12.12.120 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter is punishable by fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day's violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1138 § 12, 1983) 
Chapter 12.16 - STREET TREES 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall hereafter be referred to and cited as the street tree ordinance of the city of Coquille, Oregon. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 1, 1959) 
12.16.020 - Enforcing authority. 
    The city manager or his or her duly authorized representative shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 2, 1959) 
12.16.030 - Permission to plant trees. 
    No trees or shrubs shall hereafter be planted in or removed from any public parking strip or other public place in the city without permission of the city manager. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 3, 1959) 
12.16.040 - Street tree plan. 
    All trees and shrubs hereafter planted in any public parking strip or other public place in the city shall conform as to species and location as may from time to time be provided by the council by resolution, motion or ordinance. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 4, 1959) 
12.16.050 - Prohibited trees. 
    It is unlawful to plant in any public parking strip the following trees: poplar, willow, conifer, cottonwood, fruit trees, nut trees, ailanthus. 
    It is unlawful to plant willow, cottonwood or poplar trees anywhere in the city unless the city manager approves the site as one where the tree roots will not interfere with a public sewer. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 5, 1959) 
12.16.060 - Removal of trees. 
    The city manager or his or her duly authorized representative may cause to be trimmed, pruned or removed any trees, shrubs, plants or vegetation in any parking strip or other public place, or may require any property owner to trim, prune or remove any trees, shrubs, plants or vegetation in a parking strip abutting upon the owner's property; and failure to comply therewith, after thirty (30) days' notice by the city recorder, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 6, 1959) 
12.16.070 - Dangerous trees declared nuisance-Summary powers to remove same. 
    Any tree or shrub growing in a parking strip or any public place, or in private property, which is endangering or which in any way may endanger the security or usefulness of any water main, public street, sewer, or sidewalk, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the city may remove or trim such tree, or may require the property owner to remove or trim any such tree on private property or in a parking strip abutting upon the owner's property. Failure of the property owner to remove or trim such tree after thirty (30) days' notice by the city recorder shall be deemed a violation of this chapter; and the city manager may then remove or trim the tree and assess the costs against the property. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 7, 1959) 
12.16.080 - Appeals. 
    Appeals from orders made hereunder may be made by filing written notice thereof with the city recorder within ten (10) days after such order is received, stating in substance that appeal is being made from such order to the city council. The recorder shall thereupon call such appeal to the attention of the city council at the next regular succeeding meeting, at which meeting the appellant and the city manager may present evidence. Action taken by the city council after such hearing shall be conclusive. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 8, 1959) 
12.16.090 - Abuse or mutilation of trees. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter to abuse, destroy, or mutilate any tree, shrub or plant in a public parking strip or any other public place, or to attach or place any rope or wire (other than one used to support a young or broken tree), sign, poster, handbill or other thing to or on any tree growing in a public place, or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any such tree, or to allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with their roots or leaves. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 9, 1959) 
12.16.100 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with them shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. 930 § 1, 1976: Ord. 946 (part), 1976: Ord. 5-321 § 10, 1959) 
Chapter 12.20 - PARKS 
Sections: 

12.20.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Alcoholic liquor" means any alcoholic beverage containing more than one and one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, and capable of being consumed by a human being. 
    "City council" means common council of the city of Coquille. 
    "City manager" means the person appointed by the city council to oversee city services. 
    "City of Coquille" means a political subdivision of the state of Oregon. 
    "Horse" means horse, mule, donkey or other rideable animal. 
    "Motor vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle or vehicle designed for self-propulsion. 
    "Park employee" means an employee of the city of Coquille public works department. 
    "Park" means an area designated by the city as a public park, community activity area or recreation area, including, but not limited to, the Coquille Community Building and all adjacent city-owned property surrounding the community building. 
    "Pets" means any animal kept for domestic purposes. 
    "Public works department" means the city's public works department, its director, employees and agents. 
(Ord. 1404 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1355 § 1, 1994) 
12.20.020 - Park closure. 
A.  The city manager, or his or her designate, is authorized to close to public use any City park or portion thereof, or restrict the times when the same shall be open to such use, or limit or prohibit any recreational use whenever, in his or her judgment, such actions are necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, or for the protection of the park or any of its facilities. 
B.  Any closure beyond three days shall be authorized by order of the city council. 
C.  Reasonable cause for closure or restricted use shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Extreme fire hazard; 
2.  Dangerous water or weather conditions; 
3.  Public works department construction or repairs; 
4.  Conservation of fish and wildlife; 
5.  Excessive boat traffic; 
6.  Unsafe or crowded shoreline, ramps, parking or road conditions; 
7.  Damage to a park or any of its facilities; 
8.  Any dangerous, unsafe or unhealthful condition. 
D.  A park employee may, as conditions warrant, close the park at any time of the day or night to any new arrivals in order to limit the number of person using day-use and camping facilities on any given day or in any twenty-four (24) hour period. Any such closure to new arrivals will last only so long as the park employee believes necessary to prevent overcrowding. 
E.  Closure time for all day use areas shall be ten p.m. unless otherwise posted. 
(Ord. 1355 § 2, 1994) 
12.20.030 - Fees and permits. 
A.  All fees and charges, including permits issued by the city authorizing the use of a park or any of its areas or facilities, shall be in accordance with the schedules adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
B.  No person shall enter or use any park or any of its facilities without first paying the prescribed fee, if any, to the city. 
C.  No person shall refuse to exhibit to any park employee, upon demand, any permit issued to that person by the city. 
(Ord. 1355 § 3, 1994) 
12.20.040 - Authority to revoke permits. 
A.  A park employee may revoke any permit issued unlawfully or erroneously or when he or she has reasonable cause to believe the permit holder has violated any provisions of this chapter or state law. A park employee may also expel such person from the park. 
B.  A park employee may take possession of any revoked or fictitious permit. 
(Ord. 1355 § 4, 1994) 
12.20.050 - Motor vehicles. 
A.  Within a park no person shall: 
1.  Drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than five miles per hour in a picnic area, campground, or parking lot, or at a speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour in any other area unless otherwise posted; 
2.  Drive a motor vehicle on other than established vehicular roads, parking areas or boat ramps, except those areas specifically designated for such use; 
3.  Drive an unlicensed motor vehicle or drive a motor vehicle without a valid operator's license; 
4.  Drive any motor vehicle in a reckless manner or in wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property; 
5.  Drive a motorcycle, other than for entry or exit, into the park. 
B.  The city may, at the owner's expense, move or remove any motor vehicle trailer or tent which is parked or sited in violation of this chapter. 
C.  Within a park no person shall park or leave a boat or boat trailer in any other area other than those areas clearly designated for such purpose or as otherwise authorized by a park employee. 
(Ord. 1355 § 5, 1994) 
12.20.060 - Sturdivant Park-Motor vehicle restrictions. 
A.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle off of the traveled portion of any graveled or asphalt roadway located within the real property described above, commonly known as Sturdivant Park. 
B.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour within the confines of the boundaries of the real property, commonly known as Sturdivant Park. 
C.  Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section is punishable as follows: 
1.  Upon conviction of a first offense, a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
2.  Upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense, a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
    In addition to the provision for a fine as provided for herein, any person convicted of a violation of this section which has resulted in pecuniary damages to the city, the court may order that the convicted person make restitution to the city in addition to any other sentence it may impose for the pecuniary damages caused by the person's conduct. 
(Ord. 1201, 1985; Ord. 1133 §§ 1, 2, 1982) 
12.20.070 - Animals. 
A.  Pets are not permitted in any park except as specifically designated therein. A park employee may refuse to admit any person to a park who possesses a pet or other animal that appears in the judgment of the park employee to be dangerous or likely to disturb other persons in the park. 
B.  In those parks or park areas where pets are permitted, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  No person shall allow any pet to run unrestrained without prior permission from the city. Pets shall be restrained by a secure leash not over ten (10) feet long. 
2.  No person shall allow any pet in his/her custody to annoy or molest any person. 
3.  No person shall allow any pet in his/her custody to be tied up and left unattended. 
4.  No person shall drive, ride, lead or keep a horse in any park, except in areas designated for that purpose without prior permission from city. 
5.  No person shall bring any animal, other than a seeing eye dog, into any park building. 
C.  No person shall pursue, kill, injure, hunt, molest or in any manner disturb any bird or animal within a park, except as may be permitted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1355 § 6, 1994) 
12.20.080 - Firearms, other weapons and explosives. 
    Within a park no person shall: 
A.  Discharge any firearm, pellet gun, wrist rocket, bow and arrow, slingshot, or any other missile launching device, except in those areas designated by the parks department for such use; 
B.  Possess or use any fireworks or other explosives without prior permission from the city. 
(Ord. 1355 § 7, 1994) 
12.20.090 - Fires. 
A.  Fires in park areas shall be confined to: 
1.  Park camp stoves or fireplaces provided for such purposes; 
2.  Portable stoves in established campsites or park picnic areas where fires are permitted. 
B.  No fire shall be left unattended or be permitted to cause damage to park facilities or areas. Every fire shall be extinguished before its users leave the park area. 
C.  At the discretion of the park employee, fires normally permitted in park areas may be restricted or prohibited due to high fire hazard conditions. 
(Ord. 1355 § 8, 1994) 
12.20.100 - Overnight camping. 
A.  No person shall camp in any park without a camping permit. Camping shall be confined to areas specifically designated for such use. A park employee may revoke a camping permit if the permit holder does not maintain the campsite, in a reasonably clean, sanitary and safe manner. 
B.  No person shall remove, vandalize or destroy any valid permit displayed at a campsite. 
C.  A camping permit will expire after a maximum of ten (10) days. No camping permit shall be issued for camping in a City park for a period in excess of ten (10) days within any thirty (30) day period. The thirty (30) day period shall be calculated commencing on the first day a camping permit is issued or the first day the person begins camping in the park, whichever occurs first. 
D.  All camping permits expire at two-thirty p.m. on the expiration date. 
E.  Overnight campers under eighteen (18) years of age must be accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
F.  No persons shall reserve or attempt to reserve a campsite. 
G.  No persons shall operate or use any noise producing machine, vehicle, device or instrument in such a manner that is disturbing to other park visitors. 
(Ord. 1355 § 9, 1994) 
12.20.110 - Special events or group activities. 
    Any person intending to conduct special events or group activities, including, but not limited to, weddings, receptions, club meetings, company picnics and parties, shall obtain a permit from the parks department at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the activity or event to be conducted. All activities must comply with state laws. The permit holder shall pay, in advance, any clean up fee or deposit established by the city council. 
(Ord. 1355 § 10, 1994) 
12.20.120 - Alcoholic beverages. 
    Notwithstanding Section 9.08.050 which prohibits the use of alcohol in public places, alcoholic beverages are not prohibited in Sturdivant Park as long as the use of such beverage does not create a nuisance as that term is described by ordinance in this code. 
(Ord. 1381 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1355 § 11, 1994) 
12.20.130 - Refuse. 
    Within a park no person shall: 
A.  Throw, dump or deposit any trash, refuse, garbage, litter or waste material, except in receptacles designated by the parks department for that purpose; 
B.  Bring into a park any trash, refuse, garbage, litter, waste material or vehicle for the purpose of leaving it therein; 
C.  Throw, dump or deposit into the water of a lake or stream, or the banks thereof, any trash, refuse, garbage, litter, waste material or any other polluting products of any kind; 
D.  Clean any fish, except at places designated by the city for this purpose. 
(Ord. 1355 § 12, 1994) 
12.20.140 - Noise. 
    In addition to the provisions of the general offense of unreasonable or unnecessary noise as described in Section 9.08.020, any person(s) occupying camping sites, using the park for day use, recreational purposes or any other type of use shall refrain from creating any noise that disrupts, disturbs or interferes with any other person(s) use and enjoyment of the park area. 
(Ord. 1381 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1355 § 13, 1994) 
12.20.150 - Damage, displacement or removal of park property. 
    No person shall, within a city park: 
A.  Pick, cut, mutilate or remove flowers, shrubs, foliage or trees without permission from the city; 
B.  Mutilate, deface, damage or remove any park equipment, including but not limited to tables, benches, buildings, signs, markers, plaques, barriers, fountains, faucets, traffic recorders or other structures or facilities; 
C.  Dig, dredge, deface or remove any dirt, stones, rocks, artifacts or other substances, make any excavation, quarry stones or other objects, or cause or assist in doing any of the things except with written permission from the city. 
(Ord. 1355 § 14, 1994) 
12.20.160 - Concessions. 
    The city council is desirous of having private concessions within the parks. Each proposal will be considered on a case by case basis with a fee schedule set by the city council. The license requirements and other requirements for each type of concession will be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 1355 § 15, 1994) 
12.20.170 - Enforcement. 
    Any peace officer, as defined by ORS 161.015, may enforce this chapter. Any park employee may expel from a park any person violating this chapter. 
(Ord. 1355 § 17, 1994) 
12.20.180 - Violations-Penalties. 
    Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day that a violation of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1355 § 16, 1994) 
Chapter 12.24 - PARADES 
Sections: 

12.24.010 - Prohibited activity. 
    No person shall organize or participate in a parade which may disrupt or interfere with traffic without obtaining a permit. A permit shall always be required of a procession of people utilizing the public right-of-way and consisting of ten (10) or more persons or forty (40) or more vehicles. 
(Ord. 1375 § 37, 1997) 
12.24.020 - Parade permit. 
A.  Application for parade permits shall be made to the city manager at least twelve (12) days prior to the intended date of the parade, unless the time is waived by him or her. 
B.  Applications shall include the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade; 
2.  The date of the proposed parade; 
3.  The desired route including assembling points; 
4.  The number of persons, vehicles and animals which will be participating in the parade; 
5.  The proposed starting and ending time. 
C.  The application shall be signed by the person designated as chairperson, or person in charge. 
D.  If the city manager, upon receipt of the application, determines that the parade can be conducted without endangering public safety and without seriously inconveniencing the general public, he or she shall approve the route and issue the permit. 
E.  If the city manager determines that the parade cannot be conducted without endangering public safety or seriously inconveniencing the general public, he or she may: 
1.  Propose an alternate route; 
2.  Propose an alternate date; 
3.  Refuse to issue a parade permit. 
F.  The city manager shall notify the applicant of his or her decision within five days of receipt of the application. 
G.  If the city manager proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council. 
(Ord. 1375 § 38, 1997) 
12.24.030 - Appeal to council. 
A.  An applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager by filing a written request of appeal with the city recorder within five days after the city manager has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a permit. 
B.  The council shall schedule a hearing date which shall not be later than the second regular session following the filing of the written appeal with the city recorder and shall notify the applicant of the date and time that he or she may appear either in person or by representative. 
(Ord. 1375 § 39, 1997) 
12.24.040 - Offenses against parade. 
A.  No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or parade participant. 
B.  No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade. 
(Ord. 1375 § 40, 1997) 
12.24.050 - Permit revocable. 
    The city manager may revoke a parade permit if circumstances clearly show that the parade can no longer be conducted consistent with public safety. 
(Ord. 1375 § 41, 1997) 
12.24.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. 1375 § 36(2), 1997) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 

13.04.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter and Chapter 13.12, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    "Account maintenance fee" means the nonrefundable payment accompanying an application for water service to pay for the cost of setting up a new account, initial meter reading and other administrative expenses. 
    "Commercial establishment" means any building or establishment or portion thereof engaging in any activity other than for residential purposes. Commercial does not include dwellings, residential courts, manufactured home park, or water districts. 
    "City" means the city of Coquille. 
    Dwelling, Multiple. "Multiple dwelling" means a building designed and used for occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other and having separate housekeeping facilities for each family. This includes apartments. 
    Dwelling, Manufactured Home. "Manufactured home dwelling" means any portable structure or vehicle which is constructed and designed to permit human occupancy thereof and which is being used for residential purposes, including manufactured and mobile homes. For the purposes of this definition, it shall not be relevant: 
1.  Whether the vehicle or structure is placed upon property for temporary, semi-permanent or permanent use; or 
2.  That the wheels may be removed allowing the vehicle or structure to be placed on posts, footings or a foundation. 
    Dwelling, Single-Family. "Single-family dwelling" means a building designed and used exclusively for the occupancy of one family and having housekeeping facilities for only one family. 
    Dwelling, Two-Family. "Two-family (duplex) dwelling" means a building designed and used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having housekeeping facilities for each family. 
    "EDU" means the city-wide average monthly winter water consumption for a single family residence based upon the months of November through April. 
    "Family" means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or legal adoption or legal guardianship, a group of not more than five unrelated persons living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and using common housekeeping facilities. 
    "Housekeeping facility" means a structure or portion thereof providing living, sleeping, meal preparation, and restroom facilities for one individual family. 
    "Landowner" means the person(s) in fee title to, or the contract purchaser of, the real property, as evidenced by the Deed Records of Coos County, and shall not include a tenant or person having leasehold interest in the property. 
    "Manufactured home park" means any lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership where two or more, or a combination of two or more manufactured or mobile homes, are used for human occupancy and parked or sited within five hundred (500) feet of one another. 
    "Residence" means any dwelling. 
    "Residential court" means a group of two or more connected or unconnected residences, or recreational vehicle sites, erected on one parcel of land and designated primarily for transient or tourist rentals of less than one month and includes, but is not limited to, hotels, motels and recreational vehicle parks. 
    "Unit" means a structure, whether in whole or in part, in which a dwelling or commercial establishment exists. Units shall be calculated as follows: 
1. Single-family dwelling 1 unit 2. Two-family dwelling 2 units 3. Multiple dwelling 1 unit for each housekeeping facility 4. Manufactured home dwelling 1 unit 5. Manufactured home park 1 unit for each manufactured home, site, or pad 6. Residential court 1 unit for each three rental units 7. Commercial establishment 1 unit for each separate business or occupant which has a securable exterior door to separate the unit from other businesses and/or occupants and allows for the ability of each business oroccupant to have independent hours of operation from each other.  
    "Unit service charge" means the service charge to each unit connected by single or multiple connections to a meter. 
    "Water lateral" means the piping system between the main pipe to, and including, the water meter. 
    "Water service" means the process of supplying and distributing potable water. 
    "Water service line" means the piping from the water meter to, and servicing of, a subject property. 
(Ord. 1444 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1442 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1402 § 1, 2000) 
13.04.020 - Application for water service. 
A.  Every application for water service shall be in writing on a form approved by the city, and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the common council of Coquille. 
B.  Applicants for water service outside of the city boundaries shall execute a form containing the following agreement: 
Application is hereby made for water service at Premises known as  (address)  outside the city of Coquille, Oregon. It is understood and agreed that if this service is allowed, the undersigned owner or occupant of the Premises referred to herein shall pay the rate prescribed by city ordinance from time to time for service at that location; that this service shall be a special contract service and not provided by the city as a common utility service; that the quantity of water supplied by this service may be reduced or the service entirely discontinued at any time when the city council finds such action necessary in order to provide sufficient service to the inhabitants within the city limits, inasmuch as water service beyond the limits is a service of surplus water not needed within the city; that at least 30 days notice in writing shall be given by the city before such discontinuance may be put into effect; that notice delivered at the Premises or at the last known address of the owner or applicant shall be sufficient; that the undersigned owner may discontinue service without advance notice of more than one day, but shall be responsible for all water served to the Premises by the city until notice in writing is given of such discontinuance. 
Date: ____________ 
Owner: ____________ 
C.  The account maintenance fee for water service shall be determined by resolution of the common council of the city. 
D.  The application of an applicant who has not established a continuous, regular and prompt payment record for water service with the city for a period of thirty-six (36) consecutive calendar months or more, must include, in addition to the account maintenance fee, the following: 
1.  A utility payment deposit as determined by resolution of the common council of the city for each unit (as defined herein) that is to receive water service; or 
2.  An agreement signed by the owner of the property where water service is being requested, on a form provided by the city recorder, consenting to a lien upon the premises where water service is being provided. The lien shall be against the premises served from the date of recording and billing of such services on the city's records relating to its water system for water and sewer charges to the premises. The lien shall further provide that when water and sewer service charges remain unpaid for sixty (60) days after they have been rendered, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in the manner provided by any statute, law or city ordinance. 
E.  In the event of the payment of a water service deposit under subsection (D)(1) of this section, the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon the termination of water service and the determination that water and sewer charges have been paid in full to the city or, in the event that the applicant establishes a continuous payment record for water and sewer service charges with the city for a period of thirty-six (36) consecutive calendar months. 
F.  If an account for water service or sewer service becomes delinquent and the customer has paid a deposit under subsection (D)(1) of this section, the deposit may be applied to pay such delinquency and the city may take such other steps as are allowed by the provisions of this chapter to terminate service to the premises where the account is delinquent. 
G.  When water service is applied for, the city recorder, or his or her designee, shall provide the applicant with a copy of the notice of right to a meeting to discuss dispute as described in Section 13.04.060(B) of this chapter. 
H.  If a property owner has previously established a water account for a particular property and if water service is required for fewer than ten (10) days at that same property for the purpose of maintenance, the property owner or his authorized property manager may submit an application for temporary water service reconnection accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the common council of Coquille that will entitle him to up to one thousand (1,000) gallons of water and automatic disconnection of service by city personnel on the tenth calendar day following connection. 
(Ord. 1402 § 3, 2000) 
(Ord. No. 1483, 11-7-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1483, adopted Nov. 7, 2011, is effective Dec. 7, 2011. 
13.04.030 - Adjustment for leaks. 
    Where a leak exists underground between the meter and a building located either inside or outside of the city and the leak is repaired within ten (10) days after the owner, agent or occupant of the building becomes aware of such a leak, the water department may allow an adjustment of fifty (50) percent of the estimated excess water consumption. In any calendar year, the water department shall make no more than two leak adjustments for any unit as provided by this section. 
(Ord. 1402 § 4, 2000) 
13.04.040 - Private shut-off valve. 
    Whenever a new meter or service line is installed, a private shut-off valve shall be installed by the owner or customer. The shut-off valve shall be installed adjacent to and on the owner's or customer's side of a water meter. 
(Ord. 1402 § 5, 2000) 
13.04.050 - Use of fire hydrant. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate, alter, change, remove, disconnect, connect with, or interfere in any manner with, any fire hydrant owned or used by the city without first obtaining written permission from the water department. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Coquille fire department. 
(Ord. 1402 § 6, 2000) 
13.04.060 - Meter reading and billing. 
A.  Effective December 2000, water bills will be prepared on a monthly basis. Water meters shall be read on or near the fifteenth (15th) day of each month. Water consumption, as indicated by the meter reading shall be rounded to a whole one thousand (1,000) gallons not larger than the indicated consumption. Water bills shall be mailed or delivered as soon after the date of meter reading as is conveniently possible. Water bills shall be due and payable on the date of mailing and shall be come delinquent on the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following the mailing, or the next business day; except in cases where special written contractual arrangements specify the monthly payment date. In accordance with the provisions of this section, service may be disconnected when the billing becomes delinquent. 
B.  A final hanger notice shall be placed at the customer's residence on the fifth (5th) day of the second month following the mailing of the bill, or the next business day. A final notice charge, which shall be established by resolution of the common council of the city, shall be assessed to the customer's account. The following notice regarding a right to a meeting will accompany the final hanger notice. 
NOTICE OF RIGHT TO A MEETING TO DISCUSS DISPUTE 
If you disagree with the proposed action to disconnect your water service for your delinquency because you believe that you do not owe this bill, that you have paid this bill, there is an error in the amount, that you did not receive this service or for any other reason, you may have a meeting with the city recorder to present your disagreement. Also, if any special medical conditions exist where discontinuing water service would significantly endanger your pre-existing health problem or a pre-existing health problem of a member of your household, and this is verified in writing from a licensed physician, you can request a meeting with the city recorder to discuss the proposed disconnection of water service. To request any meeting, you should call the city recorder or go to city hall in person as soon as possible, but in no case later than 5:00 p.m. of the payment due date as shown on the delinquent notice. 
The City of Coquille alone has the discretion whether to make payment arrangements with you. Your previous payment record, current amount owing or your ability to pay will be some of the criteria taken into consideration in determining whether to make payment arrangements with you. 
C.  If the city does not receive a request for a meeting with the city recorder after the final hanger notice has been placed at the customer's residence, the city may disconnect the water service after seven days. 
D.  Whenever disconnection is made for nonpayment of a water service bill, a re-connection charge, which shall be established by resolution of the common council of the City of Coquille, shall be paid before the customer's water service will be re-connected. 
E.  If the city receives a request for a meeting, either verbal or in writing, prior to the disconnection date specified in the disconnection notice, within five days of the date that the city recorder received the request for a meeting, the city recorder or his/her designee, shall set a date and time for the meeting. The city recorder shall provide the customer with written notice of the date, time and place that the meeting shall be held. 
F.  If the meeting with the customer is resolved in favor of the customer, the customer's water bill account shall be corrected and no disconnection of service shall be made. If the meeting with the customer is resolved in favor of the city, the customer shall immediately pay the amount of the delinquent billing or disconnection may occur immediately unless the customer appeals the city recorder's decision to the city council. 
G.  If the customer wishes to appeal the city recorder's decision to the city council, the customer shall deposit the amount of the disputed bill with the office of the city recorder immediately upon conclusion of the meeting. Deposit of the amount of the disputed bill will stay disconnection of the customer's water service until final resolution of the appeal to the city council. 
H.  The customer's appeal of the city recorder's decision shall be presented to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting, and the city council shall either deny the appeal, allow the appeal or adjust the bill to accurately reflect the customer's water service charges. Within two days, not including weekends or holidays, of the city recorder receiving a customer's request to appeal the city recorder's decision, the city recorder shall send to the customer, by regular mail, written notice of the date, time and place that the city council will consider the customer's appeal of the city recorder's decision regarding the customer's water bill. 
I.  If the customer paid the deposit to stay water service disconnection, and if upon the city council's final resolution of the customer's appeal of the city recorder's decision, an amount in excess of the amount determined as the correct water service charges exists, it shall be immediately refunded to the customer. 
J.  If the customer did not pay a deposit to stay water service disconnection, and water service was disconnected, and the customer's appeal to the city council is resolved in the customer's favor, the city shall not charge the customer a re-connection charge to re-connect the customer's water service. 
K.  If the city council denies the customer's appeal, and the customer paid the deposit to stay water service disconnection, the amount of the deposit shall be applied to pay the disputed water bill. On or after the date a water bill becomes delinquent; a disconnection notice shall be sent to the customer at the address on the city's records where the water bill was mailed. The notice shall state a date on which the water service will be disconnected if the delinquent account is not paid in full thereto, which date of disconnection shall be not sooner than five days after the date of mailing of the notice, not including weekends and holidays. The notice shall further provide that, if the customer disputes the correctness of the bill, that the customer may request an informal hearing with the city recorder or her designee by responding in writing to the city and by delivering written request to the offices of the city's water department the time provided for disconnection of service in the notice sent by the city and state specifically the nature of the dispute concerning the accuracy or correctness of the bill. 
L.  If the city does not receive a request for informal hearing by a customer disputing the correctness of the bill, the city may disconnect the water service to any customer having a delinquent bill after time specified in the final notice sent pursuant to subsection B of Section 13.04.060. Whenever disconnection is made for nonpayment of a bill, a charge to be established by resolution of the common council of Coquille shall be paid before reconnection is made to the customer, said charge being for the cost of reconnection. 
M.  There shall be a single rate or charge for water service, which shall be established by resolution of the common council of the city, and it shall apply to all units specified in Section 13.04.010, including, but not limited to, residential, apartments, multiple family dwellings and commercial users. The different rates are described as follows: 
1.  Basic Unit Service Charge. The first one thousand (1,000) gallons shown on the water meter for each building unit defined in Section 13.04.010. 
2.  Residential Rate. In addition to the basic unit service charge: each one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of the first one thousand (1,000) gallons shown on the water meter shall be billed at a rate per thousand gallons. 
3.  Commercial Rate. This rate shall apply to all non-residential users. Users not receiving the sprinkling rate shall be charged based upon their total consumption. Charges shall be applied as follows: total consumption divided by the city's value of an EDU times the applicable base rate. Credit shall be given for each EDU base gallonage. Excess gallons beyond the amount credited in the EDU calculations shall be charged at the applicable excess gallonage rate. Commercial users who use less than or equal to the EDU gallonage per unit shall be charged the base rate per unit plus actual gallonage. 
4.  Meter Size Flat Rate Charges. Users utilizing meters in excess of three-quarters inch shall be assessed an additional flat rate as established by resolution of the common council of Coquille. 
5.  Standby Fire Line. Users utilizing standby fire lines shall be assessed a monthly capacity fee which shall be established by resolution of the common council of Coquille. 
(Ord. 1453, 2005) 
(Ord. No. 1491, 4-7-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1491, adopted April 7, 2014, is effective May 2014. 
13.04.070 - Penalty for turning water on or off without authority. 
A.  Water shall not be turned on by any water consumer or other person without authority from the water department and, if the same is done, the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter removed, or both. The charge for shutting off the water at the main or for removing or replacing the meter shall be established by resolution of the common council of Coquille. All such charges shall be a lien against the premises where the water is supplied, and water shall not again be furnished to such premises until the charges are paid. It is an offense under the municipal code of the city for any person or persons to turn on the water via the water meter valve, or otherwise tamper with the water meter, without prior authority from the water department. 
B.  Water shall not be turned off by manipulation of the water meter valve by any water consumer or other person without authority from the water department, except in an emergency. Whether an emergency actually existed at the time the water was turned off shall be determined by the city. If water is turned off, or an attempt is made to turn the water off, charges for any resulting damage to the water meter valve, water meter, or water lateral shall be a lien against the premises where the water is supplied. Water shall not again be furnished to such premises until such charges are paid. It is an offense under the municipal code of the city of Coquille for any person or persons to turn off the water via the water meter valve without prior authority from the water department. 
(Ord. 1402 § 8, 2000) 
13.04.080 - Resale or distribution of water. 
    No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the city water supply to any other than those for which application has been made. A violation of this section shall be sufficient grounds for discontinuance of water service. 
(Ord. 1402 § 9, 2000) 
13.04.090 - Monthly water rates. 
    Water rates shall be established by resolution of the common council of Coquille. 
(Ord. 1402 § 10, 2000) 
13.04.100 - Private fire protection service. 
    Water service to private fire systems shall be at the rate established by the common council of Coquille, plus the cost of connecting the line to the city water system. 
(Ord. 1402 § 11, 2000) 
13.04.110 - Summer sprinkling rates. 
A.  The common council, in order to encourage residents to sprinkle lawns and yards during the summer season, may establish by resolution sprinkling water rates to carry out the intent of this section. 
1.  Such rates shall be effective for the mid-month readings of June through October. These residential sprinkling rates may only be provided under this section for water use in excess of the user's average consumption of the mid-month readings of November through May immediately prior to the effective date of the special sprinkling rates. 
2.  Sprinkling rates under the provisions of this section shall apply to residential customers inside the city boundaries. 
B.  The common council, in order to encourage commercial, nonresidential customers and high consumption residential users to maintain their lawns, gardens and landscaped areas during the summer season, may establish by resolution sprinkling water rates to carry out the intent of this section. 
1.  Commercial, residential and nonresidential customers inside the city boundaries shall be eligible for commercial or nonresidential sprinkling rates. To be eligible customers must have applied for, installed and paid for a separate water meter for sprinkling purposes. 
(Ord. 1445 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1444 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1433, 2001: Ord. 1432, 2001: Ord. 1422 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1402 § 12, 2000) 
13.04.120 - Multiunits water meter. 
A.  Existing Multiunits on One Water Meter. When two or more units are served by a single water meter, the application for water service shall be in the landowner's name. A utility payment deposit shall be applied to each unit pursuant to Sections 13.04.010 and 13.04.020(D)(1) of this chapter. All landowners of multiunits existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall be required to comply with this section or provide an individual meter to each unit, within one year of the date of adoption (February 28, 2000). 
B.  Future Multiunits. All units created after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall have a separate water meter. 
(Ord. 1422 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1402 § 13, 2000) 
13.04.130 - Water meter access-Landowner maintenance. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city that the landowner to whom water service is being provided by the city shall bear the responsibility for maintaining water meter access in order to provide unrestricted access to the water meter which serves the landowner's property. Every landowner to whom water service is provided shall maintain water meter access so as to keep the water meter serving the landowner's property accessible. The landowner shall further be responsible for maintaining the vines, shrubs, trees, structures and any other obstacle growing on or over, built on or overhanging the meter or the area immediately surrounding the meter's location. 
(Ord. 1402 § 14, 2000) 
13.04.140 - Notice to landowner for water meter maintenance. 
    It shall be the duty of the landowner to whom water service is being provided by the city to take whatever steps are necessary to provide water meter access in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.04.130 within ten (10) days of the date of a notice having been sent by the city to the landowner. The landowner's notice shall specify the action to be taken to provide adequate water meter access in compliance with Section 13.04.130. If, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, the landowner objects to the requirements set forth in the notice, the landowner may request a hearing to be held before the common council of the city by submitting a request for a hearing in writing to the city prior to the expiration of the ten (10) day period. The city shall set a date, time and place for the hearing on objections to the notice. The decision of the council on such hearing shall be final. Otherwise, if no request for hearing is made, the landowner shall comply with the requirements of the notice. 
(Ord. 1402 § 15, 2000) 
13.04.150 - Abatement by city. 
    If the landowner fails to comply with the requirements of the notice sent pursuant to Section 13.04.140 or fails to comply with the order of the common council following a hearing on request of the landowner, the city may perform the work necessary to comply with the notice and assess the cost of the work to the landowner. The work performed by the city may be done by the city crew or by subcontract or by any other method deemed appropriate by the city. If the cost of the work is not paid by the landowner within thirty (30) days following the date notice is sent to the landowner requesting payment, an assessment of the cost shall be made by resolution of the common council and shall be entered in the docket of city liens, and upon such entry being made, the amount shall constitute a lien upon the real property on which the work was performed. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum. Such interest shall accrue from the date of the entry of the lien on the lien docket. An error in the name of the person in charge of the property shall not void the assessment. The assessment shall remain a valid lien against the property. 
(Ord. 1402 § 16, 2000) 
13.04.160 - A charge for water shutoff. 
    The city shall provide the service of water shutoff and restoration upon the request of a water service customer. A fee, established by resolution of the common council, shall be charged for this service. The fee shall be waived if, during the period when water is shut off, the customer shall install a turnoff valve in the water line on the customer's side and adjacent to the water meter. 
(Ord. 1402 § 17, 2000) 
13.04.170 - After hours service charge. 
    A water service customer shall be charged a fee, established by resolution of the common council, for any request for service from the city public works department if the request for service does not occur during the normal operating hours of the city public works department. This fee shall be charged to the water service customer on the next regular billing cycle following the date service is provided. 
(Ord. 1402 § 18, 2000) 
13.04.180 - Transferring of water accounts. 
    The city of Coquille with the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section established the following procedure for the transfer of water accounts: 
A.  The landlord/landlady or owner shall prepare a letter and post via certified mail, notifying the tenant of his or her intent to close the account of the property and provide five business days for the tenant to transfer the account. If the property is vacant, the landlord/landlady or owner shall provide a statement in writing to the city stating the property is vacant. 
B.  If the tenant fails to transfer the account into his or her name in the specified time, the landlord/landlady or owner shall provide to the city a copy of the notice and proof of delivery and a written request to the city to discontinue the service. 
C.  The city of Coquille shall notify the tenant with a copy of the disconnect request and a disconnect notice of at least five days. Twenty-four (24) hours before the shut-off, the city will hang a disconnect notice on the door. 
D.  If no arrangements to transfer the service have been made, the city will disconnect the water at the end of the specified period. 
(Ord. 1461 § 2, 2006) 
Chapter 13.08 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 

13.08.010 - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, words shall mean as follows: 
    "Building drain" means that part of the piping which conveys sewage from within a building to the building sewer. 
    "Building sewer" means that part of the drainage system, which extends from the end of the building drain which is located five feet outside the building wall and conveys its discharge to that public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage disposal or other point of disposal. 
    "Commercial establishment" means any building or establishment or portion thereof engaging in any activity other than for residential purposes. Commercial does not include dwellings, residential courts, manufactured home park, or water districts. 
    "Convenience Store" means any retail grocery store that has some or all of the following characteristics: 
1.  Is under four thousand (4,000) square feet in area; 
2.  Requires a package liquor license; 
3.  Is open more than fifteen (15) hrs. a day; and 
4.  Has no public restrooms. 
    Dwelling, Manufactured Home. "Manufactured home dwelling" means any portable structure or vehicle which is constructed and designed to permit human occupancy thereof, and which is being used for residential purposes, including manufactured homes, mobile homes, and trailer houses. For the purpose of this definition, it shall be immaterial: 
1.  Whether the vehicle or structure is placed upon property for temporary, semi-permanent or permanent use; or 
2.  That the wheels may be removed allowing the vehicle or structure to be placed on posts, footing or a foundation. 
    Dwelling, Multiple. "Multiple dwelling" means a building designed and used for occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other and having separate housekeeping facilities for each family. This includes apartments, boarding houses and rooming houses. 
    Dwelling, Single-Family. "Single-family dwelling" means a building designed and used exclusively for the occupancy of one family and having housekeeping facilities for only one family. 
    Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex). "Two-family (duplex) dwelling" means a building designed and used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having housekeeping facilities for each family. 
    "EDU" means the city-wide average monthly winter water consumption for a single family residence based upon the months of November through April. 
    "Family" means one or more persons, excluding servants, related by blood, marriage or legal adoption or legal guardianship; a group of not more than five unrelated persons living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and using common housekeeping facilities. 
    "Gravity system" means a sewer line installed on a grade that allows drainage or flow from the building sewer to the sewer main. 
    "Housekeeping facility" means a structure or portion thereof providing living, sleeping, sanitation and meal preparation facilities for one individual family. 
    "Landowner" means the person(s) in fee title to, or the contract purchaser of the real property, as evidenced by the Deed Records of Coos County, and shall not include a tenant or person having leasehold interest in the property. 
    "Manufactured home park" means any lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership where two or more, or a combination of two or more manufactured homes, mobilehomes, or trailer houses are used for human occupancy and are parked or sited within five hundred (500) feet of one another. 
    "Residence" means any dwelling. 
    "Residential court" means a group of two or more connected or unconnected residences erected on one parcel of land and designated primarily for transient or tourist rentals of less than one month. Includes "hotel" and "motel." 
    "Sewage ejector pump system" means a system utilizing advice for lifting sewage by entraining the sewage in a high-velocity jet of steam, air or water. 
    "Sewer lateral" means a sewer line between the public main sewer and the building sewer. 
    "STEF system" means septic tank effluent filter system which is an extension of a lateral to close proximity of the structure being served to include a septic tank, appurtenances and required sewer lines to allow gravity flow of filtered effluent to the trunk sewer. 
    "STEP system" means septic tank effluent pumped system is the extension of a lateral to close proximity of a structure being served and includes a septic tank, appurtenances and required sewer line to allow pressurized flow of effluent to the trunk sewer. 
    "Unit" means a structure, whether in whole or in part, in which a dwelling or commercial establishment exists. Units shall be calculated as follows: 
1. Single-family dwelling 1 unit 2. Two-family dwelling 2 units 3. Multiple dwelling 1 unit for each housekeeping facility 4. Manufactured home dwelling 1 unit 5. Manufactured home park 1 unit for each manufactured home, site or pad 6. Residential court 1 unit for each three rental units 7. Commercial establishment 1 unit for each separate business or occupant 8. Convenience store 1 unit maximum  
    "Unit service charge" means the service charge to each unit connected by single or multiple connections to a water meter. 
(Ord. 1446 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1443 §2, 2003; Ord. 1403 § 1, 2000) 
13.08.020 - Sewer connections. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall make any sewer connections with any part of the sanitary sewer or storm drain of the city without making application and security a permit. 
B.  It is unlawful to make alterations or repairs to or to install any new septic tank or drain field for purposes of sewage disposal on property where a city sewer exists in, on or across the property or in a street abutting such property, or where a city sewer which can be used exists within two hundred (200) feet of the building to be served and an assessment has been levied for such sewer service against such property, unless the alterations, repairs or installation are for a septic tank and/or appurtenances in connection with a STEF or STEP sewer system or sewage ejector pump system approved by the city and which is connected to the city's sewage disposal system. 
C.  Applicants for sewer connection permits must also conform with the provisions of any ordinances regulating and requiring permits for the making of cuts or excavations in or under streets or alleys. 
D.  Wherever there is now or may hereafter be constructed in any street or alley or section thereof a public sewer for the purposes of carrying sewage within the city, the owner or owners of the property abutting on, adjacent to or along the line of the sewer and within a distance of two hundred (200) feet thereof and having access to such sewer must connect the houses or buildings on such property with such sewer upon the order of the council. 
E.  Whenever the public works director, pursuant to an order of the council, shall notify in writing any owner or owners of property within the city to connect to a public sewer, it shall be the duty of such owner or owners to make application, file the plans therefor in the manner provided in this chapter, pay the fees as heretofore provided and complete said sewer connection within thirty (30) days from the date of notice, unless for good and sufficient reason the public works director, in writing, extends the time of the completion of such connection. 
F.  Application for connection permits to the city sewage disposal system shall be made in writing in a form prescribed by the public works director of the city and shall provide the following information: (1) the location of the property; (2) the number of buildings to be connected; (3) the name of the owner; (4) the name of the person or firm engaged to make the connection; (5) whether or not the real property to which the sewer connection is to be made has ever been in the past assessed for construction of a sewer to which the applicant desires to connect; (6) whether the system proposed to be installed will be a conventional gravity system, a STEF, STEP or sewage ejector pump system; and (7) such other information or plans as may be required by the public works director or this chapter. 
G.  No sewer connection permits shall be issued for property lying outside the existing limits of the city. 
(Ord. 1403 § 2, 2000) 
13.08.030 - Installation of STEF, STEP or sewage ejector pump system. 
A.  No application for installation of a STEF, STEP or sewage ejector pump system shall be allowed where the property is capable of direct connection to the city's sewer system by conventional gravity flow. The city, after considering future needs of the area, shall have discretion in deciding whether to approve a permit. 
B.  Ownership of Materials-Appurtenances STEF/STEP/Sewage Ejector Pump System: 
1.  The subject property owner shall be the owner of all material used in the installation of a STEF/STEP system from the point of the connection of the building sewer or building drain with the septic tank, to the city street right-of-way which shall include, but not be limited to, the following primary pieces of equipment and appurtenances: the septic tank or tanks, electrical panel, pump or filter and lateral line from tank to main sewer line. On and after the city's approval of the connection to the city's sewer system of a STEF/STEP system, the property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all parts of the private system to, and including, the sewer connection. 
2.  The property owner shall be the owner of all material used in the installation of a sewage ejector pump system from the point of the connection of the building sewer or building drain with the septic tank to the city street right-of-way. The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all parts of the sewage ejector pump system from where the system connects to the property owner's building lateral to the city's main sewer line. 
C.  Inspection. Reasonable notice shall be given to the city's public works director to inspect all sewer connections before their completion and while the connections are still uncovered. All work shall be done according to the city's standard of specifications. Prior to approval of any STEF/STEP or sewer ejection pump system, the owner shall provide the city with a copy of the owner's plumbing permit for the installation of the system. 
D.  Specifications for construction of STEF/STEP or Sewer Ejector Pump System. 
1.  The city, by resolution, shall adopt such regulations as are necessary so as to provide detailed specifications for the manner of construction and installation of a STEF/STEP or sewage ejector pump system as permitted by this chapter. 
2.  In addition to the regulations adopted under subsection (D)(1) of this section and if the system is a sewage ejector pump system, installation shall be in conformance with the edition of the Oregon State Plumbing Code that is in effect at the time of such installation. 
E.  Property Owner's Continuing Obligations-STEP or Sewage Ejector Pump System. Upon approval of the installation of a STEP or sewage ejector pump system as provided herein, it shall be the continuing obligation of the property owner to provide, at the property owner's expense, continuous electrical service to the system so as to maintain it in continuous operation at all times while the system is connected to any building or structure. Upon the property owner's failure to comply with his or her obligation to provide continuous electrical service as required by this chapter and after notice of noncompliance by the city to the property owner and persons residing on the property, the city shall be authorized to disconnect any buildings located on the property from the city's water and sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 1403 § 3, 2000) 
13.08.040 - Sewer application and inspection fees. 
A.  A sewer connection fee, established by resolution of the common council, shall be paid to the city at the time application is made for a connection permit. 
B.  If the application specifies installation of a STEF/STEP or Sewage Ejector Pump System, an additional inspection fee, established by resolution of the common council, shall be paid to the city at the time the application is made for a construction permit. 
C.  If the property for which the applicant desires a sewer connection has never been assessed for any portion of the costs of the sewer to which such applicant desires to make a connection, then in addition to the fees heretofore provided, the applicant shall pay an additional fee which shall be either the city's actual cost of extending the sewer, or the same assessment made in the adjoining sewer improvement district or to similarly situated property, whichever amount is greater, but in no event less than the minimum amount that the common council of the city sets by resolution for each building or residence to which the sewer connection is to be made. 
D.  Any payments made under this section shall not exempt the real property for which the application is made for connection from future assessments for costs of sewer improvements as may be made or assessed in future assessment proceedings. 
(Ord. 1403 § 4, 2000) 
13.08.050 - Construction sites. 
A.  All holders of building permits shall, on request by the building official of the city, provide information relating to sanitary sewage disposal during building construction at construction sites. 
B.  The city building official shall designate reasonable methods of sanitary sewage disposal at and near construction sites mentioned in this section and may, among other things, require the use of regular water closet toilet facilities, mechanized toilet facilities, the "sanican" type facility, or any other reasonable toilet facility, or may prohibit the use of such temporary toilet facility. In no case shall a pit toilet be approved. 
C.  In addition to designating the type of sanitary sewage disposal facility as provided in subsection B of this section, the building official may designate the place of use and location of such sanitary sewage disposal or toilet facility on such construction site and may, from time to time during such construction, required a change in the type of such facility and the location of the same on the construction site. Such location shall be at a place least likely to be offensive to adjoining properties and the view of the public. 
D.  Failure of the building permit holder to comply with the directions of the building official under the provisions of this chapter shall be cause to revoke such building permit. 
E.  No person, firm or corporation shall knowingly connect a pipe or drain or knowingly maintain a pipe or drain connection of roof water drainage, surface or subsurface water drainage, or storm water drainage to the sanitary sewage system of the city. 
(Ord. 1403 § 5, 2000) 
13.08.060 - Inspections. 
A.  Whenever an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this ordinance or whenever the building official, or his or her authorized representative as defined by the Uniform Building Code, has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on any premises any condition contrary to the requirements and provisions of this chapter, the building official, or his or her authorized representative, may enter onto such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to perform a duty of determining whether or not the connection to the sanitary sewage system exists contrary to the requirements of this chapter; however, if such building is or such premises are occupied, the building official shall first present himself or herself and request entry. If such building is or such premises are unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building official, or his or her authorized representative, shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
B.  No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the building official, or his or her authorized representative, for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1403 § 6, 2000) 
13.08.070 - Separation of storm and sanitary sewer. 
    Separation of storm sewers and sewers providing for the drainage of water, other than sanitary sewage, is necessary for the proper treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage by the city. Such separation has been required of the city as a condition of grant money to the city for the construction of sewage treatment facilities as required by the Department of Environmental Quality of the state of Oregon, and as required by the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of America. Many private connections of storm water and surface and subsurface water to the sanitary sewers of the city exist and the city is engaging in a course of inspection and separation of such sewers and elimination of such drainage into the sanitary sewage system of the city. Such separation is essential for the proper treatment of sanitary sewage at the sewage treatment facility of the city. During the rainy season, sanitary sewage cannot be effectively treated at the plant, and, on many occasions, cannot be treated in any way whatsoever and the same is discharged into the Coquille River. 
(Ord. 1403 § 7, 2000) 
13.08.080 - Regulation of drainage. 
A.  Neither temporary nor permanent drainage of excavation into the sanitary sewer system shall be permitted. Drainage from roofs, storm sewers or storm drains shall not be permitted into the sanitary sewer system, and no such connection shall be permitted. 
B.  Sanitary Sewer Connection Repair Standard. 
1.  Any building sanitary sewer connected to the sewer system, whether within the city's right-of-way or within the bounds of the sewer user's property, which is determined by the city to be causing infiltration of surface, storm or groundwater into the sewer system, shall be repaired within sixty (60) days after the date of official notice to the legal property owner to do so. 
2.  All repairs shall be made at no cost to the city. 
C.  When repairs are made within the city right-of-way, repairs shall be under city specifications. 
D.  Before being covered, each repair must be inspected and approved by the city public works department. 
E.  If the repair corrections required by this section are not made, the city may enter the property and make them and cause the expenses to become a lien upon the property, which shall become due and payable upon entry in the lien docket. The city shall attempt to serve, by certified or registered mail, a written notice upon the owner of the property at the time the lien is entered on the city lien docket, which notice shall state the amount of the lien and give the property owner notice that the lien will be deemed delinquent if not paid within sixty (60) days after the date the lien was entered on the city lien docket. If the owner fails to pay the lien within sixty (60) days after entry of the lien on the lien docket, the city may enforce or foreclose the lien in the manner provided by law. 
F.  Right to Appeal. 
1.  Within thirty (30) days after the official notice, as provided in division B above, the person responsible may elect to file with the city recorder a written statement to protest the notice. 
2.  The statement shall be referred to the city council as a part of its regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the appeal, the person protesting may appear and be heard by the council; and the council shall determine whether or not a cause of infiltration in fact exists; and the determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been filed as provided. 
3.  If the council determines that a cause of infiltration does in fact exist, the person responsible shall, within thirty (30) days after the council determination, make all necessary repairs to eliminate the cause of infiltration. 
G.  Notwithstanding division A above, the city is authorized to take immediate abatement action in the event of an emergency that creates an unreasonable risk to the public health or safety. The city shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the person in charge of or using the property, and the owner if that is a different person, prior to the city's entering the property to make the repairs. The city may cause the expenses to become a lien on the property in the manner provided herein. 
(Ord. 1403 § 8, 2000) 
(Ord. No. 1493 B, Art. 1, 4-6-2015) 
13.08.090 - Deposits in sewers. 
A.  The following shall not be allowed to flow into or be deposited in the sewer system: 
1.  Petroleum, coal tar, vegetable and mineral oils and products and their derivatives and waste; 
2.  Greases, oils and sludge from service stations, garages, repair shops, machine shops, car wastes, cleaning establishments or other industries or establishments; 
3.  Explosives or inflammable liquids and gases; 
4.  Acids, alkalis or other corrosive liquids, gases or substances of sufficient strength to damage sewers, manholes, pumping stations or treatment plant units; 
5.  Paints or waste products from paint manufacture; 
6.  Substances which will form deposits or obstructions in sewers or which when mixed with sewage will precipitate material and thus form deposits in sewers; 
7.  Ashes, cinders, sand, earth, coal, rubbish or metals of any kind; 
8.  Live steam, exhaust steam or water having a temperature above one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit; 
9.  Ground or unground fruit peelings and cores from canneries or packing plants; 
10.  Cull fruits and vegetables; 
11.  Fruit and vegetable pits and seeds such as those from peaches, apricots, cherries, prunes, pumpkins and squash; 
12.  Paunch, stable and barn manure; 
13.  Cull walnuts and filberts; 
14.  Offal from slaughterhouses; 
15.  Dead animals; 
16.  Sulfite liquor and "white" water from pulp and paper mills. 
17.  Stormwater. 
B.  Grease Traps. Garages, services stations, restaurants, car washes and wash racks of any kind shall be equipped with suitable grease traps approved by the plumbing inspector before the same can be connected to the sanitary sewer system. Such grease traps shall be maintained by the operator of any such establishment in such manner as to prevent such grease, oil and sludge from entering the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 1403 § 9, 2000) 
(Ord. No. 1493 B, Art. 2, 4-6-2015) 
13.08.100 - Sewer rate charges. 
A.  The city imposes a monthly sewer use charge for each building unit as specified in Section 13.08.010. Any building unit within two hundred (200) feet of an available sewer line shall pay the monthly rate herein specified even through the building unit is not connected to the city sewer system. The intent of this chapter is to establish uniform rates for all water users within the city who discharge water, sewage or anything else into the city sewer system. 
B.  There shall be a single rate or charge for sewer service, which shall be established by resolution of the common council of the city, and it shall apply to all units specified in Section 13.08.010, including, but not limited to, residential, apartments, multiple family dwellings and commercial users. The different rates are described as follows: 
1.  Basic Unit Service Charge. The first one thousand (1,000) gallons shown on the water meter for each building unit defined in Section 13.08.010. 
2.  Residential Rate. In addition to the basic unit service charge: each one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of the first one thousand (1,000) gallons shown on the water meter shall be billed at a rate per thousand gallons. 
3.  Commercial Rate. This rate shall apply to all non residential users. Users shall be charged based upon their total consumption. Charges shall be applied as follows: total consumption divided by the city's value of an EDU times the applicable base rate. Credit shall be given for each EDU base gallonage. Excess gallons beyond the amount credited in the EDU calculations shall be charged at the applicable excess gallonage rate. Commercial users who use less than or equal to the EDU gallonage per unit shall be charged the base rate per unit plus actual gallonage. 
4.  Special Maintenance Charge. In addition to the rate charges specified in subsection B of this section, any building connected to the city's sanitary sewer system which utilizes a STEF or STEP sewage disposal system shall pay a monthly maintenance charge to be established by the common council. 
5.  High Strength. For users which generate a high BOD content of wastewater, the user shall, in addition to their consumption charge, be assessed a ten percent (10%) high strength surcharge on their total bill. For the purposes of this section high strength users include, but are not limited to, restaurants, Coos County Jail, commercial kitchens and schools which prepare hot meals. 
6.  Tolling of Additional Consumption Charges. During the months in which sprinkling rates are in effect, sewer charges for users shall be based upon the average winter usage. Users which have both a regular water meter and separate sprinkling meter shall be charged for actual consumption regardless of average winter usage. 
(Ord. 1499 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1443 § 3, 2003; Ord. 1403 § 10, 2000) 
13.08.110 - Violations-Penalties. 
    A violation of this chapter is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine to be established by resolution of the common council of the city. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. 
(Ord. 1403 § 11, 2000) 
Chapter 13.12 - WATER SERVICE EXTENSIONS 

13.12.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to specify terms and conditions upon which the facilities of the city's water service may be extended to any premises when the premises are not adjacent to or presently capable of connection directly to a city water main. 
(Ord. 1402 § 19 (part), 2000) 
13.12.020 - Within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
A.  Expenses for Water Main Extensions. 
1.  Any person or persons desiring to extend a city water main line to their property for connection thereto, shall be responsible for the payment of costs for engineering, inspection, testing and construction of the city water main line according to the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 13.04 and to standard specifications and drawings submitted to and approved by the city public works director. 
2.  All such water main line extensions, water laterals and meters, not including water service lines, shall become the property of the city upon completion of the same by the owner or contractor and upon inspection and acceptance by the city. The person(s) constructing the water main line extensions, water laterals and meters, shall provide and dedicate to the city an easement of a width and length required by the city for maintenance and operation of the city water system prior to acceptance of the same by the city. The owner or contractor shall provide to the city not less than a one year warranty on materials and construction. 
3.  If the water main line extension, as provided for herein, provides water service, or is capable of providing water service, to premises other than those owned by the person(s) extending the water main line, and such other premises are not connected to the city water system, then the person(s) constructing the water main line extension shall file a verified statement of the total cost of construction of the water main line extension with the city recorder. The city recorder, after verifying the statement of costs, shall compute a just and reasonable method of apportionment of the costs for each premises capable of being served by the water main line. 
4.  After the city recorder computes the proportionate costs attributable to each premises, the city recorder shall maintain a statement showing the costs of construction attributable to each property owner who did not share in the initial cost of construction of the water main line. 
5.  Any property owner who did not share in the initial cost of construction of a water main line who desires to connect to the water main line extended as provided for herein, shall first be required to pay the computed proportionate amount described in subsection (A)(3) of this section to the city recorder, together with interest at the statutory rate per annum before connection shall be allowed to the water main line. Upon receipt of the payment, as provided for herein, the city recorder shall attach to the original computation of proportionate costs a statement, duly certified, showing that payment of water main line construction charges attributable to the property owner seeking connection has been made. 
6.  Upon receipt of the payment attributable to the property owner seeking connection to the water main line extension as provided for herein, together with the interest payment, the city recorder shall refund the same to the person(s) who initially paid for the water main line extension such amount(s) that the person(s) are respectively entitled. In the event the person(s) who initially paid for the water main line extension shall have transferred the premises to a third person by contract of sale, the city recorder shall pay such proportionate share to a purchaser under contract of sale if in such contract of sale, the seller authorizes such payment to be made to the purchaser. After the period of ten (10) years has expired, the city shall not require any person(s) who desire connect to the water main line to pay the proportionate share of construction costs as set forth in this section, nor shall the city be responsible for the collection of the same. 
B.  Location and Ownership of Water Main Lines. 
1.  The city will allow water main line extensions, water laterals and meters only on rights-of-way, easements or publicly owned property. Easements secured for water main extensions shall be in the name of the city or transferred to the city, along with all rights and title to the water main line, at the time the service is provided to the customer(s) paying for the extension. 
2.  The property owner shall install and maintain, at the owner's expense, the water service line from the owner's water meter to the owner's premises. The city shall be the owner of all water service lines from the connection to the water main line to the city's water meter. The city shall be the owner of all water meters connected to the city's water line. 
3.  A water main extension, water lateral and meter shall become the property of the city at the time of installation. The city council, or its designee, shall determine the size of water main line extensions and all extensions shall be made only with prior approval by the city. All installation procedures and materials for installation of city water lines shall be in accordance with city and state of Oregon standards. 
4.  At the time of the city's acceptance of a water main line extension, as provided in this chapter, the city shall assume responsibility for maintenance of the system accepted. 
(Ord. 1402 § 19(a)-(c), 2000) 
13.12.030 - Outside the corporate boundaries of the city. 
A.  Approval of Extension. The city shall not give approval to extend water service to premises located outside the city's approved urban growth boundary unless such approval is for one of the following: 
1.  Development of designated commercial or industrial sites; 
2.  Development of "recreational" planned unit developments (PUD's); 
3.  Curing documented health hazards; 
4.  Providing water service to existing rural-residential areas or to other areas committed to nonresource use upon a finding that Goal 14 Standards have been met; or 
5.  Publicly owned parks. 
B.  In addition to the other requirements provided by this chapter and Chapter 13.04, water service shall not be extended to premises situated outside the city's approved urban growth boundary except upon the city council's written resolution containing specific findings of the following: 
1.  That the services and facilities are extended solely for the purposes expressed in subsection A of this section and not for the purpose (express or implied) of justifying further expansion into rural areas; 
2.  Identifying the specific provision of subsection A of this section justifying the proposed extension; 
3.  That the area where the service is proposed to be extended is capable of being fully served by the city; and 
4.  That hook-up of city water lines to resource lands will be prohibited unless specifically allowed under subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 1402 § 19(d), 2000) 
13.12.040 - Location of extension. 
A.  Extension of Water Service to Premises with Frontage on Public Main. Water service may be extended to premises outside of the city limits only when those premises have frontage on a public main that has been built to current city standards to serve the premises requesting service and such main is constructed and extended so as to provide service to adjacent premises and has been dedicated to and accepted by the city, together with all necessary easements and rights-of-way therefor, all in conformance with the requirements of this and any other relevant city ordinance. The city council may extend such service only after proper application as required by this chapter. 
B.  Extension of Water Service to Contiguous Premises. If the city receives a request for extension of water service to premises outside of the corporate boundaries of the city, and the subject premises are contiguous to, and capable of immediate annexation to, the city, water service shall not be extended to such premises unless the property owner consents to annexation and petitions the city for such annexation. If the subject premises is contiguous to the city but outside of the city's approved urban growth boundary, the city may delay action on an application for extension of water service pending approval of a request for expansion of the city's urban growth boundary for purposes of annexation of the property proposed to be served by the city's water system. 
C.  Extension of Water Service to Noncontiguous Premises. If the city receives a request for extension of water service to premises outside of the corporate boundaries of the city and the premises are contiguous to the city and also not capable of immediate annexation as provided in subsection B of this section, but the property is within the city's approved urban growth boundary, no approval shall be granted under the provisions of this chapter for extension of water service to the subject premises until the property owner and the city have executed an agreement wherein the parties agree to annex the subject premises to the city at such future time as annexation is legally possible. The city has the discretion to determine the timing for the future annexation. The parties' agreement shall include a provision that the agreement and covenant to annex the subject premises shall be a covenant to run with the subject premises. Additionally, the agreement shall provide that the agreement be recorded in the records of Coos County, Oregon; and, the property owner shall be responsible for all recordings costs. 
D.  The city shall only allow water main extension, laterals and meters to be located on public rights-of-way, easements granted to the city, or publicly owned property. 
(Ord. 1402 § 19(e), 2000) 
13.12.050 - Water main extension expenses. 
A.  Any person or person desiring to extend a city water main, water lateral and meter under the provisions of this chapter to their property for connection thereto shall be responsible for the payment of costs for engineering, inspection, testing and construction of the same according to the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 13.04 and to standard specifications and drawings submitted to and approved by the city public works director. 
B.  All such water main line extensions, water laterals and meters not including water service lines, shall become the property of the city upon completion of the same by the owner or contractor and upon completion of the same by the owner or contractor and inspection and acceptance by the city. The person or persons constructing the water main line extensions, water laterals and meters shall provide and dedicate to the city an easement of a width and length required by the city for maintenance and operation of the city water system prior to acceptance of the same by the city. The owner or contractor shall provide to the city not less than a one year warranty on all materials and construction. 
C.  If the water main line, as extended as provided for herein, provides water service or is capable of providing water service to property other than the property owned by the person extending the water service, which property is not previously connected with the city water system, then the person or persons constructing the water main line extension shall file a verified statement of the total cost of construction of the water main line with the city recorder. The city recorder, after verifying the statement of costs, shall compute a just and reasonable method of apportionment of the costs for each property capable of being served by the water main line. 
D.  After computation of the proportionate costs attributable to each property by the city recorder, the city recorder shall maintain a statement showing the costs of construction attributable to each property. The city recorder shall then maintain a certified list of the costs attributable to each property owner who did not share in the cost of construction of the water main line in the first instance. 
E.  Any person or persons owning property who did not share in the initial cost of construction of a water main line who desire to connect to the water main line extended as provided for herein shall first be required to pay to the city recorder the proportionate amount as computed by the city recorder in subsection C of this section together with interest at the statutory rate per annum before connection shall be allowed provided for herein, the city recorder shall attach to the original computation of proportionate costs a statement, duly certified, showing that payment of water main line construction charges attributable to the property seeking connection have been paid. 
F.  Upon receipt of the payment attributable to property seeking connection to the water main line extension as provided for herein, together with the interest payment, the city recorder shall refund the same to the person or persons originally paying for the water main line extension in an amount to which said person or persons are respectively entitled. In the event the person or persons originally paying for the water main line extension shall have transferred the property to a third person, the city recorder shall pay such proportionate share to a purchaser under contract of sale, if in such contract of sale the seller authorizes such payment to be made to the purchaser. After the period or ten (10) years has expired, the city shall not require any person or persons desiring to connect to the water main line to pay the proportionate share of construction costs as set forth in this section, nor shall the city be responsible for the collection of the same. 
(Ord. 1402 § 19(f), 2000) 
13.12.060 - Potential water service disconnection. 
    All service provided to properties located outside the corporate boundaries of the city shall be subject to disconnection in the event of shortage of water supply within the city. Pressure and other conditions in all water service provided outside the city shall be at the risk of the purchaser of water, without guarantee or warranty by the city. 
(Ord. 1402 § 19(g), 2000) 
13.12.070 - Ownership of extension. 
A.  Extension With Master Meter. Prior to extending a water main beyond the corporate boundaries, the city may require that a master meter be installed inside the corporate boundaries for an extension to be located outside the corporate boundaries. If a master meter is required by the city, the city will not assume ownership of the extension, except for the individual property water meters. 
B.  Extension Without Master Meter. Water main extensions, water laterals and meters outside the corporate boundary and without a required master meter shall become the ownership of the city. 
C.  The property owner(s) served by an extension shall be responsible for all costs associated with an extension. All installation procedures and materials for installation of water lines shall be in accordance with city and state of Oregon standards. 
(Ord. 1402 § 19(h), 2000) 
13.12.080 - Maintenance of water extension. 
    If a master meter is required, maintenance of water main lines, water laterals, and all appurtenances of the extension, except for water meters, of the extension located outside the city, shall be the responsibility of the water users of the line until such time as the property adjacent to the water main line has been annexed to the city. At the time of annexation of the property adjacent to a main line, the city shall only assume responsibility for the maintenance at the main line, water laterals and meters if the main line and laterals were installed to city specifications. 
(Ord. 1402 § 19(i), 2000) 
Chapter 13.16 - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

13.16.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this chapter is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the most recent edition of the Manual of Cross Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California. 
    "Approved backflow prevention assembly" or "backflow assembly" or "assembly" means an assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by the Oregon Health Division. 
1.  "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly" or "reduced pressure principle assembly" or "RP assembly" or "RP" means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at the end of the assembly. 
2.  "Double check valve backflow prevention assembly" or "double check assembly" or "double check" or "DC" means an assembly which consists of two independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a gate valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. 
3.  "Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly" or "pressure vacuum breaker" or "PVB" means an assembly which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against backpressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used with downstream shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate valves and test cocks which allows the full testing of the assembly. 
    "Air gap" means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device; in no case less than one inch. 
    "Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention device" or "atmospheric vacuum breaker" or "AVB" means a device that cannot be tested and cannot prevent backpressure backflow, but is used to prevent backsiphonage in non-health hazard conditions. 
    "Auxiliary supply" means any water source or system other than the public water system, that may be available in the building or on the property. 
    "Backflow" means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases or substances into the water system of city. 
    "Backpressure" means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source. 
    "Backsiphonage" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixture or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    "Boresight" or "boresight to daylight" means providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drain pipe. 
    "Contamination" means the entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water. 
    "Coquille" means city of Coquille. 
    "Cross connection" means any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly (actual or potential), with any other nondrinkable water system, used water system or auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers, air conditioner units, fire protection system, or any other assembly which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change over assemblies, or other temporary or permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow may occur are considered to be cross connections. 
    "Degree of hazard" means the low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross connections. 
1.  "High hazard" means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply. 
2.  "Low hazard" means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connections that potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to backflow into the potable water supply. 
3.  "Health hazard" means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
4.  "Plumbing hazard" means an internal or plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system than may be either a pollutional or a contamination-type hazard. 
5.  "Pollutional hazard" means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
6.  "System hazard" means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    "Division" means Oregon Health Division. 
    "Point-of-use isolation" means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross connection exists. 
    "Potable water supply" means any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use. 
    "Premises" means any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it. 
    "Premises isolation" means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
    "Public water system" or "system" means any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public domestic use. The system must meet all the health requirements set forth by the Oregon Health Division. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing or conveying water for public consumption. 
    "Representative of the water system" means a person designated by the city to perform cross connection control duties that shall include, but are not limited to, cross connection inspections and water use surveys. 
    "Service connection" is the point of delivery at which the water purveyor loses control of the water. 
    "Tester" means a person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the Oregon Health Division. 
    "Thermal expansion" means heated water that does not have the space to expand. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.01, 2000) 
13.16.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the water supply of the city from contamination or pollution due to any existing or potential cross connections. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.02, 2000) 
13.16.030 - Backflow prevention assembly requirements. 
    A representative of the water system of city shall determine the type and location of any backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by Coquille. An assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but the representative is in no way limited to the following circumstances: 
A.  The nature and extent of any activity of the premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity of the premises, or materials stored on the premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
B.  Premises having any one or more cross connections as that term is defined in this Section 13.16.010, are identified or are present. 
C.  Internal cross connections are present that are not correctable. 
D.  Intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist. 
E.  There is a repeated history of cross connections being established or re-established. 
F.  There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross connections do not exist. 
G.  Materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result. 
H.  Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the judgment of the city. 
I.  An appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the city upon request. 
J.  A fire sprinkler system using non-potable piping material is connected to Coquille's water system. 
K.  A water user of the owner of the premises, obtaining water from the water system, treats the water in any way or adds any chemical or substance to the water. 
L.  There is an auxiliary water supply which is connected to the potable water piping. 
M.  There is backsiphonage potential. 
N.  Cross connections or potential cross connections exist. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.03, 2000) 
13.16.040 - Mobile units. 
A.  Any mobile unit or apparatus that uses city water or water from any premises within the city must obtain a permit from Coquille before using any water. These mobile units will include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles that use water, potable toilet-hauling and water service vehicles, septic tank-cleaning vehicles that use water. A fixed air gap or backflow assembly mounted either on the truck or piping system may be required. 
B.  Coquille reserves the right to revoke the business license of the owner of the apparatus or mobile unit if the owner fails to comply with above procedures. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.04, 2000) 
13.16.050 - Plumbing code-Compliance. 
    As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the Oregon Administrative Rules. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.05, 2000) 
13.16.060 - Installation requirements. 
    To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the following requirements shall apply to the installation of these assemblies. 
A.  No part of the backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. If installed in a vault or basement, adequate drainage shall be provided. 
B.  Assemblies must be installed immediately downstream of the water meter, before any branch in the line. Alternate locations must be approved in writing by the city prior to installation. 
C.  The assembly must be protected by the property owner from freezing and other severe weather conditions. 
D.  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the state of Oregon Health Division and Coquille. 
E.  Only assemblies specifically approved by the Oregon Health Division for vertical installation may be installed vertically. 
F.  The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance and testing. Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least six inches clearance on all sides of the assembly. All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches on the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, twelve (12) inches below the assembly and thirty-six (36) inches above the assembly. "Y" pattern double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. 
G.  If written permission is granted to install the backflow assembly inside of the building, the assembly must be readily accessible during regular working hours of six a.m. to six p.m., Monday through Friday. 
H.  An assembly installed inside of the premises and installed five feet above the floor, must be equipped with a rigidly and permanently installed scaffolding acceptable to the city. This installation must also meet the requirements set out by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the State of Oregon Occupational Safety and Health Codes. 
I.  RP assemblies may be installed in a vault only if relief valve discharge can be drained to daylight through a boresight-type drain. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends. 
J.  An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice. This air gap shall be at least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically above the top rim of the drain and in no case less than one inch. 
K.  Upon completion of installation of any additional assemblies within the premises, the city of Coquille must be notified and all assemblies must be inspected and tested, as required in this Section 13.16.080. All backflow assemblies must be registered with the city. Registration shall consist of date of installation, make, model, size, serial number of the backflow assembly, location and initial test report. 
L.  Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of Coquille. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.06, 2000) 
13.16.070 - Access to premises. 
    Authorized employees of the city, with proper identification, shall have access during the hours of eight a.m. to five p.m. to all parts of the premises and within the building to which water is supplied. However, if any water user refuses access to the premises or to the interior of a structure during these hours for inspection by a cross connection specialist appointed by Coquille, a reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed at the service connection to the premises. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.07, 2000) 
13.16.080 - Testing and maintenance of assemblies. 
A.  A representative of the city shall inspect and test, or cause to be inspected and tested, all assemblies in each of the following circumstances: 
1.  Immediately after installations; 
2.  Whenever the assembly is moved; 
3.  A minimum of once a year; 
4.  Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to reoccupancy; 
5.  Immediately after repairs. 
    Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if deemed necessary. 
B.  All assembly testing shall be performed by an Oregon Health Division certified backflow prevention assembly tester, in accordance with approved test procedures. 
C.  Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall, during the hours of eight a.m. to five p.m., permit a representative of the city or his agents to enter the premises and building for examination of pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used, and refusal by any consumer shall result in termination of water service from Coquille until such permission is granted. 
D.  The city shall not be liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly that occurs during testing. 
E.  The city is authorized to discontinue or disconnect water service to premises required to be tested under this section if their representative's access to the backflow prevention assemblies is denied or hindered. Water service shall not be reinstated until access is granted and testing completed. 
F.  A person commits an offense if he reinstates water service to premises discontinued or disconnected under subsection E of this section, except as directed by the city. 
G.  It is the responsibility of the property owner to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this chapter. 
H.  A person who owns, operates or manages premises where required backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall maintain such assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. 
I.  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in a manner which allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the city. 
J.  A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly fails to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this section. 
K.  A person commits an offense if he knowingly fails to comply with a repair order issued by the city or designee. 
L.  A person commits an offense if backflow from premises he or she owns, operates or manages enters the public water supply system. 
M.  It is the responsibility of the property owner to have all assemblies repaired in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.08, 2000) 
13.16.090 - Thermal expansion. 
    It is the responsibility of the property owner to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.09, 2000) 
13.16.100 - Pressure loss. 
    Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the city. Coquille will give reasonable assistance to the owner regarding information on adequate sizing of assemblies and proper plumbing practices to provide for required pressure and flows for fire protection. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.10, 2000) 
13.16.110 - Rental properties. 
    The property owner is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow assemblies on their property. When the tenants change, or, if the plumbing is altered in any way, it is the responsibility of the owner to notify the city. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.11, 2000) 
13.16.120 - Installation standards and specifications. 
A.  Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RP). RPs may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RP is effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
1.  RPs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data. 
2.  Premises where interruption of water supply is critical should be provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. They should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the maximum flow required. 
3.  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line must not be installed. 
4.  The assembly must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in an area where water damage to building or furnishing would not occur from relief valve discharge. An approved air gap funnel assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly; this assembly will not control flow in a continuous relief situation. Drain lines to accommodate full relief valve discharge flow should be considered. 
    RPs are typically installed above grade in well drained areas, but may be installed below grade (ground level) if a boresight drain to daylight, sized to accommodate the full discharge rate of the relief valve, is provided (see Standard Detail 1:12-2). The owner shall be responsible for keeping these vaults free of silt and debris. 
    Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies. Daylight drain ports must be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly. 
    Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least three-inch clearance on both sides and on top of the assembly, and twelve (12) inches below and behind the assembly. All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches on the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least twelve (12) inches plus nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six feet zero inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches square is required on all vault lids. 
    Assemblies that are larger than four inches and installed more than five feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel. 
5.  The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions. 
6.  Vertical installation is prohibited. 
7.  Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of assembly. 
8.  The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from an RP assembly. 
9.  All RP assemblies must be tested in accordance with this chapter: Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 




B.  Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly (DC). Double check valve assemblies may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
1.  DCs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data. 
2.  Premises where interruption of water supply is critical should be provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. They should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required. 
3.  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be installed. 
4.  The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs may be installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. 
    Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least three-inch clearance below and on both sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than twenty-four (24) inches below grade. All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches on the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and twelve (12) inches below the assembly. Headroom of six feet zero inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches square is required on all vault lids. 
    Assemblies that are larger than four inches and are installed more than five feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel. 
5.  Vertical installations are allowed on sizes up to and including four inches that meet the following requirements: 
a.  Internally spring-loaded check valves; 
b.  Flow is upward through assembly; 
c.  Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical position; 
d.  Approved by director. 
6.  The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions. 
7.  Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly. 
8.  The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damages resulting from installation, operation, and/or maintenance of backflow assembly. The owner shall be responsible for keeping all backflow prevention assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris. 
9.  All DCs must be tested in accordance with this chapter. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city public works department upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 


C.  Pressure Vacuum Breaker Backflow Prevention Assembly (PVB). PVBs may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure. 
1.  The assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest downstream piping. 
2.  PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water discharge. 
3.  The assembly must be protected from freezing. 
4.  The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches all around the assembly. 
5.  A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly. 
6.  All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this chapter. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 

D.  Air Gap Separation. Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
1.  An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel; in no case less than one inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a forty-five (45) degree angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed. 
2.  Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the city must be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
3.  Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or a distance greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls. 
4.  Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions extending from the water surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening other than specified in subsection (D)(3) of this section. The effect of three or more such side walls or ribs has not been determined. In such cases, the air gap shall be measured from the top of the wall. 
5.  The effective opening shall be the minimum cross-sectional area at the seat of the control valve or the supply pipe or tubing which feeds the assembly or outlet. If two or more lines supply one outlet, the effective opening shall be the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the individual supply lines or the area of the single outlet, whichever is smaller. 

(Ord. 1399 § 1.12, 2000) 
13.16.130 - Costs of compliance. 
    All costs associated with purchase, installation, testing, replacement, maintenance, parts and repairs of any backflow assembly are the financial responsibility of the property owner, not the city. 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.13, 2000) 
13.16.140 - Termination of service. 
    Failure on the part of any customer to discontinue the use of all cross connections and to physically separate cross connections is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to the premises. (OAR Chapter 333-61-0070, Section 1b). 
(Ord. 1399 § 1.14, 2000) 
Chapter 13.20 - WATER QUALITY PROTECTION 

13.20.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine. Except where the context indicates otherwise: 
    "Person" means every individual, firm or corporation. 
    "City" means the city of Coquille. 
    "Watershed" means all property owned and occupied by the works, reservoirs, systems, springs, branches and pipes, and all the lakes, rivers, springs, streams, creeks or tributaries acquired by the city and constituting the sources of the city water supply and by means of which the city obtains the city water supply, or stores or conducts the water supply; and all property acquired for the preservation and protection of the purity of the city water supply; and all property owned by the city within the areas draining into the lakes, rivers, springs, streams, creeks, or tributaries constituting such sources of water supply. 
(Ord. 862 § 1, 1972) 
13.20.020 - Offenses against the purity of the water supply. 
    No person shall pollute or endanger the purity of the city water supply by: 
A.  Going or trespassing upon the area within the watershed without first obtaining written permission from the city manager; 
B.  Permitting livestock owned or controlled by him or her to run at large or be pastured, kept or maintained within the watershed except as may be allowed by existing agreements with the city; 
C.  Leaving, keeping or depositing any garbage, refuse or offensive material within the watershed; 
D.  Carrying or shooting a firearm, or killing any animal or fowl within the watershed, except as permitted in ORS 448.305; 
E.  Picnicking, hunting or lighting a fire within the watershed, except fires authorized by the city manager; 
F.  Driving a motor vehicle in the watershed, except on established roads, without written permission from the city manager; 
G.  Bathing, swimming or boating in the reservoirs, lakes, springs, streams, creeks or tributaries in the watershed; 
H.  Placing any article or substance in or so near as to be liable to cause pollution of the reservoirs, lakes, springs, streams, creeks or tributaries in the watershed. 
(Ord. 1126, 1982: Ord. 862 § 2, 1972) 
13.20.030 - Regulations for authorized persons. 
    No employee or contractor of the city employed in the watershed shall violate any rules or regulations adopted by the city to protect the purity of the water and prevent pollution. 
(Ord. 862 § 3, 1972) 
13.20.040 - Pollution prohibited. 
    No person shall establish or maintain a slaughter pen, stock-feeding yards, or hogpens, or deposit, or maintain any unclean or unwholesome substance, or conduct any business or occupation, or allow any condition upon or sufficiently near the sources from which the city water supply is obtained, or where water is stored, or the property or means through which it may be conveyed or conducted, so that the water would be polluted or its purity destroyed or endangered. 
(Ord. 862 § 4, 1972) 
13.20.050 - Placing substances on watershed. 
    No person shall place or cause to be placed within the watershed any substance which either by itself or in connection with other matter will corrupt, pollute or impair the quality of the city water supply. No owner of any dead animal shall knowingly leave or cause to be left the carcass or any portion thereof within the watershed in such condition as to in any way corrupt or pollute the city water supply. 
(Ord. 862 § 5, 1972) 
13.20.060 - Defacing signs. 
    No person shall alter, change, deface, destroy, or remove any sign, warning, or notice posted by the city in the watershed. 
(Ord. 862 § 6, 1972) 
13.20.070 - Special police officer. 
    The city may appoint a special police officer or officers as necessary to carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter and, in its discretion, remove or suspend any such officer. 
(Ord. 862 § 8, 1972) 
13.20.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. 930 § 1, 1976: Ord. 862 § 7, 1972) 
Chapter 13.24 - SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1484, adopted Aug. 6, 2012, effective Sept. 5, 2012, repealed the former Ch. 13.24, §§ 13.24.010-13.24.090, and enacted a new Ch. 13.24 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1212, §§ 1-9, 1986. 

13.24.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to adopt systems development charges which impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for water, wastewater drainage and treatment, transportation, storm water drainage and parks upon those developments that create a need for or increase the demands on capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.020 - Scope. 
    The systems development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.030 - Definition. 
    For purpose of this chapter, the following mean: 
    "Capital improvements." Facilities or assets used for: 
1.  Water supply, treatment and distribution; 
2.  Waste water collection, transmission, treatment and disposal; 
3.  Drainage and flood control; 
4.  Transportation, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bike lanes and paths, street lights, traffic signs and signals, street trees, public transportation, vehicle parking and bridges; or 
5.  Parks and recreation, including but not limited to, neighborhood parks, community parks, public open space and trail systems, buildings, courts, fields and other like facilities. 
    "Development." Conducting a building or mining operation or making a physical change in the use of a structure or land which increases the usage or demand for usage of any capital improvement or which contributes to the need for additional or enlarged capital improvement(s). 
    "Improvement fee." A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.040 of this chapter. 
    "Land area." The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose. 
    "Owner." The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property. 
    "Parcel of land." A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision or other development ordinances. 
    "Qualified public improvements." A capital improvement that is: 
1.  Required as a condition of residential development approval; 
2.  Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.080 of this chapter; and 
3.  Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the residential development approval. 
    "Reimbursement fee." A fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.040 of this chapter. 
    "Systems development charge." A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee, or a combination thereof, assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit for a development as defined by this chapter, or a building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. "Systems development charge" includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. "Systems development charge" does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.040 - Systems development charge established. 
A.  Systems development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the council. 
B.  Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a systems development charge is hereby imposed upon all parcels of land within the city, and upon all lands outside the boundary of the city that connect to or otherwise use the sewer facilities, storm sewers or water facilities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.050 - Methodology. 
A.  The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contribution by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principals employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities. 
B.  The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the system to which the fee is related. 
C.  The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.060 - Authorized expenditures. 
A.  Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness. 
B.  1.  Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by development. 
2.  A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to Section 13.24.080 of this chapter. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) of this section, systems development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of systems development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of systems development charge expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.070 - Expenditure restrictions. 
A.  Systems development charge revenues shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements. 
B.  Systems development charge revenues shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.080 - Improvement plan. 
    The council shall adopt a plan that: 
A.  Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues; 
B.  Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement; and 
C.  Describes the process for modifying the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.090 - Collection charge. 
A.  The systems development charge is payable upon issuance of: 
1.  A building permit; 
2.  A permit to connect to the water system; or 
3.  A permit to connect to the sewer system. 
B.  If no building development or connection permit is required, the system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capitol improvement is increased. 
C.  If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer system without an appropriate permit, the systems development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required. 
D.  The city manager or the designee shall collect the applicable systems development charge from the owner of the parcel when a permit that allows building or development of a parcel is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system to the city is made. 
E.  The city manager or the designee shall not issue a permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, until provision for installment payments have been made pursuant to Section 13.24.110 of this chapter, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to Section 13.24.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.100 - Delinquent charges; hearing. 
A.  When, for any reason, the systems development charge has not been paid, the city manager shall report to the city council the amount of the uncollected charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is attributable, the date upon which the charge was due and unpaid, and the name of the owner. 
B.  The city council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter with notice of the hearing given to each owner together with a copy of the city manager's report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both mail and personal notice, and by posting notice on the parcel at least ten (10) days before the date set for the scheduled hearing. 
C.  At the hearing, the city council may accept, reject or modify the determination of the city manager as set forth in the report. If the city council finds that a systems development charge is unpaid and uncollected, it shall, by motion, direct the city manager to docket the unpaid and uncollected systems development charge in the lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing the city shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with interest at the legal rate of ten (10) percent per annum and for the city's actual cost of serving notice of the hearing on the owners. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.110 - Installment payment. 
A.  When a systems development charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more is due and collectible, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the charge may apply for payment in twenty (20) semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with the provisions of ORS 223.208. 
B.  The city manager or the designee shall provide application forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for correction of computational errors. 
C.  An applicant for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant's authority to grant the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien. 
D.  The city manager or the designee shall report to the city finance director the amount of the systems development charge, the date upon which the payments are due, the name of the owner(s) and a description of the parcel. 
E.  The city finance director shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From that time, the city shall have a lien on the property described for the amount of the systems development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.120 - Exemptions. 
A.  Structures and uses established and existing on or before the effective date of this chapter are exempt from a systems development charge imposed by this chapter, to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date. 
B.  Additions or alterations which do not increase the floor space of a structure, the land area occupied by the structure or do not constitute the imposition of an increased use on the city's water or sewer services are exempt from all portions of the systems development charge. 
C.  A project financed totally by city revenues is exempt from all portions of the system development charge. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.130 - Credits. 
A.  A systems development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for the computed systems development charge in an amount equal to what would otherwise be the charges for the existing structure and use. The credit so computed shall not exceed the calculated systems development charge. No refund shall be made on account of such credit. 
B.  A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement associated with a residential development. If a qualified public improvement is located partially on and partially off the parcel that is subject to the residential development approval, the credit shall be given only for the cost of the portion of the improvement not located on or wholly contiguous to the property. The credit provided for by this section shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed and shall not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee. 
C.  Credits shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to another. 
D.  Credits shall not be transferable from one development to another. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.140 - Segregation and use of revenue. 
A.  All funds derived from a particular type of systems development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. The portion of the systems development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in Section 13.24.060 of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager or the designee shall provide the city council with an annual accounting, based on the city's fiscal year, for systems development charges showing the total amount of systems development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.150 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made under the provisions of this chapter, who has been denied the privilege of constructing or developing or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of systems development charge revenues may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written request with the city finance director within fifteen (15) days of the action appealed from describing with particularity the matter which forms the basis for the appeal. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.24.150(a) above, an appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure. 
C.  Appeals of any other type required or permitted to be made by the city manager under this chapter must be filed within ten (10) days of the date of the decision. 
D.  After providing notice to the appellant, the council shall determine whether the city manager's decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm, modify or overrule the decisions. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. 
E.  Any legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the city council pursuant to Section 13.24.050 of this chapter shall not be filed later than sixty (60) days after the adoption of the methodology. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.160 - Prohibited connection. 
    No person may connect to the water, sewage or drainage systems of the city unless the appropriate systems development charges have been paid or the lien or installment payment method has been applied for and approved. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.170 - Penalty. 
    Violation of Section 13.24.160 of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each separate connection to a city system prohibited under the provisions of Section 13.24.160 shall be a separate offense under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.180 - Construction. 
    The rules of statutory construction contained in ORS Chapter 174 are adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.190 - Severability. 
    The invalidity of a section or subsection of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or subsections. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.200 - Repeal. 
    Ordinance No. 1212 enacted August 4, 1986, is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
13.24.210 - Saving clause. 
    Ordinance No. 1212, repealed by this chapter, shall remain in force for the prosecution, conviction and punishment of persons who violate Ordinance No. 1212 before the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 8-6-2012) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

15.04.010 - Code established. 
    By the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is established a uniform and specialty codes inspection program for the city which shall be titled the uniform and specialty code of the city and shall be comprised of the following building codes inspection programs: 
A.  Uniform Fire Code; 
B.  Structural Specialty Code, including Appendix J, Grading; 
C.  Mechanical Specialty Code; 
D.  Dwelling Code; 
E.  Manufactured Dwelling Standards; 
F.  Substandard Building Code; and 
G.  Dangerous Building Code. 
(Ord. 1454 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1400 § 101(a), 2000) 
15.04.020 - Funding. 
    Funding for the building codes program shall be derived from the fees collected as required under this title. 
(Ord. 1400 § 101(b), 2000) 
15.04.030 - Short title. 
    The short title for the uniform and specialty code of the city shall be the building code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 101(c), 2000) 
15.04.040 - Definitions. 
    Except where the context otherwise clearly requires, as used in this title: 
    "Building department" means a department within the city's public works department. 
    "Building official" means the person designated by the city to implement and administer the requirements under this title and to perform all inspections and other duties specifically required by this title. 
    "Chief of the bureau of fire prevention" means, except as required under Section 15.12.030, the building official. 
    "City" means the city of Coquille. 
    "Code" means the uniform and specialty code of the city, and any amendment hereafter adopted. 
    "Corporation counsel" means the city attorney for the city. 
    "Director" means the building official or the public works director of the city, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    "Fire department" means the fire department of the city. 
    "Fire marshal," "fire chief" or "chief" means, except as required by Section 15.12.030, the building official. 
    "Inspecting jurisdiction" means the city. 
    "Jurisdiction" means the city. 
    "LPG," "LP gas" or "liquefied petroleum gas" means any liquid composed predominately of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of the same: propane, propylene, butane (normal or isobutane) and butylenes. 
    "NFPA" means the 1994 edition of the National Fire Codes published by the National Fire Protection Association, unless otherwise specifically referenced. 
    "Person" means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or other entity in law or fact. 
(Ord. 1400 § 105, 2000) 
Chapter 15.08 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

15.08.010 - Code administration. 
    The city shall provide for administration of all plan check, permit and inspection programs adopted under this code and applicable to buildings and/or structures in the city. Except as otherwise provided in this code, this code, Chapter 15.04 and Chapter 15.40 shall be the administrative and enforcement provisions for all uniform and specialty codes adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 106, 2000) 
15.08.020 - Building official-Powers and duties. 
    The building official shall enforce all the provisions of the code and shall have for such purposes the powers of a law enforcement officer. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions, provided that such interpretations, rules and regulations shall conform to the intent and purpose of this code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 107, 2000) 
15.08.030 - Authority and corrective action. 
    In addition to any authority and power granted to the building official under the specific uniform codes adopted by this code, and except where inconsistent with other provisions of law, the building official may enforce the provisions of this code against any person regardless of whether a permit, certificate, license or other indicia of authorization has been issued. The building official may investigate, order corrective action, and issue orders to stop any or all work not in compliance with any applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 108, 2000) 
15.08.040 - Notice of noncompliance. 
    The building official shall have authority to file notices of noncompliance in the records of the city stating that a particular property is not in compliance with or in violation of this code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 109, 2000) 
15.08.050 - Violations-Penalties. 
    Any violation of this code constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to any other remedies provided for enforcement, the city may bring civil suit to enjoin the violation of any provision of this code. 
    Violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this code is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00); each day that such violation shall continue and persist after due notice of the violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. 1400 §§ 110, 111, 2000) 
Chapter 15.12 - UNIFORM FIRE CODE 
Sections: 

15.12.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the fire code provisions of the uniform and specialty code of the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 130, 2000) 
15.12.020 - Adoption of state provisions. 
    As authorized by ORS 476.030, the city adopts the "state of Oregon Uniform Fire Code," 1996 Edition, as the fire code of the city, which by this reference is made a part of this code as if each and every part was specifically set forth, except that such adoption is subject to specific deletions, amendments and additions as set forth herein. A copy of the state of Oregon Uniform Fire Code shall be kept on file in the office of the public works and building department and shall be made available for reference to any person subject to requirements of this code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 131, 2000) 
15.12.030 - Duties of the fire prevention division. 
    The fire code shall be administered by the building department; provided, that the following fire code sections shall be jointly administered with city fire department: Sections 101.4, 101.5, 103.2.1.1 -(1 ),(2),(3) and (8), 103.1.2, 104.1-104.3.2, 902.4, 1001.5.2, 1102.1-1102.5.2.4, 3409, 5109, 7704.2 and 8001.3.3. 
(Ord. 1400 § 132, 2000) 
15.12.040 - Deletions. 
    The following sections are deleted from the state of Oregon Uniform Fire Code, 1996 Edition: 
A.  Section 103.1.4; 
B.  Section 103.4.1.1.1 through Section 103.4.6; 
C.  Sections 901.2 through subsection 901.2.1; 
D.  Section 1101.3; 
E.  Section 7704.9 through subsection 7704.9.4; 
F.  Sections 7801 through subsection 7801.3.2; 
G.  Section 7802.5 through 7803.9. 
(Ord. 1400 § 133, 2000) 
15.12.050 - Amendments. 
    The following sections and subsections of The State of Oregon Uniform Fire Code, 1996 Edition are amended to read as follows: 
 (a) Section 101.8.1 Appendices Specifically Adopted. The provisions of the following appendices are adopted as part of this Code: I-C, I-D, II-F, III-A, III-B, III-C, IV-A, V-A, VI-A, VI-B, VI-D and VI-F. 
 (b) Section 102.1 Existing Conditions. The provisions of this Code shall apply to conditions not in conformity with law at the time of the adoption of this Code, and to any other conditions which, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, constitute a distinct hazard to life or property, of "high life hazard" pursuant to OAR 837 Division 41. No structural changes shall be required for any buildings built, occupied and maintained in conformity with state building code regulations applicable at the time of construction. 
 (c) Section 105.1 Scope. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use a building or other premises or to engage in any use or activity for which a permit is required by this Code without first obtaining a permit for such use or activity. 
 (d) Section 105.3 Application for Permit. Except, as otherwise provided in this section or section 105.8, all applications for permits required by this Fire Code shall be made to the Building Department. Applications for permits shall be in such form and detail and accompanied by such plans as may be required by the Building Official or Fire Department. 
 (e) Section 105.8 Permit Required. In addition to any permit required by other applicable law, regulation or ordinance, a permit shall be obtained prior to engaging in the following activities, operations, practices or functions: 
(1) Existing Building. Any building, except private residences erected after May 28, 1925, coming within the provisions of ORS 479.020 to 479.120 which does not conform to the requirements of ORS Chapter 479 (this includes fire escapes, stationary ladders, standpipes, public garages, auto exhibitions, tents, school fire regulations, public building exit doors, unsafe conditions). 
(2) Flammable/Combustible Liquids. Installation of tanks for above-ground storage of flammable or combustible liquids in individual or aggregate quantities greater than 1,000 gallons, as specified in Section 7901.3 of this Code. 
(3) LPG Tank Installation. Installation of LP-gas containers or receptacles. See Sections 8202.1. 
(4) LPG Plans. Installation of single containers with a capacity greater than or equal to 2,000 gallons of water, and multiple containers with an aggregate capacity greater than or equal to 4,000 gallons of water. See Section 8202.1. 
(5) Incinerators and Open Burning. Open burning or use of any form of incinerator including a burn barrel. Application for burn permits shall be made to the Fire Department. 
 (f) Section 901.2.2.1 Fire Department Access. Plans for fire apparatus access roads shall be submitted to the Public Works Department for review and approval prior to construction of the access road. 
 (g) Section 901.2.2.2 Fire Hydrant Systems. Plans and specifications for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to the Public Works Department for review and approval prior to construction of the fire hydrant system. 
 (h) Section 901.4.4 Premises Identification. All new and existing buildings shall be numbered and otherwise identified as required by Coquille City Ordinance. 
 (i) Section 902.2.2 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support loads imposed by all regularly used fire apparatus. Any such access road shall have a minimum of 3 inches of rolled and compacted 1 1/2 inch minus rock, which shall be satisfactory to the Public Works department. 
 (j) Section 902.2.3. Turning Radius. The turning radius of all fire apparatus access roads shall be approved by the Public Works Department, except that any proposed access road with a turning radius of less than 45 feet radius shall also be subject to approval by the Coquille Fire Department. 
 (k) Section 902.2.4 Dead Ends. Any dead-end fire apparatus access roads greater than 150 feet in length shall be provided with a circular turnaround with a radius of 45 feet, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1) The Public Works and the Coquille Fire Department may approve a 20-ft. × 40-ft. hammerhead turn-around (see exhibit), upon a showing by the applicant that terrain, lot configuration, or pre-existing development makes a circular turn-around impractical. 
(2) An automatic fire sprinkler system may be provided in lieu of a turn-around, subject to prior approval by the Public Works and the Coquille Fire Department. 
 (l) Section 902.2.2.6 Grade. The gradient for fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 14 percent without prior approval of the Public works Department. 
 (m) Section 902.4 Key Boxes. 
(1) A "Knox Rapid Entry System" key box shall be installed on all structures of 4000 square feet or larger, and on all structures deemed by the Fire Marshal to pose difficult problems of entry, including, but not limited to, barred windows on concretestructures; except that structures without secured access, such as apartment buildings with all common areas open to the public, shall be exempt from this requirement. All key boxes shall be approved by and purchased through the Fire Department, 
(2) Unless otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal, key boxes shall be located to the left of the primary entrance to the building, which shall bear the address, or other identification required by Fire Chief. The key box shall be located not less than a minimum of six (6) feet and not greater than maximum of eight (8) feet above grades and shall be secured in an approved manner to the building. 
(3) The building owner or occupant shall provide the Fire Department with necessary keys to the building's primary entrance for fire protection or to ensure the safety of human life. The keys shall be placed in the key box by the Fire Department within 24 hours of any changes to keys for any such locks. 
 (n) Section 1102.2.2: The first sentence of this Section is amended to read as follows: Freestanding incinerators shall be constructed of concrete, masonry or other approved fire-resistant material and shall have a completely enclosed combustion chamber. 
 (o) Section 7701.1 Scope. Except as provided herein, manufacture, possession, disposal, storage, sale, and use of explosive materials are prohibited within city limits of the city, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1) Explosives used by the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Coast Guard or the Oregon National Guard: 
(2) Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia; 
(3) Sale, possession or use of Class C common fireworks; 
(4) Possession, transportation, storage and use of small arms ammunition when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging requirements; 
(5) Possession, storage, transportation and use of not more than 5 pounds (2.27 kg.) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9.07 kg.) of smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand-loading small arms ammunition for personal sporting use; 
(6) The transportation and use of explosive materials by the United States Bureau of Mines, and federal, state and local law enforcement and fire agencies acting within their official capacities; 
(7) Special industrial explosive devices which contain in the aggregate less than 50 pounds (22.7 kg.) of explosive materials; 
(8) The possession, transportation, storage and use of blank industrial power load cartridges when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging regulations: 
(9) The use of any explosives preempted by federal regulation; 
(10) The use and handling of Class B fireworks (Explosives, Division 1.2 1.3-see Appendix VI-E), as set forth in Article 78; 
(11) Temporary storage of explosives for use in approved blasting operations. For the purposes of this exception, temporary storage is defined as storage for a total amount of time in continuous or aggregate intervals less than or equal to 72 hours; 
(12) Retail sales of explosives subject to 7702.2 through 7702.3.10. 
 (p) Section 7802.1 Permit. A permit issued by the Public Works Department is required for storage of retail sales of "Class C" fireworks. This permit shall be in addition to any permit required by the Oregon State Fire Marshal. 
 (q) Section 7802.2, Use, Storage and Sales. Use, storage and sales of Class C fireworks shall be made in accordance with ORS 480.110-480.165 and OAR 837, Division 12. 
 (r) Section 7802.3 Temporary Storage. Temporary storage of fireworks shall be made in accordance with the city of Coquille Building Code, Section 307. 
 (s) Section 7802.4 Seizure of Fireworks. The Fire Marshal is authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the sold expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered for sale, exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of Article 78. 
 (t) Section 8202.1 Permits and Plans 
(1) Except as provided herein, permits to store, use, handle or dispense LP-gas, or to install or maintain an LP-gas container shall be obtained as provided by Section 105 or this Code, subject to the following exceptions: A permit is not required to install or maintain portable containers with an aggregate capacity of less than 125-gallons or water (473.2 L). 
(2) Distributors shall not fill an LP-gas container for which a permit is required unless a permit for installation has been issued for that location by the Fire Marshal, and all installations, including all LP-gas appliances and gas piping, have been inspected and approved. 
(3) Installation of tanks for above-ground storage of flammable or combustible liquids in individual or aggregate quantities greater than 1,000 gallons of water and installation of LP-gas single containers with a capacity greater than or equal to 2,000 gallons of water, and multiple LP-gas containers with an aggregate capacity greater than or equal to 4,000 gallons of water shall first be subject to plan review by the Building Department. 
 (u) Section 8202.2 Installation Inspection. 
(1) If the Fire Marshal determines a new installation does not comply with the requirements of this Code or other applicable law or regulation, the Fire Marshal shall inform the installer of the corrections necessary to bring the installation into compliance. The installer shall make the corrections within the time set by the Fire Marshal, and shall notify the Fire Marshal upon completion of the required corrections. In no case shall such correction and notification occur more than thirty (30) days after receipt of instructions from the Fire Marshal. 
(2) An additional fee shall be collected from the person making the installation in an amount equal to the fee required for a new installation. The installer shall not be responsible for the additional fee if the basis of the additional fee is the result of actions of the user; in such case the user shall pay the additional fee. 
(3) Liquid petroleum gas containers may be re-inspected as needed after initial inspection. The Fire Marshal shall be notified upon alteration of any installation in the same manner as required for new installations. The method of inspection, requirements for corrections, satisfaction of requirements and collection of fees shall be identical to the provisions in this Code for new installations. 
 (v) Section 8204.2 Establishment of Limits in Which Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases is to be Restricted. Except as otherwise provided by this Section, bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited in all areas within the city of Coquille except those areas zoned I (Industrial). 
(1) Class 1 and Class 2 liquids may be stored in above-ground tanks with a capacity in excess of 330 gallons in those area zoned commercial and quasi-public, if the tanks meet all the regulator requirements for secondary containment, leak monitoring and spill and overfill protection in conformity with NFPA 30 and 30A Fire Safety Standards and the 1996 Uniform Fire Code Appendix II-F and UFC Standard 79-7. In addition, tanks shall be of double-wall construction and shall be encased in not less than six inches of rebar-reinforced concrete providing sufficient strength to satisfy the requirements for bridge construction as provided in the Federal Highway Code for protection against vehicle incursions. The installation, including the tank, shall be screened from view at ground level from neighboring properties or public ways by a fence constructed of non-flammable materials. 
(Ord. 1400 § 134, 2000) 
15.12.060 - New sections. 
    The following sections and subsections are created: 
 (a) Section 103.4.2 Inspections. All regulated buildings shall be inspected as often as deemed necessary to provide a reasonable level of safety and protection from fire and for life. All institutional, primary and secondary educational occupancies shall be inspected not less than once every twelve (12) months. 
   103.4.5 The Fire Department shall inspect commercial buildings in the City of Coquille on a bi-annual basis for fire hazards detrimental to life or property as well as upon change in usage or ownership of the building. 
The owner or occupant of commercial buildings shall allow inspectors access to inspect commercial buildings upon request of the Fire Chief or Company Inspectors. 
   103.4.6 The Fire Chief and Company Inspectors shall act as assistants to the State Fire Marshal under ORS 476.060. Inspections shall be conducted by Company Inspectors to the extent and scope of their training, not including individual apartments or living quarters. Issues of concern beyond the scope of their training shall be referred to the Fire Chief who shall confer with the Deputy State Fire Marshal (DSFM) for guidance. Inspections shall be held referencing National Fire Prevention Association Code; Chapter 1) Administration, Chapter 7 Means of Egress, Chapter 9 Building Service and Fire Protection Equipment and shall correct identified hazards except structural changes shall not be required as specified in Section 15.12.050(b)102.1, and all of Chapter 10 Standards for Portable Fire Extinguishers. 
 (b) Section 105.9 Permit Fees. The Fire Department shall collect all fees charged or penalties assessed under Section 105.8.5 and 1102.5.2.4. All other fees and penalties shall be collected by Public Works. 
 (c) 1102.5.2.4 Responsibility. When any fire is burning in violation of this Code or a violation of an authorized permit, the person responsible for the fire shall be liable for any damage done to the property of another. The cost of controlling or extinguishing such fire may be recovered by the city from the person responsible for the fire according to a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
 (d) Section 7901.1.3 Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Flammable or Combustible Liquids in Outside Aboveground Tanks is to be prohibited. 
 (e) Section 8202.3 Corrections. Any person who has received a notice of non-compliance from the building official shall correct an improper installation within the time set in the notice, which in no case shall be more than thirty (30) days after date of receipt. 
 (f) Appendix III-B (6). Type of Hydrants. The city of Coquille shall approve the type, location, and placement of fire hydrants. The hydrant shall be provided with two 21/2-inch outlets and one 41/2-inch outlet. Connections to all three outlets shall have national standard thread. The hydrant shall have a five-inch barrel and valve. Hydrants shall be supplied with a minimum six-inch lead. 
(Ord. 1400 § 135, 2000; Ord. No. 1507, 6-18-2018) 
Chapter 15.16 - STRUCTURAL SPECIALTY CODE 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the structural specialty code provisions of the uniform and specialty code of the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 140, 2000) 
15.16.020 - Adoption of state provisions. 
    As authorized by ORS 455.010-455.990, the city of Coquille hereby adopts the state of Oregon Specialty Code, 1998 Edition, Volumes 1, 2 and 3, as the specialty code of the city, which by this reference is made a part of this Code as if each and every part was specifically set forth, except that such adoption is subject to specific deletions, amendments and additions set forth herein. A copy of the state of Oregon specialty code, 1998 Edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the public works and building department and shall be made available for reference to any person subject to requirements of this code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 141, 2000) 
15.16.030 - Deletions. 
    The following section and subsections are deleted from the state of Oregon Specialty Code, 1998 Edition, Volumes 1, 2 and 3: 
A.  Section 102; 
B.  Section 103.2; and 
C.  Section 107.7. 
(Ord. 1400 § 142, 2000) 
15.16.040 - Amendments. 
    The following sections and subsections of the state of Oregon Specialty Code, 1998 Edition, Volumes 1, 2 and 3 are amended to read as follows: 
 (a) Section 101.3 last sentence: Appendix Chapter 3 (Division I & II); 4 (Division III); 9, 10, 15, 16, 18, 19, 29, and 31 are adopted. 
 (b) Section 103.1 Violations. No person shall: 
(1) Violate, produce, aid or abet in the violation of or procurement of, any final order concerning the application of a provision of the state building code in a particular case made by the administrator, an advisory board, a state administrative officer, or building official, or inspector. 
(2) Engage in or procure or aid or abet any other person to engage in any conduct or activity for which a permit, certificate, label or other formal authorization is required by any specialty code or other regulation without first having obtained such permit, certificate, label or other formal authorization. 
 (c) The Building Official shall make the determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Code. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finished work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevator, fire-extinguishing system and any other permanent equipment. 
 (d) Section 107.3 
(1) When a plan or other data is required to be submitted under Subsection 106.3.3.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time the plans and specifications are submitted for review. The plan review fee shall be equal to 65 percent of the building permit fee. 
(2) When required under Section 106.3.3.2, there shall be an additional plan review fee equal to 40 percent of the building permit fee. 
(3) Plan review fees required by this section are separate fees from permit fees required by Section 107.2 and shall be paid in addition to permit fees required by Section 107.2. 
(4) When the applicant has submitted incomplete plans or has changed or amended the plans to such an extent that additional plan review is required, an additional plan review fee shall be charged. 
 (e) In addition to the permit fee, an investigation fee shall be collected, regardless of whether the permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee, which would be required by this Code if a permit were issued. Payment of the investigation fee shall not exempt a person from compliance with any other provision of this Code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
 (f) Section 3401 General. Any building in existence on the date this Code becomes effective may have its existing and uninterrupted use or occupancy continued if such use or occupancy was legal at the time of the adoption of this Code, provided such continued use does not pose a danger to life. 
At the time of any change in the use or occupancy of any existing building or structure, that building or structure shall be brought into compliance with chapters 3 and 34. 
Any building or portion thereof which has a change of occupancy may be inspected and shall be subject to fire and safety requirements. 
(Ord. 1400 § 143, 2000) 
15.16.050 - Creation of new sections. 
    A new Section 110 is created: 
Section 110. Demolition of Buildings. 
Section 110.1 Permits Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall demolish, or cause to be demolished, any building or structure in the city without first obtaining a separate demolition permit for each building or structure. 
Section 110.2 Application. To obtain a demolition permit, an application in writing shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose. Every application shall: 
(a) Describe the land on which the proposed demolition is to be done by lot, block or tract and house and street address or similar description, which will readily and definitely identify the location of the proposed demolition. 
(b) Identify the applicant's legal interest in the property to be demolished. 
(c) Identify and describe the demolition work (number of floors, basement, and cellar) to be done under the permit for which the application is filed. 
(d) Specify the use or occupancy of all parts of the building to be demolished; in the case of residential buildings or structures, the number of dwelling units shall be included. 
(e) Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to establish such authority. 
(f) Give such other information as may be reasonably required and establish valuation of the demolition work to be done. 
Section 110.3 Plans. The building official may require each application for a demolition permit to be accompanied by a drawing showing the outside dimensions of the building to be demolished, the location of the building within property lines, and the overall height and type of construction of the building. The location of buildings adjacent to the demolition site shall also be indicated on the drawing. 
Section 110.4 Bond Required. 
Section 110.4.1 A demolition permit shall not be issued unless the permittee first posts a bond, executed by the owner, and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State of Oregon as a surety, in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the demolition work provided, however, that a bond will not be required for a demolition permit for small detached accessory buildings. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file a cash bond or other acceptable security in an amount equal to that required as a surety bond. 
Section 110.4.2 Every bond shall require the permittee to meet the following conditions: 
(i) The permittee will comply with all the provisions of this Code and all other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances; 
(ii) The permittee shall comply with all the terms and conditions of the permit for demolition; and 
(iii) The permittee shall complete all work contemplated under the permit within the time specified in the permit. 
Section 110.4.3 The term of each bond shall begin on the date of filing and shall remain in effect until the completion of the demolition work. Should a permittee fail to complete all work within the time limit specified in the permit, and if the Building Official extends the time to complete the work, any such extension shall not in any way act to release the surety on the bond. 
Section 110.5 Failure to Complete Work. If the permittee fails to complete the demolition work or fails to comply with any terms and conditions of the permit, the Building Official may order the work completed to the Building Official's satisfaction. The surety on the bond or the permittee under his or her cash bond or other acceptable security shall be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred by the City in causing any and all such required work to be done. 
Section 110.6 Issuance. The application and drawings filed by an applicant for a demolition permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official and may be reviewed by other departments of the City. If the application for the demolition permit conforms to the requirements of this Code and other laws and ordinances, and if the fee specified has been paid, then a demolition permit shall be issued. 
Section 110.7 Term and Expiration. Every demolition permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall contain a definite time limit during which the demolition work must be performed. Every demolition permit shall expire if the demolition work is not commenced within the time limit specified in the permit. An extension of time may be granted by the Building Official if it is apparent that the permittee has made every effort to comply within the time specified but has been unable to do so because of unusual or difficult conditions. 
Section 110.8 Failure to Complete Work. If the permittee fails to complete the demolition within the time limit specified by the demolition permit because of failure to perform the work, the city council may declare the building an unsafe or substandard building and may order demolition of the building to be completed. 
Section 110.9 Suspension or Revocation. A demolition permit may be suspended or revoked whenever the permit is issued in error, on the basis of incorrect or misleading information, or in violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance or regulation. 
Section 110.10 Demolition Permit Fees. A fee for each demolition permit shall be paid at the time the permit is issued, except that a permit fee will not be required for small-detached accessory buildings exempt from bond requirements under section 110.4. 
Section 110.4.1. The value or valuation to be used in computing the permit fee shall be the total value of all work for which the permit is issued. 
Section 110.11 Protection of Public Utilities. Street lights, parking meters, fire or police alarm boxes, hydrants, catch basins, manholes and other public facilities shall be protected. All such facilities, which are damaged during demolition work, shall be replaced or repaired by the applicant, as directed by the Building Official. 
Section 110.12 Protection for Pedestrians. Walkways, railings, fence and canopies shall be provided for the protection of pedestrians. 
Section 110.13 Protection of Public Sidewalks. Public sidewalks shall be protected from damage by the installation of a pad of solid planking not less than two (2) inches thick or other similar method or materials. Any sidewalk or street, which is damaged during demolition work, shall be immediately replaced or repaired, as directed by the Building Official. 
Section 110.14 Notification of Utilities. All utility companies shall be notified prior to the commencement of demolition to disconnect all services and main lines to the building. 
Section 110.15 Basement and Cellar Walls. 
Section 110.15.1 If the building or structure to be demolished has a basement or cellar, basement or cellar walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition after demolition in all areas adjacent to public sidewalks so that any such sidewalks will be adequately supported. The city may require an engineer's analyses. If a basement or cellar wall adjacent to a public sidewalk is not structurally sound so that support for adjacent sidewalks will not be adequate or the owner desires to remove the wall, an engineered solution shall be submitted for review. 
Section 110.15.2 A temporary fence shall be maintained along the inside edge of a public sidewalk during demolition work to protect pedestrians from basements and cellars. As soon as demolition work is completed, a permanent fence or other approved protection shall be erected or installed according to specifications provided by the Building Official. Any permanent fence shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner at all times. 
Section 110.16 Clean up. All debris, stumps, broken concrete, brick and other irreducible materials with a maximum dimension exceeding 12 inches shall be completely removed from the premises after demolition. All ground surfaces shall be raked clean and evenly graded. 
Section 110.17 Sewer Laterals. To prevent the entry of ground water into the sewer system, each and every sewer lateral serving the subject property shall be tightly plugged. The plug shall be an appropriately sized mechanical plug and shall be installed in the building's sewer lateral at the sewer trunk line serving the property. The Department of Public Works shall be notified when the sewer lateral is ready to be plugged and shall be given an opportunity to inspect the plug and, if necessary, to obtain necessary data to relocate the lateral. 
(Ord. 1400 § 144, 2000) 
Chapter 15.20 - MECHANICAL SPECIALTY CODE 
Sections: 

15.20.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the mechanical specialty code provisions of the uniform and specialty code of the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 150, 2000) 
15.20.020 - Adoption of state provisions. 
    As authorized by ORS 455.010-455.990, the city adopts the State of Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, 1999 Edition, as the mechanical code of the city, which by this reference is made a part of this code as if each and every part was specifically set forth, except that such adoption is subject to specific deletions, amendments and additions as set forth herein. A copy of the state of Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, 1999 Edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the public works and building department and shall be made available for reference to any person subject to requirements of this code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 151, 2000) 
15.20.030 - Deletions. 
    The following sections and subsections are deleted from the State of Oregon Mechanical Code, 1999 Edition: 
    None. 
(Ord. 1400 § 152, 2000) 
15.20.040 - Amendments. 
    The following sections and subsections of the State of Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, 1999 Edition, are amended to read as follows: 
 (a) Section 108 of the "State of Oregon Mechanical Code" Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment shall be subject to substandard building proceedings under Sections 180-189 of this code. 
 (b) Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data are required to be submitted by Section 106.5.3 of the State of Oregon Mechanical Code, a plan review fee shall be paid. The plan review fees for mechanical work shall be equal to 25 percent of the total mechanical permit fee. 
 (c) Incomplete or Changed Plans. When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged. 
 (d) Investigation Fees: Work without a Permit. When any person commences work for which a permit is required by this Code without first obtaining the required permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee shall be paid by the person seeking the permit prior to the time the investigation commences. The investigation fee shall be collected whether or not permit is issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee that would be required by this Code for the work. The payment of an investigation fee shall not exempt a person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code, including payment of the permit fee, nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
 (e) Section 107.2.3 Re-inspection. When a second re-inspection is requested for the same work, a re-inspection fee shall be charged and collected. When re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. 1400 § 153, 2000) 
Chapter 15.24 - DWELLING CODE 
Sections: 

15.24.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the dwelling code provisions of the uniform and specialty code of the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 160, 2000) 
15.24.020 - Adoption of state provisions. 
    As authorized by ORS 455.310-455.450, 455-610-455.690 and 455.895, the city adopts the International One-and Two- Family Dwelling Code, 2000 Edition, as the dwelling code of the city, which by this reference is made a part of this code as if each and every part was specifically set forth, except that such adoption is subject to specific deletions, amendments and additions set forth herein. A copy of the International One- and Two- Family Dwelling Code, 2000 Edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the public works and building department and shall be made available for reference to any person subject to requirements of this code. 
(Ord. 1411 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 1400 § 161, 2000) 
15.24.030 - Deletions. 
    The following sections and subsections are deleted from the International One- and Two- Family Dwelling Specialty Code, 2000 Edition: 
A.  Section 106.1-106.4; 
B.  Section 107.1; and 
C.  Section 118.1. 
(Ord. 1411 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 1400 § 162, 2000) 
15.24.040 - Amendments. 
    The following sections and subsections of the International One- and Two- Family Dwelling Code, 2000 Edition, are amended to read as follows: 
 (1) Section 106.1 Violations. Any violation of this Dwelling Code constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to any other remedies provided for enforcement, the city may bring civil suit to enjoin the violation of any provision of this Code. 
(Ord. 1411 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 1400 § 163, 2000) 
Chapter 15.28 - MANUFACTURED DWELLING STANDARDS 
Sections: 

15.28.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the manufactured dwelling standards of the uniform and specialty code of the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 170, 2000) 
15.28.020 - State manufactured dwelling standards adopted by reference. 
    The 1997 Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Standards are adopted, as authorized by ORS 446.155. 
(Ord. 1400 § 171, 2000) 
15.28.030 - Mobilehome park standards adopted by reference. 
    The Oregon Mobile Home Park Standards, OAR 918 Division 600, January 1996, are adopted. 
(Ord. 1400 § 172, 2000) 
15.28.040 - State recreational vehicle park standards adopted by reference. 
    The Oregon Recreational Vehicle Park Standards, OAR 918 Division 650, July 1993, are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. 1400 § 173, 2000) 
Chapter 15.32 - SUBSTANDARD BUILDING PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

15.32.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the substandard building provisions of the uniform and specialty code of the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 180, 2000) 
15.32.020 - Substandard building designated. 
    Any building or structure or portion thereof in which there exists any of the following conditions is a substandard building: 
A.  Inadequate sanitation, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Lack of, or improper toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house, 
2.  Lack of, or improper toilet, lavatories and bathtubs or shower per number of guests in a hotel, 
3.  Lack of or improper kitchen sinks in a dwelling unit, 
4.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel, 
5.  Lack of hot and cold running water the plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house, 
6.  Lack of adequate heating facilities, 
7.  Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilation equipment, 
8.  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required under city specialty codes, 
9.  Room and space dimensions less than required under city structural codes, 
10.  Lack of required electric lighting, 
11.  Dampness in habitable rooms, 
12.  Infestation by insects, vermin or rodents as determined by health officer or building official, 
13.  General dilapidation or improper maintenance, 
14.  Lack of connection to sewage disposal system, 
15.  Lack of garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the building official; 
B.  Structural hazards, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations, 
2.  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, 
3.  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety, 
4.  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration, 
5.  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety, 
6.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof support or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration, 
7.  Members of ceilings, roofs, supports for ceilings and roofs or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety, 
8.  Fireplaces or chimneys, which lift, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration, 
9.  Fireplaces or chimneys, which are of insufficient size or strength to carry, imposed loads with safety; 
C.  Hazardous electrical wiring: electrical wiring which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation, which was not installed according to generally accepted construction practices in locations where no codes were in effect at the time of installation, which has not been maintained in good condition, or which is not being used in a safe manner; 
D.  Hazardous plumbing: plumbing which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation, which was not installed according to generally accepted construction practices in locations where no codes were in effect, which has not been maintained in good condition, or which is not free of cross-connections or siphonage between fixtures; 
E.  Hazardous mechanical equipment: mechanical equipment which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation, which was not installed according to generally accepted construction practices in locations where no codes were in effect at the time of installation, or which has not been maintained in good and safe condition; 
F.  Faulty weather protection, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster, 
2.  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundation or floors, including broken windows or doors, 
3.  Lack or defective weather protection of exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering, 
4.  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings; 
G.  Fire Hazard. Any building or portion thereof, or any device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the fire chief or the building official, is in such condition as to cause threat of fire or explosion or provide ready fuel to augment the spread or intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause; 
H.  Faulty material of construction: any construction material other than that which is specifically allowed or approved by this code, and any specifically allowed or approved construction materials which have not been adequately maintained in good and safe condition; 
I.  Hazardous or unsanitary premises: premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harbors, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions constitute a fire, health or safety hazard; 
J.  Inadequate exits: 
1.  Buildings or portions thereof whose exits were installed in violations of code requirements in effect at time of construction, or whose exits have not been increased in number or size in relation to any increases in occupancy subsequent to the time of construction, 
2.  Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at time of construction, exits in building or portions thereof which the building official finds are unsafe because of improper location, a lack of adequate number or width, or other conditions, which are dangerous to human life; 
K.  Inadequate fire-protection or firefighting equipment: any building or portions thereof which is not provided with fire-resistant construction, fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this code, except any building or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at time of construction and whose fire-resistant integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, or any alteration, addition or change in occupancy; 
L.  Improper occupancy: any building or portion thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purpose which was not designed or intended to be used for such purpose. 
(Ord. 1400 § 181, 2000) 
15.32.030 - Initiation of enforcement proceedings. 
A.  Whenever the building official has inspected any building and has determined the building is a substandard building, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation or vacation of the building. 
B.  The building official shall issue a notice of substandard building and order directed to the owner of record of the building, stating action to be taken: 
1.  If the building official has determined the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be obtained and the work commenced and completed within such time as the building official determines reasonable under all of the circumstances. 
2.  If the building official has determined the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require such vacation within a time certain as determined by the building official to be reasonable. 
C.  The notice and order shall also contain a statement advising that any person holding record title or having a legal interest in the building may appeal the action of the building official to the city council, by filing an appeal with the building official, in writing within thirty (30) days from the date of service of such notice and order, and that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to a hearing before the city council and determination of the matter. 
D.  The notice and order shall be posted on the property and served, by personal service or certified mail, on the owner of record and each of the following, if known: the holder of a mortgage or deed of trust; the holder of a lien or other encumbrance of record; the holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in the building or real property on which the building is located. The failure of the building official to serve any person shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section. 
E.  Any order issued pursuant to this section shall require either of the following: 
1.  The building be repaired in accordance with current uniform and specialty code applicable to the substandard condition which is the subject of the order; or 
2.  The building be demolished, at the option of the owner. 
(Ord. 1400 § 182, 2000) 
Chapter 15.36 - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

15.36.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the dangerous building code provisions of the uniform and specialty code of the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 190, 2000) 
15.36.020 - Conditions or defects designated. 
    To the extent such conditions or defects endanger the life, health, property or safety of its occupants or the public, a building or structure which has any or all of the following defects or conditions is deemed a dangerous building: 
A.  Whenever any door, isle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is of insufficient size or width or is not arranged so as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
B.  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or does not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
C.  Whenever stress from any load on any material, member or portion thereof is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed under the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
D.  Whenever any building or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or any other cause, such that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such cause and is less than the minimum requirements under the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
E.  Whenever any portion or member of a structure, or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, become detached or dislodged, or collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
F.  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting wind pressure of one-half that specified under the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted under the building code for such buildings; 
G.  Whenever any portion of a building has cracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to wind or earthquake than is required for similar new construction; 
H.  Whenever partial or total collapse of a building or structure or any portion thereof is likely, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for support of such building, or deterioration, decay or inadequacy of the foundation, or any other cause; 
I.  Whenever, for any reason, a building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose to which it is being used; 
J.  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members of a building list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base; 
K.  Whenever a building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows damage or deterioration to thirty-three (33) percent of its supporting members, or damage or deterioration to fifty (50) percent of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings; 
L.  Whenever a building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children, a harbor for vagrants or criminals, or a place for the commission of unlawful or immoral acts; 
M.  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, maintained or exists in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to the building or structure under the building regulations of the city, or any law or ordinance of this state of the city relating to condition, location or structure of buildings; 
N.  Whenever any building or structure, whether or not erected in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has, in any non-supporting part, member or portion, less than fifty (50) percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less that sixty-six (66) percent, of the strength. Fire-resistant qualities or characteristics, or weather-resistance qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of newly constructed buildings of like area, height and occupancy in the same location; 
O.  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or likely to cause sickness or disease because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, insufficient light or air or inadequate sanitation facilities, or other cause; 
P.  Whenever any building or structure is determined by the fire chief or building official to be a fire hazard because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistant construction, faulty electric wiring, has connections or heating apparatus, or other cause; 
Q.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on site after demolition or destruction of the building structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months and constitutes an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public; 
R.  A structure which is liable to cause fire because of lack of proper repairs, age and dilapidated condition, substandard electrical wiring or equipment, defective chimney, has connection, or heating apparatus, or any other defective condition and is situated in such a manner that endangers other property or human; 
S.  A structure containing combustible or explosive materials or inflammable substances which are liable to cause fire or endangers the safety of the building, premises or human life; 
T.  A structure in such a filthy or unsanitary condition that there is the probability of the spread of contagious or infectious diseases; 
U.  A structure in such weak dilapidated or deteriorated condition that the probability of partial or total collapse endangers persons or property. 
(Ord. 1400 § 191, 2000) 
15.36.030 - Structural survey. 
    For the purpose of this code, any building or structure may be deemed to be a dangerous building based on a structural and condition survey. (See Appendix A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.) 
(Ord. 1400 § 192, 2000) 
15.36.040 - Notice to vacate dangerous buildings. 
A.  If the building official determines a building or structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the life, property or safety of its occupants or the public, the building official shall issue a notice to vacate and order the building or structure vacated and secured. (See Appendix B attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.) 
B.  Posting Notice to Vacate. 
1.  Every Notice to Vacate shall be posted at or on each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DANGER 
THIS BUILDING DEEMED UNSAFE 
FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY 
IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO 
OCCUPY OR RESIDE IN THIS BUILDING 
2.  Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall also provide written notice to the owner and occupant of the building or structure, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions, which necessitate the posting. 
3.  No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under a permit. 
4.  No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the structural specialty code provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 193, 2000) 
15.36.050 - Initiation of abatement proceedings. 
    When the building official has issued an order to vacate under Section 15.36.040, the building official shall provide a report to the city council, who shall then fix a time and place for a hearing to determine whether the building is a public nuisance and should be abated. 
(Ord. 1400 § 194, 2000) 
15.36.060 - Notice. 
A.  The city recorder shall provide written notice to the owner of the building or structure and, if different, the owner of the property on which the building or structure is situated, that a hearing on abatement will be held before the city council concerning the property. The notice shall specify the time and place for the hearing and the violation's which will be the subject of the hearing. 
B.  A copy of this notice shall be posted on the property. 
C.  Ten (10) days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or shall be posted in three public places in the city. 
(Ord. 1400 § 195, 2000) 
15.36.070 - Nuisance determination. 
    After hearing, and upon evidence presented, any building or structure, or portion thereof determined by the city council to be a dangerous building shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be abated. 
(Ord. 1400 § 196, 2000) 
15.36.080 - Order of abatement. 
    The city council shall issue an order of abatement, which shall be served on the owner within fifteen (15) days after the date of the hearing. The order shall specify a time certain within which the owner shall either make the building safe or have the building demolished and shall state that if the owner fails to act within the specified time, the city may, at the owner's expense, make the building safe or have the building demolished. 
(Ord. 1400 § 197, 2000) 
15.36.090 - Costs of abatement performed by the city. 
A.  Assessment of Costs of Abatement. If the owner fails to comply with the order of abatement or summary abatement is ordered pursuant to Section 15.36.100 of this code, and the city makes the building or structure safe or has the building or structure demolished, the building official shall submit to the council a report containing an itemized statement of costs. Upon receipt of the report, the council shall, by resolution, assess the cost of abatement against the property. The assessment shall be a lien against the property and may be enforced and collected as provided in ORS 223.505-223.650. 
B.  Notice of Assessment. A copy of the resolution assessing the cost shall be mailed to the property owner by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
C.  Lien Docket-Interest. The recorder shall enter into the city lien docket a statement of the amount assessed against the property; the name of the property owner; the date of the assessment resolution; and a statement that the lien is for the costs of abatement of a dangerous building or structure. The assessment shall become a lien upon the real property at the time of entry upon the lien docket. The lien shall bear interest at the statutory rate commencing on the date the lien is entered in the city lien docket. 
(Ord. 1400 § 198, 2000) 
15.36.100 - Summary abatement. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision in the code, when the public safety officer finds a building or structure is unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers human life or property, the public safety officer may summarily declare the building or structure a nuisance and commence abatement. Whenever summary abatement occurs, the property owner shall be afforded a post-abatement hearing before the council at the earliest opportunity to determine whether summary abatement was proper. Notice of the abatement, the council shall, by resolution, determine whether abatement was proper or not, and, if proper, assess the costs of abatement as provided by Section 15.36.090. As used in this section, "public safety officer" means the fire chief, the fire marshal, the building official or the police chief. 
(Ord. 1400 § 199, 2000) 
Chapter 15.40 - PERMITS AND FEES 
Sections: 

15.40.010 - Permit issuance. 
    An applicant for a permit shall provide complete and accurate information on the application. No permit shall be issued upon an incomplete application or to any person who does not meet the requirements of this code for the type of permit issued, including, in the appropriate case, possession of a professional license or certificate. 
(Ord. 1400 § 112, 2000) 
15.40.020 - Permit extension. 
    A permittee may request a one-time six-month extension of any valid unexpired permit. No additional fee shall be charged for an extension under this section. 
(Ord. 1400 § 113, 2000) 
15.40.030 - Permit renewal. 
    Any permit which has expired for six months or less may be renewed upon request by the permittee for a single additional term, provided no changes have been made to the original plans, specifications or codes, and subject to any conditions imposed in the original permit. An additional fee shall be charged for a renewal equal to one-half the amount charged for the original application. No permit renewal shall be issued for any permit, which has expired for a period greater than six months. 
(Ord. 1400 § 114, 2000) 
15.40.040 - Permit suspension. 
A.  The building official may suspend any permit upon finding any of the following: 
1.  The permittee's activity presents a serious danger to public health or safety; 
2.  The permittee has refused, prevented, interfered with, or otherwise obstructed any inspection required by this code; 
3.  The permittee made inaccurate or misleading representations on the permit application; 
4.  The permittee is failing to use required licensed contractors; 
5.  For any other good cause shown. 
B.  Notice and order of suspension shall be provided by the building official, in writing, to the permittee, and shall state the specific reasons for suspension, along with a statement of the permittee's right to appeal the building official's action. Service may be by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail. 
(Ord. 1400 § 115, 2000) 
15.40.050 - Permit revocation. 
A.  The building official shall revoke any permit upon finding the permittee made fraudulent or intentional misrepresentations on the permit application, lacks sufficient funds to cover the costs of the permit, or has engaged in any other actions which provide good cause for revocation. 
B.  The building official shall serve written notice of intent to revoke and an order of revocation on the permittee. Service may be by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail. 
C.  The notice of intent to revoke shall include a short and plain statement of acts sufficient to apprise the permittee of the basis of the building official's action. The notice of intent to revoke shall contain a statement advising the permittee of a right to appeal the building official's actions provided by this code. 
(Ord. 1400 § 116, 2000) 
15.40.060 - Fees-Generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this code, when a plan or other data is submitted for review, a field review is requested, or a permit is requested to perform work, a plan review fee, or permit fee, or both, shall be paid at the time of submission, request or application. 
(Ord. 1400 § 117, 2000) 
15.40.070 - Establishment and collection of fees and penalties. 
    Except, as otherwise provided by this code, fees for all other services required by this code shall be established by resolution of the council. Except as otherwise provided by this code, the city shall collect all fees and penalties. 
(Ord. 1400 § 118, 2000) 
15.40.080 - Fee refunds. 
A.  A fee shall be refunded in full in the following circumstances: 
1.  When dual payment has been received for one permit or plan review; 
2.  When the city has no jurisdiction to inspect the work for which the permit was issued; 
3.  When an applicant submits plans for review which do not show the required architect's or engineer's stamp, or a licensed supervising electrician's stamp for electrical plans, provided, also that the plans shall be returned. 
B.  The building official shall not authorize any refunds except on written application by the original permittee filed not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of payment of the fee. 
C.  Fee refunds shall not be allowed under the following circumstances: 
1.  An applicant obtains a permit but is unable or unwilling to proceed with the project; 
2.  An applicant submits plans for review but is unable or unwilling to proceed with the project. 
(Ord. 1400 § 119, 2000) 
Chapter 15.44 - CANOPIES 
Sections: 

15.44.010 - Canopy defined. 
    As used in this chapter, "canopy" (singular or plural) means any structure attached to a building, whether or not the same may be raised to a position flat against a building when not in use, whether made of cloth, metal or similar material with a metal frame and which is designed to project from the side of the building into the area of the street right-of-way above the public sidewalk area, or having upright supports placed in the sidewalk area whether or not the canopy is located above the entrance to a building. As used in this chapter, canopy has the same meaning as awning. 
(Ord. 1419 § 1, 2001: Ord. 1330 § 1, 1992) 
15.44.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the installation of canopies located above the street rights-of-way of the city in the area above or having upright supports on the sidewalk adjacent to any building. 
(Ord. 1419 § 2, 2001: Ord. 1330 § 2, 1992) 
15.44.030 - Canopies permitted. 
A.  The installation of canopies shall be permitted in the city in the C-1 (central business district) and C-2 (general commercial) zones of the city. 
B.  No canopy shall be installed so as to project into the area of the street right-of-way beyond the edge of the curb closest to the building so that it would be located above the portion of the street right-of-way regularly used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 1330 § 3, 1992) 
15.44.040 - Installation restrictions. 
A.  All canopies shall be installed in accordance with the current building codes being enforced in the city at the time of the application for a permit for the installation of the canopy under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The installation of all canopies in the city shall meet current fire codes. 
C.  All canopies shall be installed so that the lowest point of the canopy or any item projecting below the canopy is at least seven and one-half feet above the average sidewalk elevation below the canopy. 
D.  No part of a canopy, including upright supports, shall be installed closer than twenty-four (24) inches to the street edge of the curb. 
E.  Only entry way canopies may use upright supports and shall use no more than two upright supports per entry way canopy. 
F.  Entry way canopies shall not extend beyond the width of the entry way by more than twelve (12) inches on each side of the entry way. 
G.  All canopies shall be installed so as to allow a minimum sidewalk width of six feet, measured from the front of the building to any upright supports, in order to allow for the passage of pedestrians. 
H.  All canopies shall conform with present and future city design standards. 
(Ord. 1419 § 3, 2001: Ord. 1330 § 4, 1992) 
15.44.050 - Replacement of existing canopies. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 15.44.040(C) and (D), a canopy may be installed to replace an existing canopy to the dimensions of a then existing canopy provided the same does not violate the provisions of Section 15.44.030(B). 
(Ord. 1330 § 5, 1992) 
15.44.060 - Canopy installation permit. 
    No canopy shall be installed in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except following the issuance of a permit by the building official of the city for such installation. There shall be no charge for the permit to install a canopy, except for the charge associated with the issuance of the usual building permit which shall also be required. The building official of the city, prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of a canopy may require such diagrams and/or plans evidencing the dimensions of the proposed installation as may be reasonably necessary to determine that the proposed installation meets the requirements of this chapter. All canopies installed in accordance with the permit shall be installed strictly in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the building official. 
(Ord. 1330 § 6, 1992) 
15.44.070 - Canopy not part of setback. 
    No portion of a canopy shall be considered a part of the building for determination of the required setback area for the location of a building on a lot in the C-l and C-2 zone. 
(Ord. 1330 § 7, 1992) 
Title 17 - PLANNING AND ZONING* 
Division I. - Introduction 
Chapter 17.01 - HOW TO USE THE DEVELOPMENT CODE 

17.01.010 - How to use the development code. 
    Welcome to the City of Coquille Development Code. This is a comprehensive land use and development code that governs all of the land within the incorporated limits of City of Coquille. The five divisions of the code are used together to review land use applications. They are organized as follows: 
A.  Division I. In addition to this brief introduction, Division I provides definitions for selected terms, land use classifications and categories, and information on the legal construct of the code. It also explains the city authority to enforce the development code. 
B.  Division II. Every parcel, lot, and tract of land within the city's incorporated boundaries is also within a "land use district." Land use districts are shown on the city's official zoning map. Division II identifies the land uses that are allowed within each district, and the standards that apply to each type of land use (e.g., lot standards, setbacks, and use-specific design standards). As required by state law, the zones or "land use districts" are intended to implement the City of Coquille comprehensive plan. The districts reserve land for planned land uses, provide for compatibility between different uses, and implement planned housing densities. 
C.  Division III. The design standards contained in Division III apply throughout the city. They are used in preparing development plans and reviewing applications, to ensure compliance with city standards for transportation access and circulation, landscaping, parking, public facilities, surface water management, housing densities, and areas subject to natural hazards. 
D.  Division IV. Application requirements and procedures for obtaining permits required by this code are contained in Division IV. Four types of permit procedures are provided: Type I (nondiscretionary, "ministerial" decision); Type II (discretionary, "administrative" decision); Type III ("quasi-judicial" decision requiring a public hearing); and Type IV ("legislative" decisions). 
E.  Division V. Standards and application procedures for processing variances and addressing nonconforming situations (i.e., existing uses or development that do not comply with the code) are contained in Division V. This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The city's varied geography, and complexities of land development, require flexibility. Division V provides that flexibility, consistent with the purposes and intent of the code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

17.04.010 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this development code are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of the development code is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the development code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.04.020 - Compliance and scope. 
A.  Compliance with the Provisions in the Development Code. Land and structures may be used or developed only as this development code ("code"), including all amendments thereto, permit. No plat shall be recorded and no building permit shall be issued without compliance with the provisions of this code. 
B.  Obligation by Successor. The requirements of this code apply to the owner(s) of record, persons undertaking the development or the use of land, and to those persons' successors in interest. 
C.  Most Restrictive Regulations Apply. Where a conflict arises between this code and any other rule or regulation of the City of Coquille, the most restrictive regulation, or that imposing the higher standard, shall govern. The City of Coquille planning official ("planning official") shall determine applicability of such regulations; however, where the planning official is unable to determine a regulation's applicability, the Coquille city council shall decide. 
D.  Variances. Variances shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 17.116. 
E.  Transfer of Development Standards Prohibited. No lot area, yard, landscaping, or open space that is required by this code for one use shall be a required lot area, yard, landscaping, or open space for another use, except as otherwise specifically allowed by this code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.04.030 - Consistency with plan and laws. 
    This development code is designed to implement the City of Coquille comprehensive plan. All provisions of this code shall be construed in conformity with the comprehensive plan, including all adopted comprehensive plan elements, except as otherwise required by applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.04.040 - Land use and use of a development. 
    All land uses and all uses of a development shall conform to this code. A lawful use is one that is permitted by this code (including nonconforming uses, subject to Chapter 17.128), and is not prohibited by law. Where a proposed use is not specifically identified by this code, the planning official shall determine the code's applicability based on similar uses either permitted, allowed conditionally, or prohibited by this code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.04.050 - Pre-existing approvals. 
A.  Legality of Pre-Existing Approvals. Developments and uses for which approvals were granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may occur pursuant to such approvals; except that modifications to those approvals shall comply with Chapter 17.100, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval, as applicable. 
B.  Subsequent Development Applications. All developments and uses begun on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall conform to the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.04.060 - Building permit and certificate of occupancy. 
A.  Building Permit. A building permit shall not be issued until the planning official has issued a land use review or site design review approval in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.84, or has otherwise found that such review is not required. Processing of building permits is subject to City of Coquille Municipal Code. 
B.  Certificate of Occupancy Required. To ensure completion of a development or use in the manner approved, a building shall not be occupied and a use shall not begin until the City of Coquille has issued or received a certificate of occupancy, as applicable, from the building official following completion of the work in substantial conformance to the applicable approvals and permits. Occupancy shall be subject to final clearance by the city planning official for compliance with applicable zoning and development code requirements, including applicable conditions of approval. Where a development or use is found to be in violation of this code or any applicable condition of approval, the city may withhold final clearance and occupancy until the violation is remedied. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.04.070 - Official action. 
A.  Official Actions. The planning official or his or her designee, as applicable, is vested with authority to issue permits or grant approvals in conformance with this code, and shall issue no permit and grant no approval for any development or use that violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed to carry out this code. 
B.  Void Actions. Any permit or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this code shall be void, unless it is modified to conform to the code. The planning official shall determine when an approval is void and he or she may modify the approval, or refer it back to the original decision making body for modification, to make it conform to the code. 
C.  Notices and Validity of Actions. The failure of any person to receive mailed notice or failure to post a notice shall not invalidate any actions pursuant to this code, provided a good faith effort was made to notify all parties entitled to notice. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.05 - PLANNING COMMISSION 

17.05.010 - Planning commission-Created-Members. 
    There is created a planning commission that shall be known as the City of Coquille Planning Commission. The City of Coquille Planning Commission shall consist of seven voting members in number appointed by the common council, and their qualifications shall be as required by ORS Chapter 227 and as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.020 - Vacancy. 
    Any vacancy shall be filled by the common council for the unexpired portion of the term; provided, however, appointments made while Ordinance 893 was in effect shall continue as to the member and the respective term. Their successors shall hold office for four years. Commission members may be removed only by the common council subsequent to a hearing for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.030 - President and vice-president-Election. 
    The city planning commission shall, at its first meeting in January of each year, elect a president and vice-president, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the commission. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.040 - Reimbursement of expenses. 
    Members of the city planning commission shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses. The city planning commission shall elect or appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. Such secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of said commission. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.050 - Power and authority to employ. 
    The city planning commission shall have power and authority to employ consulting advice on municipal problems, a secretary, and such clerks as may be necessary, and to pay for their services and for such other expenses as such commission may lawfully incur, including the necessary disbursements incurred by its members in the performance of their duties as members of said commission out of such funds as are therefore placed at the disposal of the commission by the city council. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.060 - Power and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city planning commission and they shall have power, except as otherwise provided by law, to recommend and make suggestions to the city council and to all other public authorities concerning the laying out, widening, extending, parking, and locating of streets, sidewalks, and boulevards, the establishment of setback lines, the relief of traffic congestion, the betterment of housing and sanitation conditions, and the establishment of zones and districts limiting the use, height, area, and bulk of buildings and structures; to recommend to the city council and all other public authorities plans for the regulation of the future growth, development, and beautification of the municipality in respect to its public and private buildings and works, streets, parks, grounds, and vacant lots, and plans consistent with the future growth and development of the city in order to secure to the city and its inhabitants sanitation, proper service of all public utilities (harbors, shipping) and transportation facilities; to do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out the provisions of this division; and in general to study and to propose such measures as may be advisable for the promotion of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, and welfare of said city. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.070 - Maps, plats, and replats dedicated to public use-Submittal requirements-Approval. 
    All maps, plats, and replats of land laid out in building lots and the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto and located within the city limits and all plans or plats for vacating or laying out, widening, extending, parking, and locating streets or plans for public buildings shall first be submitted to the city planning commission by the city engineer or other proper municipal officer; and a report thereon from the commission secured in writing before approval shall be given by the said proper municipal official. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.080 - Plans, plats, or replats dedicated to public or private use-Approval before being recorded. 
    All plans, plats, or replats of lands laid out in lots or plats within the city, including the streets, alleys, and other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use, shall first be submitted to the said planning commission and approved by it before they shall be recorded. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.090 - Proposed zone or district boundaries and regulations-Recommendation. 
    Copies of all proposed ordinances for establishment of the boundaries of any zone or district provided by Section 17.05.060, and of all proposed ordinances regulating or limiting the use, height, area, bulk, and construction of buildings to be submitted to the council shall, before the same are presented to the council, be first submitted by the city recorder to the city planning commission for recommendation and said recorder shall immediately so notify the council of such submission to said commission, and said commission shall make its recommendation thereon in writing to the council. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.100 - Gifts-Bequests. 
    The city planning commission may not receive gifts, bequests, or devise property to carry out any of the purposes of this act and shall have control and disposition over same unless this title should be repealed, in which case such control shall be vested in the council. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.110 - Authority. 
    The city planning commission shall also have all the powers which are now, or may hereafter be, given to it under the general laws of the State of Oregon, "including the power to grant or deny applications for zone changes and permits for variance of requirements of the city zoning ordinance." 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.120 - Recommendations to the council. 
    All recommendations made to the council by the commission shall be in writing. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.130 - Appointment of hearing officer. 
    The city manager shall appoint a planning commission hearings officer who shall be a nonvoting additional member of the planning commission and who shall be the presiding officer at all hearings as specified in Section 17.05.210, Rule 1, of this chapter. The hearings officer shall rule on all matters pertaining to admissibility of evidence and the general conduct of hearings. Such rulings shall be in conformance with the rules pertaining to admissibility of evidence and procedure as set forth herein. In the event the city manager does not appoint a "hearings officer," the chairman of the planning commission shall act in this capacity and shall be a voting member thereof. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.140 - Meetings. 
    The chairman of the planning commission or a majority of the members of the planning commission may call a special meeting thereof with not less than three days notice. Regular meetings shall be held once a month at the times and places fixed by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.05.150 - Quorum. 
    Four members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 

17.08.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to define terms that are used frequently in the City of Coquille Development Code to assist decision makers in interpreting and applying the code. Some of the terms that are defined here may have different meanings in other communities. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.08.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Definitions. The definitions in this chapter apply to all actions and interpretations under the City of Coquille Development Code. The meanings of some terms in this chapter may, in certain contexts in which they are used, be clearly inapplicable. In such cases, the context in which a term is used will indicate its intended meaning, and that intent shall control. Where a term used in this code is already defined in another part of the City of Coquille Municipal Code or codes incorporated therein by reference (e.g., building code), the term is not redefined herein for purposes of that other code. Terms not defined in this code shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged, shall be considered a standard reference. 
B.  Land Use Categories. Chapter 17.12 contains descriptions of the land use categories and examples of uses allowed in each district in Division II. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.08.030 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are organized alphabetically and some related terms are also grouped together and cross-referenced under group headings (e.g., transportation-related, environment-related, etc.). 
    "Abutting" means contiguous or adjoining. 
    Access. See transportation-related terms. 
    "Accessory" means secondary or incidental to a primary use or structure. 
    Accessory Dwelling. See "Residential structure types." 
    "Accessory parking facility" means a parking facility that provides parking for one or more primary use and may be located on or off the site of the use or uses to which it is accessory. 
    "Accessory structure" means a structure of secondary importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Accessory structures are detached from the primary structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not limited to: garages, decks, fences, arbors, gazebos, heat pumps, workshops and other structures. See also "Primary structure." 
    "Accessory use" means a use or activity that is a subordinate part of a primary use and that is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site. See also "Primary structure." 
    "Adjacent" means abutting or located directly across a street right-of-way or easement. 
    "Administrative" means a discretionary action or permit decision made without a public hearing, but requiring public notification and an opportunity for appeal. 
    "Adult foster care" means a family home or facility in which residential care is provided for five or fewer adults who are not related to the provider by blood or marriage. "Provider" means any person operating an adult foster care home. See also "Residential structure types: Group living structure." 
    "Adverse impact or effect" means negative effect that can be measured (e.g., noise, air pollution, vibration, dust, property values, etc.). 
    "Affordable" means housing affordable to a certain percentage of the population earning a specified level of income and spending no more than thirty (30) percent of their income on housing expenses. For more information, contact the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Oregon Department of Housing and Community Services. 
    Agriculture. See use category under Chapter 17.12 and ORS 215.203(2)(a). 
    Airport-Related Definitions. The airport-related definitions of the Oregon Department of Aviation's Land Use Compatibility Handbook are incorporated by reference. 
    Alley. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    Alteration. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Ambient" means normal or background environmental conditions, as in the level of light, dust or noise. 
    "Applicant" means a person who applies for a land use review. An applicant can be the owner of the property, a contract purchaser, or someone who is legally authorized to represent the owner, such as a builder, developer, contract purchaser, consultant, architect, or similar individual. 
    "Arborist" means a professional listed as a certified arborist or a registered consulting arborist. 
    Arterial. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Articulate/articulation" means the jointing and interrelating of building spaces through offsets, projections, overhangs, extensions or similar breaks in the exterior building elevation. 
    Attached House (Townhouse or Rowhouse). See "Residential structure types." 
    Attached Structure. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Automobile-Dependent/Oriented Development. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Automobile-Oriented Use. Automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of the use, such as drive-in/drive-through restaurants and banks. See also "Automobile-oriented development." 
    "Bed and breakfast inn" means any establishment located in a structure designed for a single-family residence and structures appurtenant thereto, regardless of whether the owner or operator of the establishment resides in any of the structures, that: 
1.  Has more than two rooms for rent on a daily basis to the public; and 
2.  Offers a breakfast meal as part of the cost of the room. 
    "Berm" means a small man-made rise or hill in a landscape which is intended to buffer or visually screen certain developments, such as parking areas. 
    Bikeway. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Block" means all of the property bounded by streets, rights-of-way (pedestrian or vehicle ways), water features, or any combination thereof, but is not divided or separated in any way by streets or water features. 
    "Block frontage" means all of the property fronting on one side of a street that is between intersecting or intercepting streets, or that is between a street and a water feature, or end of a dead-end street. An intercepting street determines the boundary of the block frontage only on the side of the street that it intercepts. See figure. 
Block Frontage

    "Bollard" means a post of metal, wood or masonry that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians and/or bicycles). Bollards may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting. 
    Boulevard. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    Building. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Building official" means the person who enforces the building ordinances and regulations for the city, and other ordinances and regulations as assigned. 
    "Build-to line" means a maximum front or street yard setback which is typically required along commercial street frontages to promote a storefront character and pedestrian-oriented design. 
    "Canopy" means a permanent roofed unenclosed structure that may be freestanding or be partially attached to a building, for the purpose of providing shelter; typically used for sheltering patrons on foot and/or in motor vehicles; does not include a completely enclosed structure. See also "Carport" (below) and "Tree canopy," under "Environment-related definitions." 
    "Capacity" means maximum holding or service ability, as used for transportation, utilities, parks and other public facilities. See also definition of "Occupancy" in applicable building codes. 
    "Carport" means a stationary structure consisting of a roof, its supports, not more than one wall or storage cabinets substituting for a wall, used to shelter motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, or boats; does not include temporary shelters or canopies not affixed to a permanent foundation per applicable building codes. 
    "Centerline radius" means the radius of a centerline of a street right-of-way. 
    "Certificate of occupancy" means a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of inspection issued by the building official at the completion of a building permit or change of occupancy. 
    "Change of use" means change in the primary type of use on a site. 
    "Child care center, family child care" means facilities that provide care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours. "Family child care providers" provide care for not more than sixteen (16) children in a home. See ORS 657A.440(4) for applicable requirements. 
    "City" means the City of Coquille, Oregon. 
    "Clear and objective" means decision criteria and standards that do not involve substantial discretion or individual judgment in their application. 
    Clearing (as in clearing and grading). See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Club" means any organization, group, or association supported by the members thereof, the purpose of which is to render a service customarily rendered for members and their guests but shall not include any organization, group, or association, the chief activity of which is to render a service customarily carried on as a business. 
    Collector. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Commercial" means land use involving buying/selling of goods or services as the primary activity. 
    "Commission" means the Coquille planning commission. 
    "Common area" means land commonly owned to include open space, landscaping or recreation facilities (e.g., may be managed by a homeowners' association). 
    "Comprehensive plan" means the current adopted comprehensive plan of the City of Coquille. 
    "Conditional use" means a use that requires a conditional use permit. See Chapter 17.92. 
    "Condominium" means ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit structure that includes common areas and facilities; includes both residential and commercial condominiums. See ORS 100 for applicable requirements. 
    Conservation Easement. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    Corner Lot. See "Lot, Corner lot." 
    "Corner radius" means the radius of a street corner, as measured around the curb or edge of pavement. 
    Cottage. See "Residential structure types." 
    "Council" means the city council of Coquille, Oregon. 
    Courtyard. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Crown cover" means the area directly beneath the crown and within the drip line of a tree or shrub. The crown consists of the aboveground branches, stems, and leaves. 
    "Days" means calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days. Working days include Monday through Friday, excluding federal holidays. 
    Dead-End Street. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Dedication" means the designation of land by its owner for any public use as shown on a subdivision plat or deed. The term may also be used for dedications to a private homeowners' association. 
    "Density(ies)" means a measurement of the number of dwelling units in relationship to a specified amount of land. As used in this code, density is determined based on the gross parcel or lot area, which includes land that will be dedicated as right-of-way and land that will be reserved as open space through the development process. It does not include land previously dedicated as right-of-way. Density is a measurement used generally for residential uses. 
    Development-related definitions: 
1.  "Alter/alteration" means a change in use or occupancy or physical change to a structure or site. Alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair. (See also "Interior/exterior alteration.") Alterations may or may not require land use approval, but property owners should check with the city planning official before commencing any alteration. Alterations include the following: 
a.  Changes in use or occupancy; 
b.  Changes to the exterior of a building; 
c.  Changes to the interior of a building; 
d.  Increases or decreases in floor area of a building; 
e.  Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures; 
f.  Changes to exterior improvements; 
g.  Changes to landscaping; and 
h.  Changes in the topography of the site. 
2.  "Arcade" means an arched or covered passageway; often along building fronts, or adjacent to courtyards. 
3.  "Attached structure" means any structure that is attached to another structure by a common wall, by a roof or canopy, or by other structural connections. A garage or workshop may be attached to another structure by sharing a wall or by a breezeway, subject to applicable building codes. Structures connected by an "I" beam or similar connections are not considered attached. 
4.  "Automobile-dependent development" means primary or accessory structure or facility servicing motor vehicles, or patrons in motor vehicles, such as motor vehicle repair or service (e.g., oil change), gas station, car wash, auto or truck sales or rental, drive-up windows, kiosks, and similar uses. 
5.  "Automobile-oriented development" means development in which the site layout and design gives preference to automobiles as the primary mode of transportation; generally discouraged in all residential areas and in the downtown. 
6.  "Building" means a structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least fifty (50) percent of the area of its sides. 
7.  "Building coverage" means the area that is covered by buildings, and decks, stairways and entry bridges that are more than thirty (30) inches above grade. Eaves are not included in building coverage. 
8.  "Building footprint" means the outline of a building, as measured around its foundation, or building coverage, whichever is greater. 
9.  Building/Structure Height. "Building height," for the purposes of this code, is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum (grade plane) to the highest point (peak) of a roof. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
10.  "Building line" means a line running parallel to a lot line that is the same distance from the lot line as the closest portion of a building on the site, typically used in reference to required setback yards. See figure. 
Building Lines

11.  "Building mass" means the aggregate size of a building, or the total height, width, and depth of all its parts. 
12.  "Building pad" means a vacant building site on a lot with other building sites, as identified by an approved site plan. 
13.  "Building scale" means the dimensional relationship of a building and its component parts to other buildings. 
14.  "Clearing (as in clearing and grading)" means any activity that removes existing vegetation or strips surface material from any portion of the site and exceeding typical yard maintenance for a single-family dwelling. 
15.  "Cornice" means the projecting horizontal element that tops a wall or flat roof. 
16.  "Courtyard" means a court or enclosure adjacent to a building, which usually provides amenities such as gardens, planters, seating, or art. 
17.  "Develop" means to construct or alter a structure or to make a physical change to the land, including excavations and fills. See also "Alter/alteration." 
18.  "Development" means all improvements on a site, including alterations to land and new or remodeled structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include naturally occurring (e.g., geologic) forms landscaping land. See also "Exterior improvements." 
19.  Driveway. There are two types of driveways: 
a.  The area that provides vehicular access to a site from a street. Maximum driveway width for this type is the same width as the curb cut, excluding any aprons or extensions of the curb cut. This type of driveway begins at the street and extends into the site. A driveway does not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas in parking areas, such as aisles; and 
b.  The area that provides vehicular circulation between two or more noncontiguous parking areas. This type of driveway does not include maneuvering or circulation areas within the interior of a parking area. Where required by code for fire safety, a driveway must be kept clear of all obstructions. 
20.  "Driveway apron/approach" means the edge of a driveway where it abuts a public way; usually constructed of concrete. 
    21 "Eave" means projecting overhang at the lower border of a roof and extending from a primary wall or support. See figure. 
Eave

22.  "Exterior improvements" means all improvements except buildings or other roofed structures. Exterior improvements include surface parking and loading areas, paved and graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. It includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include vegetative landscaping, natural geologic forms, or unimproved land. See also "Development." 
23.  "Facade" means the front or street-facing elevation of a structure, except as otherwise specified by this code. 
24.  "Fire apparatus lane" or "fire lane" means unobstructed area or driveway meeting Uniform Fire Code requirements; typically may not be used for parking or loading area. 
25.  "Floor area" means, except as otherwise prescribed by applicable building codes, the total floor area of a building, both above and below ground with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet. Floor area is measured from the interior walls of a building or structure and does not include the following: 
a.  Roof area; 
b.  Roof top mechanical equipment; and 
c.  Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than forty-two (42) inches in height, for fifty (50) percent or more of their perimeter. 
26.  Floor, Main. "Main floor" means building floor closest to street level and within four feet of finished grade. 
27.  "Grading" means all cuts, fills, embankments, stockpile areas, and equipment maneuvering areas associated with development. 
28.  "Impervious surface" means surface area that does not allow for water infiltration, or has a runoff coefficient of 0.90 or more (e.g., nonpermeable pavement, solid rock, roofs, foundations, underground tanks and vaults, and similar areas). 
29.  "New development" means development of a site that was previously unimproved or that has had more than fifty (50) percent of any previously existing buildings demolished; e.g., not a remodel of an existing building. 
30.  Parking. See "Parking." 
31.  "Paved area" means an uncovered, hard-surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface (such as porous concrete or pavers) that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy-impact uses. Graveled areas are not paved areas but are typically impervious. 
32.  "Pedestrian amenity(ies)" means areas and objects that are intended to serve as places for public socializing and enjoyment and are usually closed to motorized vehicles. Examples include plazas, building frontage areas (extra-wide sidewalks), street furnishings (e.g., benches, drinking fountains, bus waiting shelters), pocket parks adjacent to a street or public way, and similar areas and objects. Sidewalk surfaces designed to meet the minimum sidewalk width standards under Section 17.72.010 are not "amenities" for the purpose of this code. 
33.  "Pedestrian-oriented development" means development that is designed with an emphasis primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and building, rather than on auto access and parking areas. The building is generally placed close to the street and the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk. There are generally windows or display cases along building elevations which face the street and other public ways. Typically, buildings cover a large portion of the site. Although parking areas may be provided, they are generally oriented behind or to the sides of buildings. 
34.  "Roof pitch" means the slope of a roof, usually described as ratio (e.g., one foot of rise per two feet of horizontal distance). 
35.  "Shopping street" means a driveway in a commercial development that is designed to mimic a public street with sidewalks, tree wells, pedestrian lighting, and street furnishings. A shopping street may also have on-street parking. 
36.  "Storm water facility" means a facility designed to manage the quantity of storm water runoff and may contain features that are designed to improve the quality of runoff. Storm water quality facilities may include vegetated swales and sand filters, wet or dry ponds, marshes, infiltration facilities, and structural storm sewer devices such as oil-water separators. Storm water quality facilities do not include conveyance systems that are meant only for conveying the storm water from one place to another and do not affect the quality of the storm water. 
37.  "Storefront character" means the character expressed by buildings placed close to the street with ground floor display windows, weather protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), corner building entrances or recessed entries, and similar features. 
38.  "Street furniture/furnishings" means benches, lighting, bicycle racks, drinking fountains, mail boxes, kiosks, and similar pedestrian amenities; may be located within a street furnishings zone or building front zone of a sidewalk or in a plaza. See also "Pedestrian amenities." 
39.  "Structure" means, except as provided by applicable building codes, any object constructed in or on the ground. Structure includes buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, utility vaults, and other similar objects. Structure does not include paved areas or vegetative landscaping materials. 
40.  "Structure height" means the height of a structure, and the cumulative height of a building with any appurtenant structures. 
41.  "Swale" means a type of storm water facility. Usually a broad, shallow depression with plants that filter and process contaminants. 
42.  "Vehicle areas" means all of the areas on a site where vehicles may circulate or park, including parking areas, driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading areas. See also "Driveway and parking area." 
    Disabled Person. For the purposes of this code, a "disabled person" is a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability which substantially limits one or more major life activities as stated in Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and state law. 
    "Discontinued use" means a use that physically left the land it was on, a permitted use that ceased, or a use terminated at the end of a lease or contract. See Chapter 17.120, Nonconforming Uses and Developments. A use is considered temporarily discontinued during the first two years after it ceases, after which it is considered permanently discontinued. 
    "Discretionary" means a permit action or decision that involves substantial judgment or discretion. 
    Disturbance Area. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    Drainage Way. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    Drip-Line. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    "Drive-through/drive-up facility" means a facility or structure that is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during an activity on the site. Drive-through facilities are a type of site development that is usually found in conjunction with a quick vehicle servicing use or a retail sales and service use, as defined by Chapter 17.12. Drive-through/drive-up facilities also include facilities designed for the rapid servicing of vehicles, where the drivers may or may not remain in their vehicles, but where the drivers usually either perform the service for themselves, or wait on the site for the service to be rendered. Drive-through facilities may serve the primary use of the site or may serve accessory uses. Examples are drive-up windows; automatic teller machines; coffee kiosks and similar vendors; menu boards; order boards or boxes; gas pump islands; car wash facilities; auto service facilities, such as air compressor, water, and windshield washing stations; quick-lube or quick-oil change facilities; and drive-in theaters. All driveways queuing and waiting areas associated with a drive-through/drive-up facility are similarly regulated as part of such facility. 
    Driveway. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Driveway Apron/Approach. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Duplex. See "Residential structure types." 
    Dwelling Unit. See "Residential structure types." 
    "Easement" means a grant of rights by a property owner that allows others to use the owner's land for a specific purpose, such as access, or to locate utilities. Recorded and on record at Coos County. 
    Eave. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Elevation" means height in feet and inches above a specified datum. 
    Elevation, Building. "Building elevation" means scaled drawing of the outside wall of a building or structure, from grade to roof ridgeline, typically specifying materials, color, and dimensions. 
    Environment-related definitions: 
1.  "Designated sensitive lands" means natural resources areas and landforms regulated under applicable overlay zones in Division II. 
2.  "Conservation easement" means an easement that restricts development and protects identified conservation values of the land, such as wetlands, woodlands, significant trees or groves, floodplains, habitat, or similar resources. 
3.  "Crown cover" means the area directly beneath the crown and within the drip line of a tree or shrub. The crown consists of the aboveground branches, stems, and leaves. 
4.  "Disturbance area" means an area that contains all temporary and permanent development, exterior improvements, and staging and storage areas on the site, both existing and proposed. Vegetation planted for resource enhancement and agricultural and pasture land is not included. 
5.  "Drainage way" means an open linear depression, whether constructed or natural, that functions for the collection and drainage of surface water. It may be permanently or temporarily inundated. 
6.  "Drip-line" means imaginary line around a tree or shrub at a distance from the trunk equivalent to the canopy (leaf and branch) spread. 
7.  "Fish and wildlife habitat areas" means lands that contain significant food, water, or cover for native terrestrial and aquatic species of animals. Examples include forests, fields, riparian areas, wetlands, and perennial or intermittent water bodies, as regulated by applicable state or federal natural resource regulatory agencies. 
8.  "Flood hazard area" means land that is in the one hundred (100) year floodplain as currently defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) program. See City of Coquille floodplain ordinance (Ordinance No. 1226 (March 16, 1987; amended by Ordinance No. 1351A, November 1, 1993). 
9.  "Floodway" means the active flowing channel during a flood, as designated on flood maps for the city; the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. See applicable overlay zones in Division II. 
10.  "Identified natural features (e.g., wetlands or streams)" means natural features that are identified in the national wetlands inventory, and/or other references used by applicable natural resource regulatory agency, as being significant and requiring protection under Federal Clean Water Act. 
11.  "Natural hazard" means natural areas that can cause dangerous or difficult development situations. For example, natural hazard areas include steep slopes, unstable soils, and areas prone to landslides, floodways and floodplains. See applicable overlay zones in Division II. 
12.  "Riparian areas" means lands adjacent to rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and other water bodies. They are transitional between aquatic and upland zones, and as such, contain elements of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. They have high water tables because of their close proximity to aquatic systems, soils which are usually made up largely of water-carried sediments, and some vegetation that requires free (unbound) water or conditions that are more moist than normal. 
13.  "Sensitive lands" means wetlands, significant trees, steep slopes, floodplains and other natural resource areas designated for protection or conservation by the comprehensive plan. 
14.  "Stream" means an area where enough natural surface water flows to produce a stream channel, such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water either intermittently or during most of the year. This includes: 
a.  The water itself, including any vegetation, aquatic life, or habitat; 
b.  Beds and banks below the high water level which may contain water, whether or not water is actually present; 
c.  The floodplain between the high water levels of connected side channels; 
d.  Beaver ponds, oxbows, and side channels if they are connected by surface flow to the stream during a portion of the year; and 
e.  Stream-associated wetlands. 
15.  "Stream channel" means an area with evidence of perennial or seasonal water passage. The depression between the banks worn by the regular and usual flow of the water. The channel need not contain water year-round. This definition does not include irrigation ditches, canals, storm or surface water runoff devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses. 
16.  "Top of bank" means the first major change in the slope of the incline from the ordinary high water level of a water body. A major change is a change of ten (10) degrees or more. If there is no major change within a distance of fifty (50) feet from the ordinary high water level, then the top of bank will be the elevation two feet above the ordinary high water level. 
17.  "Tree canopy" means the ground area that, when viewed from above the crown of one or more trees, is mostly covered by the tree(s). For deciduous trees, canopy area is based on the time of year when foliage is present. 
18.  "Water bodies" means permanently or temporarily flooded lands which may lie below the deepwater boundary of wetlands. Water bodies include rivers, streams, creeks, sloughs, drainage ways, lakes, and ponds. 
19.  "Wetland" means, except as otherwise determined by applicable state or federal natural resource regulatory agencies with wetland jurisdiction, an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
    "Evidence" means application materials, plans, data, testimony and other factual information used to demonstrate compliance or noncompliance with a code standard or criterion. 
    "Excavating or filling" means the removal, placement, or replacement of earth, concrete, asphalt, and similar nondecomposable materials whether permanent or temporary in nature. Excavating or filling does not include the movement of earth or placement of gravel, asphalt, or other paving materials that is done in conjunction with road improvements. It does not include the excavation of mineral or aggregate resources. Excavating or filling includes the terms grading, preloading, surcharging, and stockpiling. 
    "Exterior display" means the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and machinery for sale or lease. Exterior display functions as an outdoor showroom for customers to examine and compare products. The display area does not have to be visible to the street. Exterior display does not include storage of goods placed or parked outside, if the goods are not examined and compared by customers in such location. It does not include damaged or inoperable vehicles, vehicles or equipment being serviced, bulk goods and materials, and other similar products. Exterior display does not include car and boat sales and/or leasing when such vehicles are not accessible to customers to inspect and compare; this situation is considered exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior display are car and boat sales and leasing, and plant nurseries. See also "Exterior Work Activities" and "Exterior Storage." 
    Exterior Improvements. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Exterior Storage. "Exterior storage" includes the outdoor storage of goods exclusive of outdoor displays for sale or rent. The goods may be for sale or lease, but if so, the storage area is generally not for the purpose of inspection or comparison of goods by customers. Exterior storage includes the storage of raw or finished goods (packaged or bulk), including gases, oil, chemicals, gravel; building materials, packing materials; salvage goods; machinery, tools, and equipment; vehicles that are for sale, lease or rent, which are not accessible to the customer to inspect or compare; vehicles that have been unloaded and are waiting transport to off-site locations; vehicles that have been towed and are being kept in an impound lot; and other similar items. The storage of recreational vehicles outdoors is also considered exterior storage. Damaged or inoperable vehicles, or vehicles that have missing parts, which are kept outside are also included as exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior storage are lumber yards, wrecking yards, tool and equipment rental, bark chip and gravel sales, car dealerships or car rental establishments, and port facilities. See also "Exterior display" and "Exterior Work Activities." 
    Exterior Work Activities. "Exterior work activities" include the outdoor processing, assembly, or fabrication of goods; the maintenance, repair, and salvage of vehicles and equipment; and other similar activities that generally have an industrial orientation. Exterior work activities do not include normal pickup and deliveries to a site, parking, excavation and fills, exterior eating areas, outdoor recreation, or outdoor markets. See "Exterior display" and "Exterior Storage." 
    Facade. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Family Day Care. See "Child care center, family child care." 
    Farming or Farm Use. As used in this code, "agriculture" is the same as "farm use." (See ORS 215.203(2)(a).) Includes utilization of land to raise, harvest, or sell crops; feed, breed, manage, and sell livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, honeybees, or their produce; dairy and sell dairy products; or any other agricultural or horticultural use, animal husbandry, timber agricultural use, or combination thereof. Farm uses include preparation or processing and storage of products raised on such land, but do not include construction or use of dwellings and other buildings customarily provided in conjunction with farm uses. 
    "Final plat" means the diagrams, drawings, and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions and information concerning a land division. 
    Fire Apparatus Lane or Fire Lane. See "Development-related definitions" and applicable fire code. 
    Flag Lot. See "Lot." 
    Flood Hazard Area. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    Floor, Main. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Footcandle" means a unit of illumination (light standards), equal to one lumen per square foot, or the amount of light from a source of one candela directly thrown on a square foot of surface at a distance of one foot. 
    "Frontage" means the dimension of a property line abutting a public or private street. 
    "Frontage street or road" means a minor street that parallels an arterial street or highway in order to provide access to abutting properties and minimize direct access onto the arterial or highway. 
    "Functional classification" means the classification given to streets by the road authority (e.g., "local/collector/arterial"). See "Transportation-related definitions," and Section 17.72.020 for street standards. 
    "Future division plan" or "future development plan" means a document that shows lot, tract and right-of-way boundaries for all potential future phases of a land division. The plan is not binding on the city or the applicant. The purpose of the plan is to document that the design of the first phase of the plan does not preclude future phases or future development of adjacent properties from meeting city standards. 
    "Garage" means a covered permanent structure designed to provide shelter for vehicles, and which is accessory to a use in these structure types: houses, attached houses, duplexes, mobile homes, or houseboats. Carports are considered garages. Floor area adjacent to the space designed to provide shelter for vehicles, if not entirely separated from the garage area by floor-to-ceiling walls, is considered part of the garage. A garage may be attached to or detached from another structure. See also "Structured parking." 
    "Grade" means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building. This is the definition used in the Oregon Structural Specialty Code (the International Building Code as amended by the state of Oregon). 
    Grading. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Ground cover" means living or processed plant material (e g., mulch, bark chips) that is used to cover bare ground. See Chapter 17.64, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. 
    Group Living Structure. See "Residential structure types." 
    "Hardscape" means nonvegetative landscape materials or installations, including pathways, decorative pavers, benches, drinking fountains, arbors, pergolas, playgrounds, plazas, and similar amenities. 
    "Hazardous substances" means any substance, material, or waste listed below: 
1.  Nuclear or radioactive materials or waste; 
2.  Chemicals subject to reporting under Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of 1986, published July, 1987, U. S. Environmental Protection Agency; 
3.  Hazardous Materials Table, in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 49, Part 172.101; and 
4.  Other substances as determined by applicable state or federal agency. 
    Historic Resource-Related Definitions. See "Historic-cultural resources provisions." 
    "Home occupation, home occupation site" means a business activity that is carried out on the same site as a dwelling unit, and which is accessory to the household living use on the site, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.24 (Residential Land Use Districts) and Section 17.112.020 (Home occupation permits). 
    "Hotel/motel" means a building or portion thereof designed and used for occupancy of transient individuals lodged with or without meals for a continuous period not to exceed twenty-nine (29) days. (See ORS 446.310.) 
    House. See "Residential structure types." 
    "Household" means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, civil union, legal adoption or guardianship, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit; or one or more handicapped persons as defined in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit. 
    "Impervious surface" means surface area that does not allow for water infiltration, or has a runoff coefficient of 0.90 or more (e.g., nonpermeable pavement, solid rock roofs, foundations, underground tanks and vaults, and similar areas). 
    "Incidental and subordinate to" means secondary to, and less apparent, than the primary use or other portion of the development. 
    "Infill" means the development of vacant, bypassed lands located in an area that is predominately developed at densities/land use intensities allowed by zoning. 
    "Junk yard" means: 
1.  Any property or establishment on which one or more persons are engaged in breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying, or selling scrap or waste materials; 
2.  Any establishment or place of business on which two or more inoperable motor vehicles or an equivalent volume of waste or refuse are maintained, stored, bought, or sold. Includes wrecking yards, automobile grave yards, garbage dumps, and scrap metal processing facilities. See also "Recycling facility." 
    "Kennel" means any lot or premises where three or more dogs or cats aged six months or older are boarded or bred for compensation. Establishments where animals are offered for sale as the primary use, such as pet stores, are not classified as kennels. 
    "Land division" means the process of dividing land to create parcels or lots. See Chapter 17.88. 
    "Land use" means the activity or activities that occur on a piece of land. Activities may be individually identified as primary or accessory uses. See also Chapter 17.12, Use Categories. 
    "Land use approval" means a land use decision for approval or approval with conditions under Division IV; includes any time limits or other restrictions that may apply to the land use decision. 
    Land Use District. As used in this code, a "land use district" is the same as a zoning district. 
    "Land use review" means an application for land use approval under Section 17.84.020(A), or the review of such application; typically limited to determining conformance with standards of the applicable land use district and does not include site design review, conditional use permit, or land division approval. 
    "Landing (stairs)" means a level part of a staircase, usually at the end of a flight of stairs. 
    "Landscaping" means any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, plazas, works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like. Also includes irrigation systems, mulches, topsoil, and revegetation or the preservation, protection and replacement of trees. 
    Lane, Mid-Block. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    Legislative. A "legislative action" or "decision" is the making of law, as opposed to the application of existing law to a particular use (e.g., adoption of, or amendment to, a comprehensive plan or development regulation). See also Section 17.80.050 (Type IV procedure). 
    Light Manufacture. See Chapter 17.12, Use Categories. 
    "Livestock" means domestic animal types customarily raised or kept on farms. See "Agriculture." 
    "Living area" means the habitable floor area of a residential structure conforming to applicable building codes; typically does not include garage area, and attic and basement areas with substandard ceiling height or substandard egress. 
    "Loading area" means the area available for the maneuvering and standing of vehicles engaged in delivering and loading goods, freight, or other articles. See also Chapter 17.68, Parking and Loading. 
    "Local improvement district (LID)" means a small public district formed for the purpose of financing local improvements (paving of streets, construction of sidewalks, street lighting, water mains, storm sewers, parks, etc.) within a zone of benefit, usually assessed against abutting properties. Property owners within the LID are assessed for the cost of the improvements in accordance with ORS 223.387 through 223.485. 
    "Longest street-facing wall" means the longest wall that faces a street. If two or more street-facing walls are of equal length, then the applicant chooses which is to be the longest street-facing wall for purposes of applying regulations of the development code. See also "Facade," and Section 17.28.060, Building orientation and commercial block layout. 
    Lot. A "lot" is a legally defined piece of land other than a tract that is the result of a land division. The following definitions for "lot" apply to the state definition of both lot (result of subdividing), and parcel (result of partitioning). See also "Ownership and site." 
1.  "Corner lot" means a lot that has frontage on more than one intersecting street. A street that curves with angles that are one hundred twenty (120) degrees or less, measured from the centerline of the street, is considered two intersecting streets for the purpose of evaluating whether a lot is a corner lot. See figures below. 
2.  "Flag lot" means a lot with two distinct parts (see figure below): 
a.  The flag, which is the only building site; and is located behind another lot; and 
b.  The pole, which connects the flag to the street; provides the only street frontage for the lot; and at any point is less than the minimum lot width for the zone. 
3.  "Through lot" means a lot that has frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Corner Lots

Flag Lot

    "Lot area" means the total surface area (measured horizontally) within the boundary lines of a lot. 
    "Lot consolidation" means the reduction in the number of lots; i.e., the creation of one lot from two or more existing lots. 
    "Lot coverage" means the total area of a lot covered by building(s) or impervious surfaces, as provided by the applicable land use district development standards. 
    Lot, Double-Frontage. See "Lot, Through lot." 
    Lot Line Adjustment. See "Property line adjustment." 
    "Lot lines/property lines" means the property lines along the edge of a lot or site. 
1.  "Front lot line" means a lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shortest of the lot lines that abut a street. If two or more street lot lines are of equal length, then the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line for the purpose of determining required setbacks. However, a through lot has two front lot lines regardless of whether the street lot lines are of equal or unequal length. See figures below. 
2.  "Rear lot line" means a lot line that is opposite a front lot line. A triangular lot has two side lot lines but no rear lot line. For other irregularly shaped lots, the rear lot line is all lot lines that are most nearly opposite the front lot line. See figures below. 
3.  "Side lot line" means a lot line that connects front and rear lot lines. On a corner lot, the longer lot line that abuts a street is a side lot line. See figures below. 
4.  "Side street lot line" means a lot line that is both a side lot line and a street lot line. See figures below. 
5.  "Street lot line" means a lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. Street lot line does not include lot lines that abut a dedicated alley. On a corner lot, there are two (or more) street lot lines. Street lot line can include front lot lines and side lot lines, however, both are considered front yards for the purpose of measuring required setbacks. See figures below. 
6.  "Lot of record" means a legally created lot or parcel meeting all applicable regulations in effect at the time of creation, and held in separate ownership, or any other lot deemed a legal lot under Chapter 17.124. 
Front and Side Lot Lines

Street Lot Lines

Lot Lines on Irregular Lots

    Main/Primary Building Entrance. A "main entrance" is the entrance to a building that most pedestrians are expected to use. Generally, each building has one main entrance, however, some buildings may have more than one primary entrance where pedestrian access is provided from a street sidewalk as well as a parking area internal to the site. In multi-tenant buildings, main entrances may open directly into the building's lobby or principal interior ground level circulation space. When a multi-tenant building does not have a lobby or common interior circulation space, each tenant's outside entrance is a main entrance. In single-tenant buildings, main entrances typically open directly into lobby, reception, or sales areas. 
    "Main floor" means building floor closest to street level and within four feet of finished grade. 
    "Major remodeling" means projects where the floor area is being increased by fifty (50) percent or more, or where the cost of the remodeling is greater than the assessed value of the existing improvements on the site. Assessed value is the market value shown on the applicable county assessment and taxation records for the current year. 
    "Maneuvering area/aisle" means the driving area in a parking lot where motor vehicles are able to turn around and access parking or loading spaces. 
    "Manufactured dwelling park" means any place where four or more manufactured dwellings are located within five hundred (500) feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership; the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space or keep space for rent or lease to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or lease or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person. "Manufactured dwelling park" does not include a lot or lots located within an approved subdivision being rented or leased for occupancy by no more than one manufactured dwelling per lot. See also ORS Chapter 446. Manufactured Home/Dwelling. See "Residential structure types." 
    "Ministerial decision" means a routine administrative action or decision that involves little or no discretion. See Section 17.80.020 (Type I procedure). 
    "Mitigation" means to avoid, rectify, repair, or compensate for negative impacts or effects that result from other actions (e.g., improvements to a street may be required to mitigate for transportation impacts resulting from development.) 
    "Mixed-use" means the combination on a site of residential uses with commercial (e.g., office, retail, or services), civic, or light industrial uses. 
    "Mobile home park" means two or more mobile homes that are located on a single site for thirty (30) days or more, connected to an electric utility and city sewer and water systems, and intended for permanent residential use; does not include recreational vehicle parks or temporary medical hardship homes approved by the city, nor does it include sites where unoccupied mobile homes are offered for sale or lease. See also "Recreational vehicle park." 
    "Mobile home space" means the area occupied by a mobile home and its accessory uses and structures in a mobile home park. 
    Motor Home. See "Recreational vehicle," under "Vehicle types." 
    Motor Vehicle. See "Vehicle types." 
    Multi-Dwelling Development or Multifamily Housing. See "Residential structure types." 
    Multi-Dwelling Structure. See "Residential structure types." 
    Multi-Use Pathway. See "Walkway and bikeway." 
    Natural Resource Areas/Natural Resources. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    "Neighborhood" means a residential area usually having distinguishing character or geography. 
    Neighborhood Commercial. See Chapter 17.12, Use Categories, Commercial. 
    "Nonconforming development" means an element of a development, such as lot area, setback, height, lot coverage, landscaping, sidewalk, or parking area, or lack thereof, that was created in conformance with development regulations but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or applicable code standards, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable development regulations. See Chapter 17.120. 
    "Nonconforming situation" means a nonconforming development or nonconforming use. A situation may be nonconforming in more than one aspect. For example, a site may contain a nonconforming use and also have some nonconforming development. See also "Nonconforming development" and "Nonconforming use." See Chapter 17.120. 
    "Nonconforming use" means a use that was allowed by right when established or a use that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the amount of floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone. See Chapter 17.120. 
    "Nonnative invasive plants" means plants listed by Oregon State University Extension Service, Coos County, or other government agency as nonnative invasive plants in Oregon. 
    "Off-street parking" means all off-street areas designed, constructed, used, or required or intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles. See Chapter 17.68 for parking standards. 
    "On-street parking" means parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking lanes or bays. Parking may be "parallel" or "angled" in relation to the edge of the right-of-way or curb, as provided by applicable standards of the roadway authority. See Chapter 17.68 for parking standards. 
    "Open space (public/common/private/active/passive)" means land within a development that has been dedicated in common to the ownership within the development or to the public specifically for the purpose of providing places for recreation, conservation or other open space uses. See also "Common area." 
    "Orientation" means to cause to face toward a particular point of reference (e.g., "A building oriented to the street"). See also "Pedestrian-oriented development." 
    "Outdoor commercial use" means a use supporting a commercial activity that provides goods or services, either wholesale, retail or entertainment, where the amount of site area in outdoor use (e.g., storage of materials, display of merchandise, or entertainment) exceeds the total floor area of all buildings on the site. Examples of outdoor commercial uses include automobile sales or services, nurseries, lumber yards and equipment rental businesses, and outdoor amusement. 
    Overlay Zone/District. "Overlay zones" impose and/or relax requirements of an underlying land use district, or base zone, where characteristics of the land or neighborhood, or the types of development planned for an area, require special regulations. See Chapter 17.40. 
    "Owner" means the owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the latest assessment records in the office of the county assessor. Owner also includes a deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest assessment records, but who presents to the city a copy of a deed or contract of sale signed by the owner of record. 
    Ownership. An "ownership" is one or more contiguous lots that are owned by the same person, partnership, association, or corporation. Ownership also includes lots that are in common ownership but are separated by a right-of-way. See also "Lot" and "Site." 
    "Parcel" means a legally defined area of land created through a partition. 
    Parking Area. A "parking area" is all the area devoted to the standing, maneuvering, and circulation of motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include driveways or areas devoted exclusively to nonpassenger loading or fire apparatus lanes. See also "Driveway," "Garage," "Structured parking," and "Vehicle areas." 
    "Parking lot perimeter" means the boundary of a parking lot area that usually contains a landscaped buffer area. 
    "Parking space" means an improved space designed to provide standing area for a motor vehicle. See Chapter 17.68 for parking space standards. 
    Parking Versus Storage. "Parking" is to leave a motor vehicle for a temporary time, no longer than twenty-four (24) hours. Storage is to place or leave in a location for storage, maintenance, repair, future sale or rental, or future use more than twenty-four (24) hours. See also "Exterior display." 
    Partial Street/Half Street. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Partition" means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. See ORS 92.010(8). 
    Paved Area. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Pedestrian Amenity(ies). See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Planter strip" means a landscape area for street trees and other plantings within the public right-of-way, usually a continuous planter area between the street and a sidewalk. See also "Tree well." 
    "Plat" means diagrams, drawings and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a land division. This term includes the state law definitions of "partition plat" and "subdivision plat." See also Chapter 17.88, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments. 
    "Plaza" means an area generally open to the public on a controlled basis and used for passive recreational activities, informal public gathering, and relaxation. Plazas are paved areas typically provided with amenities, such as seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees, and landscaping for use by pedestrians. See also "Pedestrian Amenities (Development-related definitions)." 
    "Pocket park" means a small park, usually less than one-half acre typically accessed by foot or wheelchair, or bicycle. See also "Pedestrian Amenities (Development-related definitions)." 
    "Practicable" means capable of being done after taking into consideration reasonable cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes. 
    "Primary structure" means a structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure is determined by comparing the size, placement, similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on a site. 
    "Primary use" means an activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use. See also Chapter 17.12, Land Use Categories. 
    "Project" means an existing or proposed use or development subject to one or more land use approvals. 
    Project, Major. "Major project" means a project that requires site design review (Sections 17.84.040 through 17.84.060), subdivision or partition review (Chapter 17.88), conditional use permit review (Chapter 17.92), or master planned development review (Chapter 17.96). 
    Project, Minor. "Minor project" means a project that requires land use review (Section 17.84.030), but does not require site design review (Sections 17.84.040 through 17.84.060), subdivision or partition review (Chapter 17.88), conditional use permit review, or master planned development review (Chapter 17.96). 
    Property Line: Front, Rear, Interior Side, Street Side. See "Lot line." 
    "Property line adjustment" means the relocation of a single common property line between two abutting properties, in conformance with Chapter 17.88 and ORS 92.010(11). See figure. 
Property Line Adjustment

    Public Access Easement. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Public improvements" means development of public infrastructure, as required by the city, county, special district, or road authority, as applicable. See Chapter 17.72. 
    "Public safety facility" means a facility necessary to respond to an immediate hazard to the public health and safety, and that is owned, leased, or operated by a public agency. Public safety facilities include fire and police stations, flood control facilities, water towers and pump stations needed for emergency service, and emergency communication broadcast facilities. 
    "Quasi-judicial" means an action or decision that requires substantial discretion or judgment in applying the standards or criteria of this code to the facts of a development or land use proposal, and requires a public hearing. See Section 17.80.040 (Type III procedure). 
    Rail Right-of-Way. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Recreation camp" means: 
1.  An area devoted to facilities and equipment for recreation purposes, including swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, and similar uses, either open to the public upon payment of a fee, or limited to private membership; 
2.  An area designated by the landowner for picnicking or overnight camping and offered to the general public, with or without a fee or charge. (See ORS Chapter 446.) 
    Recreational Vehicle. See "Vehicle types." 
    "Recreational vehicle park" means a commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. There is no minimum required stay in a recreational vehicle park, however, the maximum length of stay may be established by the city. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included as recreational vehicle parks. See also "Outdoor storage and display," and "Mobile home park." 
    "Recycling facility" means any property or establishment on which one or more persons are engaged in collecting, sorting, storing and distributing post-consumer goods or materials for reuse in the marketplace. Post-consumer goods do not include scrap or waste materials from manufacturing, industrial processing, or waste treatment facilities. 
    Residence. Same as "Dwelling." See "Residential structure types." 
    Residential structure types: 
1.  "Accessory dwelling unit" means a second dwelling unit created on lot with a single-family house, attached house, or manufactured home. The second unit is created auxiliary to, and is always smaller than the house, attached house, or manufactured home. 
2.  "Attached duplex" means a duplex located on its own lot that shares one or more common or abutting walls with one other duplex (for a total of four dwelling units on two lots). The common or abutting wall must be shared for at least fifty (50) percent of the length of the side of the dwelling. 
3.  "Attached house (townhome or rowhouse)" means a dwelling unit located on its own lot which shares one or more common or abutting walls with one or more dwelling units. The common or abutting wall must be shared for at least fifty (50) percent of the length of the side of the dwelling. An attached house does not share common floor/ceilings with other dwelling units. An attached house is also called a rowhouse or a common-wall house. 
4.  "Cottage" means a small house, generally containing not more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor area that may be used as a primary dwelling or an accessory dwelling, as applicable. 
5.  "Cottage cluster" means a group of two or more cottages on one lot. 
6.  "Duplex" means a building that contains two primary dwelling units on one lot. The units must share a common wall or common floor/ceiling. 
7.  "Dwelling unit" means a building, or a portion of a building, that has independent living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential occupancy by a group of people. Buildings with more than one set of cooking facilities are considered to contain multiple dwelling units or accessory dwelling units, as applicable, unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory to the primary use, such as an outdoor grill or wet bar. 
8.  "Group living structure" means a structure that contains sleeping areas and at least one set of cooking and sanitary facilities that is used as a residence for group living uses: 
a.  "Residential care facility" means a residence for six to fifteen (15) physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The facility may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the state definition of residential facility; or 
b.  "Residential care home" means a residence for five or fewer physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The residence may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the state definition of residential home. 
c.  Manufactured Home. A "manufactured home" is a dwelling constructed off-site in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD code) in effect after June 15, 1976, then assembled or placed on-site in accordance with the requirements of this code. 
10.  "Mobile home" means a dwelling unit constructed off of the site and which is not constructed to building code standards and does not conform to current standards for manufactured homes. 
11.  "Multi-dwelling development" means a grouping of individual structures where each structure contains one or more dwelling units. The land underneath the structures is not divided into separate lots. A multi-dwelling development project may include an existing single-dwelling detached building with one or more new detached structures located to the rear or the side of the existing house. It might also include a duplex in front with either one or more single-dwelling houses behind or one or more duplex units or multi-dwelling structures behind. There is no requirement for the structures on the sites to be attached. 
12.  "Multi-dwelling structure" means a structure that contains three or more dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceilings with one or more units. The land underneath the structure is not divided into separate lots. Multi-dwelling includes structures commonly called garden apartments, apartments, and condominiums. 
13.  "Residential trailer" means a mobile home that was not constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD code) in effect after June 15, 1976. This definition includes the state definitions of residential trailers and mobile houses, as stated in Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) Chapter 446. 14. "Senior housing" means housing designated and/or managed for persons over a specified age. Specific age restrictions vary. May include assisted living facilities, retirement homes, convalescent or nursing homes, and similar uses not otherwise classified as group care. 
15.  "Single-family house" means a detached dwelling unit located on its own lot. 
16.  "Single room occupancy housing (SRO)" means a structure that provides living units that have separate sleeping areas and some combination of shared bath or toilet facilities. The structure may or may not have separate or shared cooking facilities for the residents. SRO includes structures commonly called residential hotels and rooming houses. 
17.  "Temporary medical hardship dwelling" means a dwelling for the care of an aged or infirm person or persons. Financial hardship, child care, upkeep of home or property, or other convenience arrangements are not considered medical hardships. The temporary dwelling may be a manufactured home or an existing building on the property converted for temporary residential use. 
    "Review body" means the person or group who is assigned to make decisions on land use reviews, whether initially or on appeal. Review body includes the planning official, planning commission, and the city council. 
    Right-of-Way. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    Riparian Areas. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    Roadway/Roadway Authority. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    Senior Housing. See "Residential structure types." 
    Sensitive Lands. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    "Setback/setback yard" means the minimum distance required between a specified object, such as a building, and another point, measured from lot lines to a specified object. Typically, a setback refers to the minimum distance (yard dimension) from a building to a specified property line. 
    Shared Driveway. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Shared parking" means required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or lots or parcels, which are satisfied jointly with the same facilities. See Chapter 17.68. 
    Shopping Street. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Sign" means any outdoor device, or device visible from outdoors, providing identification, advertising or directional information for a specific business, group of businesses, service, product, brand, person, organization, place or building. Including in this definition of signs are: graphic devices such as logos, trademarks, and attention-attracting objects such as wind-driven spinners and portable sign devices, logo sculpture and banners, balloons, streamers, strobe lights, flags, inflatable structures, projected picture signs, holographic projection signs, laser-projected designs/images/copy and other attention-attracting media and devices. 
    Single Room Occupancy Housing (SRO). See "Residential structure types." 
    Site. For land divisions, property line adjustments, and lot consolidations, the "site" is the lots, lots of record, parcels, or tracts proposed to be divided or reconfigured. For all other purposes, the site is an ownership except as follows: 
1.  If a proposed development includes multiple ownerships, then the site is the combined area of all contiguous ownerships. 
2.  If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and the balance of the ownership is vacant, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development. 
3.  If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and there is other development on the ownership, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is currently developed plus the portion proposed for development. 
    "Site design review" means a discretionary review that applies to all major developments except those specifically designated for land use review. A development proposal is reviewed in light of the Division II, land use district development standards and the design standards and public improvement requirements in Division III. See Chapter 17.84 for review procedures. 
    "Site frontage" means the part of a site that abuts a street. See also "Block frontage." 
    "Specific area plan" means an adopted plan for a sub-area of the city and/or urban growth area providing a framework and standards for future land uses, densities, blocks, typical lot patterns, public improvements and streets, and site design; may also include architectural design guidelines or standards. 
    Standards and Criteria. Both are code requirements for how to develop uses and structures on land. A standard is a quantitative requirement, or a qualitative requirement that is interpreted through one or more standards. (Example: Criterion: All developments subject to site design review shall comply with the Chapter 17.68, Parking and Loading. Standard: Medical and dental office uses must provide one vehicle parking space for each x square feet of gross floor area.) 
    "Steep slopes" means slopes of eighteen (18) percent or greater, subject to the hazards overlay zone provisions in Chapter 17.40. 
    Storefront Character. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Storm Water Facility. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Storm water management system" means all components of storm water facility (e.g., conveyance, detention/retention, treatment system or outfall). 
    "Story" means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the lower surface of the next floor above, or as otherwise provided by applicable building codes. 
    Stream. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    Street. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    Street Connectivity. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    "Street-facing facade/wall" means all the wall planes of a structure as seen from one side or view that are at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees or less from a street lot line. See figure below. 
Street-Facing Facade

    Street Furniture/Furnishings. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Structure. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Subdivision" means to divide land into four or more lots within a single calendar year. See also Chapter 17.88, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments, and ORS 92.010(13). 
    "Surface water management" means storm drainage facilities or practices conforming to an adopted surface or storm water management plan, or environmental/engineering best practices. 
    Swale. See "Development-related definitions." 
    "Tangent" means meeting a curve or surface in a single point. 
    "Terrace" means a porch or promenade supported by columns, or a flat roof or other platform on a building. 
    Through Lot. See "Lot." 
    Through Street. See "Transportation-related definitions." 
    Top of Bank. See "Environment-related definitions." 
    "Topographical constraint" means where existing slopes, landforms (e.g., streams, canals, rock outcropping, etc.) or existing man-made feature (e.g., embankment or berm) make conformance with a code standard impracticable. 
    "Tract" means a piece of land within a platted subdivision reserved for open space, utility corridor, recreation facilities, sensitive lands, or other purpose; may be dedicated to a homeowner's association or other entity for maintenance. 
    Transportation-related definitions (see also Section 17.72.020 for related standards): 
1.  "Access" means a way or means of approach to provide pedestrian, bicycle, and/or motor vehicular entrances or exits to a property. See transportation-related terms. 
2.  "Access easement" means an easement recorded for the purpose of providing vehicle, bicycle, and/or pedestrian access from a public street to a parcel across intervening property under separate ownership from the parcel being provided access. "Cross access" is a service drive providing vehicular access between two or more separate sites, so that the driver need not enter the public street system between sites. 
3.  "Accessway" means a walkway providing a through connection for pedestrians between two streets, between two lots, or between a development and adjoining public right-of-way. It may be an accessway for pedestrians and bicyclists (with no vehicle access), or a walkway on public or private property (i.e., with a public access easement); may also be designed to accommodate emergency vehicles. See also "Walkway." 
4.  Accessible. Two meanings are possible depending on the specific code provision: in general, "accessible" means approachable by pedestrians, vehicles or other transportation mode, as applicable. Accessible may also mean approachable and useable by people with disabilities, in conformance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. Either or both definitions may apply in a particular situation. See "Accessible route." 
5.  "Accessible route" means a route that can be used by a disabled person using a wheelchair and that is also usable by people with other disabilities. 
6.  "Access management" means the systematic control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings interchanges, and street connections to a roadway to minimize conflicts between turning and through vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians. The purpose of access management is to provide vehicular access to land development in a manner that preserves the safety and efficiency of the transportation system. Public facility measures to support access management include roadway design applications, such as median treatments and auxiliary lanes, and the appropriate spacing of traffic signals. Measures that may be included as conditions of approval for development decisions include, but are not limited to: (a) standards such as minimum spacing of driveways and on-site vehicle storage requirements; (b) mitigations related to site conditions such as right-in-right-out only approaches, medians, dedicated turn lanes, and shared driveways; and (c) provision for future opportunities for mitigation by land dedication or easement. 
7.  "Access spacing/intersection spacing" means the minimum required distance from an intersection of a public or private street to the nearest driveway or other access connection, measured from the closest edge of the pavement of the intersecting street to the closest edge of the pavement of the connection along the traveled way. 
8.  "Alley" means a right-of-way that provides vehicle access to a lot or common parking area. Generally, alleys provide secondary vehicle access; however, where vehicle access from the street is not allowed, not possible, or not desirable, the alley may provide primary vehicle access. 
9.  "Arterial" means the highest order classification of streets; includes highways and other major streets with limited or no direct access from adjoining properties. 
10.  Bicycle Facility. There are different types of bicycle facilities: in general, a "bicycle facility" is a public or private way designed for and dedicated to bicycle use. It may consist of a road, a lane within or on the shoulder of a road, a path, or other way that is specifically designated for bicycle travel or shared bicycle/pedestrian travel. 
11.  "Bus stop" means a location where bus service stops to load and unload passengers. For purposes of measuring, the bus stop is the location of a sign denoting the bus stop. 
12.  Collector, Minor/Major. "Minor/major collector" means type of street that serves traffic within commercial, industrial, and residential neighborhood areas. Connects local neighborhood or district streets to the arterial network. Part of the street grid system. See standards under Chapter 17.72. 
13.  "Common green" means a courtyard that provides for pedestrian access, but not vehicle access, to abutting property and generally provides a common area for use by residents. A common green may function as a community yard (e.g., as in a multiple-family or cottage cluster development). Hard and soft landscape features may be included in a common green, such as ground cover, trees, shrubs, surfaced paths, patios, benches, or gazebos. 
14.  "Curb cut" means a driveway opening delineated by a concrete apron along a street. 
15.  Driveway, Shared. "Shared driveway" means when land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one driveway. An easement or tract (owned in common) must be created and recorded for this purpose. 
16.  "Dead-end street" means a street that connects to another street at only one end, does not have a city-approved turnaround on its other end, and may or may not be extended to serve future development. A pedestrian connection may extend from the end of a dead-end street to connect with another street of any type, or with another pedestrian connection. 
17.  "Level of service (LOS)" means a quantitative standard for transportation facilities describing operational conditions. Level of service may be described for intersections (signalized or unsignalized) or street segments (between signalized intersections). 
18.  "Pathway" means a walkway, bikeway or accessway conforming to city standards and separated from the street right-of-way, that may or may not be within a public right-of-way. 
19.  Public Access Easement. A "public access easement" is an easement granted to the public for all the purposes for which a public sidewalk may be used, including, but not limited to, pedestrian and bicycle travel. 
20.  "Rail right-of-way" means a public or private right-of-way, for the purpose of allowing rail travel. 
21.  "Right-of-way" means an area that allows for the passage of people or vehicles. Right-of-way includes all public streets, highways, alleys and public accessways (e.g., pedestrian connections). A right-of-way may be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency, or it may be privately owned, provided the public is granted access. A right-of-way that is not dedicated or deeded to the public will be in a public access easement and may be separately contained in a tract. 
22.  "Roadway" means the portion of a right-of-way that is improved for motor vehicle and bicycle travel, subject to applicable state motor vehicle licensing requirements. Roadway includes vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. Roadway does not include area devoted to curbs, parking strips, or sidewalks. 
23.  "Road/roadway authority" means the city or other agency (e.g., Oregon Department of Transportation, Coos County, a special purpose district, or other agency) with jurisdiction over a road or street. 
24.  "Sidewalk" means a paved walkway within a public street right-of-way that is generally located adjacent to and separated from the roadway by a curb or curb and planter strip. 
25.  "Sight distance" means the unobstructed viewing distance measured from one object or location to another object or location, usually required the purpose of traffic safety. 
26.  "Street" means a right-of-way that is intended for motor vehicle, pedestrian or bicycle travel or for motor vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian access to abutting property. For the purposes of this code, street does not include alleys, rail rights-of-way that do not also allow for motor vehicle access, or freeways and their on-ramps. 
27.  "Street connectivity" means expressed as the number of street and/or accessway connections within a specific geographic area. Higher levels of connectivity provide for more direct transportation routes and better dispersion of traffic, resulting in less traffic on individual streets and potentially slower speeds through neighborhoods. 
28.  "Street stub" means a temporary street ending where the street will be extended through adjacent property in the future, as those properties develop. Not a permanent street-end or dead-end street. See also "Dead-end street." 
29.  "Street tree" means a tree planted in a planter strip or tree well between the street and sidewalk. 
30.  "Through street" means a street that connects to other streets at both ends. 
31.  "Transportation mode" means the method of transportation (e.g., automobile, bus, walking, bicycling, train, etc.) 
32.  "Turnaround" means a vehicle maneuvering area at the end of a dead-end street (e.g., hammerhead, cul-de-sac, or other configuration) that allows for vehicles to turn around. 
33.  "Walkway" means a sidewalk or path, including any accessway, improved to city standards, or to other roadway authority standards, as applicable. See also "Accessway," "Pathway," "Sidewalk." 
    "Travel trailer" means a vacation structure or self-propelled vehicle equipped with wheels for street or highway use; intended for human occupancy; equipped with plumbing, sink or toilets; used for vacation and recreational purposes; and not used as a residence. See ORS 446.003(5), (24); and see "Recreational vehicle." 
    "Travel trailer/recreational vehicle park/campground" means a lot or parcel on which two or more travel trailers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, tent trailers, tent sites, campers, and/or similar vehicles or devices, with or without a charge or fee. 
    "Tree well" means a planter area cut out of a sidewalk within the street furnishing zone, planted with a street tree and including ground cover or a grate cover; typically used in commercial districts where on-street parking or pedestrian traffic makes the use of a planter strip impracticable. 
    "Use (land use)" means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained. See also Chapter 17.12, Use Categories. 
    Utilities. For the purposes of this code, there are two types of utilities: (1) private: telephone, cable, natural gas, electric, telecommunication, and similar franchise facilities, any portion of which utilizes a public right-of-way; and (2) public: water and wastewater conveyance and treatment facilities. See also Section 17.12.180, Basic utilities, private and public. 
    "Vacate plat/street" means to abandon a subdivision or street right-of-way. For example, vacation of a public right-of-way that is not needed or cannot be used for a street or other public purpose. Vacation of a plat typically returns the property to the adjoining owners and restores it to an undivided condition and ownership. 
    "Vacation home rental" means a commercial use of a single-family or duplex dwelling unit where the unit is rented for periods of time of twenty-eight (28) or fewer consecutive days. 
    "Variance" means an administrative or quasi-judicial decision to lessen or otherwise modify the requirements of this code. See Chapter 17.116. 
    Vehicle Areas. See "Development-related definitions." 
    Vehicle types: 
1.  "Motor vehicle" means vehicles that have their own motor power and that are used for the transportation of people or goods on streets. Motor vehicle includes motorcycles, passenger vehicles, trucks, and recreational vehicles, except all-terrain vehicles, off-road vehicles, snow mobiles, and similar vehicles may be prohibited from using streets. 
2.  "Passenger vehicle" means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten (10) persons or less, including the driver. Passenger vehicles are passenger cars and multi-purpose passenger vehicles as defined by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 575-1.3. See also "Recreational vehicle" and "Truck." 
3.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle with or without motive power that is designed for sport or recreational use, or that is designed for temporary human occupancy on an intermittent basis. A recreational vehicle may be permitted in a city-approved mobile home park or manufactured home park where the vehicle is connected to an electrical utility and city sewer and water systems, in accordance with ORS 197.493. Recreational vehicle is divided into two categories as follows: 
a.  Motor Home. "Motor home" includes motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis. A camper is considered a motor home when it is on the back of a pick-up or truck. Motor homes are regulated as trucks unless the regulations specifically indicate otherwise. See also "Truck." 
b.  Accessory Recreational Vehicle. "Accessory recreational vehicle" includes nonmotorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis such as vacation trailers and fifth-wheel trailers. A camper is considered an accessory recreational vehicle when it is standing alone. Accessory recreational vehicle also includes vehicles designed for off-road use, such as all-terrain vehicles, dune buggies, and recreational boats. Recreational vehicles are not dwellings, and occupancy of a recreational vehicle is not considered a primary or accessory residential use. 
4.  "Truck" means a motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the movement of property or special purpose equipment, or a motor vehicle that is designed to carry more than ten (10) persons. Truck includes vehicles commonly called trucks, pick-ups, delivery vans, buses, motor homes and other similar vehicles. See also National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 575-1.3. 
a.  "Light truck" means trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and single rear wheels. 
b.  "Medium truck" means trucks and similar vehicles, other than truck tractors, with single rear axles and dual rear wheels. Truck tractors are in the heavy truck category. 
c.  "Heavy truck" means trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with two or more rear axles. 
5.  "Utility trailer" means a vehicle designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle which is used to carry property, trash, or special equipment and that is sixteen (16) feet or less in length. Boat trailers are included as utility trailers. Utility trailers that are longer than sixteen (16) feet are considered industrial vehicles and are regulated as heavy trucks. 
    "Vision clearance area" means those areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is necessary for traffic safety and to maintain adequate sight distance. See standards in Section 17.60.020. 
    Waste Collection Areas. "Waste collection areas" include areas set aside or designed to be used for garbage collection and collection of materials for recycling. Waste collection areas include areas occupied by dumpsters and other solid waste receptacles. 
    "Window" means, for the purposes of this code, a transparent or semi-transparent (not more than fifty (50) percent opaque) glazing on a building facade; a window may be a display window (e.g., for merchandise, art, etc.) that is integral to a building design, but a display box mounted onto the exterior of a building is not a window for purposes of this code. 
    "Wireless communication equipment" means cellular towers, antennae, monopoles, and related facilities used for radio signal transmission and receiving. 
    "Yard" means the area defined by setbacks (i.e., between the setback line and nearest property line). 
    "Zero-lot line house" means a single-family detached dwelling with one "0" side yard setback. See also "Attached dwelling types." 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.12 - USE CATEGORIES 
Article 1. - Introduction to the Use Categories 

17.12.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter classifies land uses and activities into use categories on the basis of common functional, product, or physical characteristics, as follows: 
A.  Categorization. Uses are assigned to the category whose description most closely describes the nature of the primary use. The "Characteristics" subsection of each use category describes the characteristics of each use category. Developments may have more than one primary use. Developments may also have one or more accessory uses. 
B.  Interpretation. When a use's category is not clearly identifiable, the planning official, through a Type II procedure, may determine the applicable use category or refer the question to the planning commission for a determination following the Type II procedure under Chapter 17.108, Code Interpretations. The following is considered to determine what use category the use is in, and whether the activities constitute primary uses or accessory uses: 
1.  The description of the activity(ies) in relationship to the characteristics of each use category; 
2.  The relative amount of site or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity; 
3.  Relative amounts of sales from each activity; 
4.  The customer type for each activity; 
5.  The relative number of employees in each activity; 
6.  Hours of operation; 
7.  Building and site arrangement; 
8.  Vehicles used with the activity; 
9.  The relative number of vehicle trips generated by the activity; 
10.  Signs; 
11.  How the use advertises itself; and 
12.  Whether the activity would function independently of the other activities on the site. 
C.  Developments with Multiple Primary Uses. When all the primary uses of a development fall within one use category, then the development is assigned to that use category. For example, a development that contains a retail bakery and a cafe would be classified in the retail sales and service category because all the primary uses are in that category. When the primary uses of a development fall within different use categories, each primary use is classified in the applicable category and is subject to the regulations for that category. 
D.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are allowed by right in conjunction with the use unless stated otherwise in the regulations. Also, unless otherwise stated, they are subject to the same regulations as the primary use. Typical accessory uses are listed as examples with the categories. 
E.  Use of Examples. The "Examples" subsection of each use category provides a list of examples of uses that are included in the use category. The names of uses on the lists are generic. They are based on the common meaning of the terms and not on what a specific use may call itself. For example, a use whose business name is "Wholesale Liquidation" but that sells mostly to consumers, would be included in the retail sales and service category rather than the wholesale sales category. This is because the actual activity on the site matches the description of the retail sales and service category. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Article 2. - Residential Use Categories 

17.12.020 - Group living. 
A.  Characteristics. Group living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of household living. The size or composition of the group is different than that of a household. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are not considered residential. They are considered to be a form of transient lodging (see the retail sales and service and community service categories). Generally, group living structures typically have a common eating area for residents, though individual units may have a kitchen. The residents may or may not receive any combination of care, training, or treatment, as long as they also reside at the site. Group living may include the state definition of residential facility (see Section 17.08.030, Definitions). 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses commonly found are recreational facilities, parking of autos for the occupants and staff, and parking of vehicles for the facility. 
C.  Examples. Examples include dormitories; fraternities and sororities; monasteries and convents; nursing and convalescent homes; assisted living and similar retirement facilities where some level of daily care is provided by on-site staff; some group homes for the physically disabled, mentally retarded, or emotionally disturbed; some residential programs for drug and alcohol treatment; and alternative or post-incarceration facilities. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods less than one month is considered a hotel or motel use (or hospital) and is classified in the retail sales and service or other category. However, in certain situations, lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods less than one month may be classified as a community service use such as publicly assisted, short-term housing. 
2.  Lodging where the residents meet the definition of household, and where tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period is classified as household living. 
3.  Facilities for people who are under judicial detainment and are under the supervision of sworn officers are included in the detention facilities category. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.030 - Household living. 
A.  Characteristics. Household living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Where units are rented, tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are not considered residential. They are considered to be a form of transient lodging (see the retail sales and service and community service categories). Apartment complexes that have accessory services such as food service, dining rooms, and housekeeping are included as household living. Single room occupancy (SRO) housing that do not have totally self-contained dwelling units (i.e., with kitchen and wash room facilities) are also included if at least two-thirds of the units are rented on a monthly basis. SROs may have a common food preparation area, but meals are prepared individually by the residents. In addition, temporary medical hardship dwellings, and residential homes as defined by the state of Oregon, are included in the household living category. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses commonly found are private yards and gardens, private recreational activities, raising of pets, hobbies, home occupations (subject to code requirements), and parking of the occupants' vehicles, but not including residential occupancy of any vehicle. Home occupations, accessory dwelling units, and bed and breakfast facilities are accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations. 
C.  Examples. Uses include living in houses, duplexes, apartments, condominiums, retirement center apartments (not otherwise categorized as group living), manufactured housing, and other structures with self-contained and permitted dwelling units. Examples also include living in single room occupancy hotels if the provisions are met regarding length of stay and separate meal preparation. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  For purposes of this code, a recreational vehicle is not considered a dwelling, except when it is permitted within a city-approved mobile home park or manufactured home park where the vehicle is connected to an electrical utility and city sewer and water systems in accordance with ORS 197.493. 
2.  Lodging in a dwelling unit or single room occupancy hotel (SRO) where less than two-thirds of the units are rented on a monthly basis or longer is considered a hotel or motel use and is classified in the retail sales and service category. SROs which include common dining are classified as group living. 
4.  Guest houses that contain kitchen facilities are not accessory to household living uses; such houses may be allowed as accessory dwellings or as part of a multifamily development, subject to applicable code requirements. 
5.  In certain situations, lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods less than one month may be classified as a community service use, such as publicly assisted, short-term housing or mass shelter in the event of an emergency declared by a government agency. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Article 3. - Commercial Use Categories 

17.12.040 - Commercial outdoor recreation. 
A.  Characteristics. Commercial outdoor recreation uses are large, generally commercial uses that provide continuous or temporary recreation or entertainment-oriented activities. They generally take place outdoors. They may take place in a number of structures which are arranged together in an outdoor setting. (Temporary uses are subject to Chapter 17.112.) 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include concessions, restaurants, parking, caretaker's quarters, and maintenance facilities. 
C.  Examples. Examples include amusement parks, theme parks, golf driving ranges, farmer's market, flea market, arts and crafts fair, miniature golf facilities, and similar commercial venues. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Golf courses, including up to two thousand (2,000) square feet of accessory commercial floor area (e.g., clubhouse, restaurant, equipment sales and rental) are classified as parks and open space. Golf courses with a commercial component exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet commercial floor area are considered retail sales and service. 
2.  Uses that draw large numbers of people to periodic events, rather than on a continuous basis, are classified as major event entertainment. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.050 - Commercial parking. 
A.  Characteristics. Commercial parking facilities provide parking that is not accessory to a specific use. A fee may or may not be charged. A facility that provides both accessory parking for a specific use and regular fee parking for people not connected to the use is also classified as a commercial parking facility. 
B.  Accessory Uses. In a parking structure only, accessory uses may include car washing, and vehicle repair activities. 
C.  Examples. Examples include short- and long-term fee parking facilities, commercial district shared parking lots, commercial shuttle parking, and mixed parking lots (partially for a specific use, partly for rent to others). 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Parking facilities that are accessory to a use, but which charge the public to park for occasional events nearby, are not considered commercial parking facilities. 
2.  Parking facilities that are accessory to a primary use are not considered commercial parking uses, even if the operator leases the facility to the primary use or charges a fee to the individuals who park in the facility. See "Accessory parking facilities" in Section 17.08.030, Definitions. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.060 - Quick vehicle servicing. 
A.  Characteristics. Quick vehicle servicing uses provide direct services for motor vehicles where the driver generally waits in the car before and while the service is performed. The development will include a drive-through facility, the area where the service is performed. (See Section 17.08.030, Definitions.) Vehicle fueling stations are always classified as a primary use (quick vehicle servicing), rather than an accessory use, even when the fueling component comprises less land than other uses of the site. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include auto repair and tire sales, minimart or similar convenience retail uses. 
C.  Examples. Examples include full-serve and mini-serve gas stations, unattended card key stations, car washes, and quick lubrication services where service is typically provided in less than one hour. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Truck stops are classified as industrial service. 
2.  Refueling facilities for the vehicles that belong to a specific use (fleet vehicles), which are on the site where the vehicles are kept, are accessory to the use. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.070 - Major event entertainment. 
A.  Characteristics. Major event entertainment uses are characterized by activities and structures that draw large numbers of people to specific events or shows. Activities are generally of a spectator nature. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include restaurants, bars, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
C.  Examples. Examples include sports arenas, race tracks (auto, horse, dog, etc.), auditoriums, exhibition and meeting areas, concert halls, outdoor amphitheaters, and fairgrounds. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Exhibition and meeting areas with less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of total event area are classified as retail sales and service. 
2.  Banquet halls that are part of hotels or restaurants are accessory to those uses, which are included in the retail sales and service category. 
3.  Theaters, including drive-in theaters, are classified as retail sales and service. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.080 - Educational services, commercial. 
A.  Characteristics. Commercial educational service uses are characterized by activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on serving students with vocational education, or supplemental academic education, enrichment, and/or tutoring. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include incidental retail (e.g., sale of instructional materials), parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of customers and employees. 
C.  Examples. Examples include vocational schools, tutoring centers, computer classes, after school learning centers for grades K-12, and arts and crafts classes. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.090 - Office. 
A.  Characteristics. Office uses are characterized by activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, professional, medical, or financial services. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, health facilities, parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building. 
C.  Examples. Examples include professional services such as lawyers, accountants, engineers, or architects; financial businesses such as lenders, brokerage houses, bank headquarters, or real estate agents; data processing; sales offices; government offices and public utility offices; TV and radio studios; medical and dental clinics, and medical and dental labs. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Offices that are part of and are located with a firm in another category may be considered accessory to the firm's primary activity. Headquarters offices, when in conjunction with or adjacent to a primary use in another category, are considered part of the other category. 
2.  Contractors and others who perform construction or similar services off-site are included in the office category if equipment and materials are not stored on the site and fabrication, services, or similar work is not carried on at the site. 
3.  Governmental offices may be classified as office, community service, or other use based on the use's predominate function. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.100 - Retail sales and service. 
A.  Characteristics. Retail sales and service firms are involved in the sale, lease or rent of new or used products to the general public. They may also provide personal services or entertainment, or provide product repair or services for consumer and business goods. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale, and parking, subject to applicable code requirements. 
C.  Examples. Examples include uses from the four subgroups listed below: 
1.  Sales-oriented: stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods, including art, art supplies, bicycles, clothing, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home improvements, household products, jewelry, pets, pet food, pharmaceuticals, plants, printed material, stationery, and videos; food sales, and sales or leasing of consumer vehicles, including passenger vehicles, motorcycles, light and medium trucks, and other recreational vehicles; 
2.  Personal service-oriented: branch banks; urgency medical care; laundromats; photographic studios; photocopy and blueprint services; hair, tanning, and personal care services; tax preparers, accountants, real estate, legal, financial services; business, martial arts, and other trade schools; dance or music classes; taxidermists; mortuaries; veterinarians; kennels limited to boarding, with no breeding; and animal grooming; 
3.  Entertainment-oriented: restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, taverns, and bars; indoor or outdoor continuous entertainment activities such as bowling alleys, ice rinks, and game arcades; pool halls; indoor firing ranges; theaters, health clubs, gyms, membership clubs, and lodges; hotels, motels, recreational vehicle parks, and other temporary lodging with an average length of stay of less than thirty (30) days; 
4.  Repair-oriented: repair of TVs, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, guns, appliances and office equipment; photo or laundry drop-off; quick printing; recycling drop-off; tailor; locksmith; and upholsterer. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Lumber yards and other building material sales that sell to contractors and not retail customers are classified as wholesale sales. 
2.  The sale of landscape materials, including bark chips and compost not in conjunction with a primary retail use, is classified as industrial service. 
3.  Repair and service of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles, light and medium trucks and small personal transportation devices (e.g., electric carts) and garden tractors, is classified as vehicle repair. Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment, including farm, construction and other heavy equipment, and heavy trucks is classified as industrial service. 
4.  Sales, rental, or leasing of heavy trucks and equipment is classified as wholesale sales. 
5.  Hotels, restaurants, and other services that are part of a truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop which is classified as industrial service. 
6.  In certain situations, hotels and motels may be classified as a community service use, such as publicly assisted, short-term housing or mass shelter in the event of an emergency declared by a government agency. See "Community services." 
7.  When kennels are limited to boarding, the applicant may choose to classify the use as retail sales and service or agriculture. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.110 - Self-service storage. 
A.  Characteristics. Self-service storage uses provide separate storage areas for individual or business uses. The storage areas are designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing personal property. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include security and leasing offices. Living quarters for one resident manager per site are allowed. Other living quarters are subject to the regulations for residential uses. Use of the storage areas for sales, service and repair operations, or manufacturing is not considered accessory to the self-service storage use. The rental of trucks or equipment is also not considered accessory to a self-service storage use. 
C.  Examples. Examples include single-story and multi-story facilities that provide individual storage areas for rent. These uses are also called mini-warehouses. 
D.  Exceptions. A transfer and storage business where any individual storage areas are incidental to transfer and storage operations, or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred, is in the warehouse and freight movement category. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.120 - Vehicle repair. 
A.  Characteristics. Firms servicing passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Generally, the customer does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed (different than quick vehicle services category). 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, sales of parts, and vehicle storage. 
C.  Examples. Examples include vehicle repair, transmission or muffler shop, auto body shop, alignment shop, auto upholstery shop, auto detailing, and tire sales and mounting. 
D.  Exceptions. Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment, and of heavy trucks; towing and vehicle storage; and vehicle wrecking and salvage are classified as industrial service. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Article 4. - Industrial Use Categories 

17.12.130 - Industrial service. 
A.  Characteristics. Industrial service firms are engaged in the repair or servicing of industrial, business or consumer machinery, equipment, products or byproducts. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, parking, storage, rail spur or lead lines, and docks. 
C.  Examples. Examples include welding shops; machine shops; tool repair; electric motor repair; repair of scientific or professional instruments; sales, repair, storage, salvage or wrecking of heavy machinery, metal, and building materials; towing and vehicle storage; auto and truck salvage and wrecking; heavy truck servicing and repair; tire retreading or recapping; truck stops; building, heating, plumbing or electrical contractors; printing, publishing and lithography; exterminators; recycling operations; janitorial and building maintenance services; fuel oil distributors; solid fuel yards; research and development laboratories; dry-docks and the repair or dismantling of ships and barges; laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; and photofinishing laboratories. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Contractors and others who perform industrial services off-site are included in the office category, if equipment and materials are not stored at the site, and fabrication, or similar work is not carried on at the site. 
2.  Hotels, restaurants, and other services that are part of a truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.140 - Manufacturing and production. 
A.  Characteristics. Manufacturing and production firms are involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, man-made, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on-site, but if so, they are a subordinate part of sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site, as distinguished from retail sales and services where customers routinely come to the business. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, rail spur or lead lines, docks, repair facilities, or truck fleets. Living quarters for one caretaker per site are allowed. Other living quarters are subject to the regulations for residential uses. 
C.  Examples. Examples include processing of food and related products; catering establishments; breweries, distilleries, and wineries; slaughter houses, and meat packing; feed lots and animal dipping; weaving or production of textiles or apparel; lumber mills, pulp and paper mills, and other wood products manufacturing; woodworking, including cabinet makers; production of chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products; movie production facilities; ship and barge building; concrete batching and asphalt mixing; production or fabrication of metals or metal products, including enameling and galvanizing; manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, instruments, including musical instruments, vehicles, appliances, precision items, and other electrical items; production of artwork and toys; sign making; production of prefabricated structures, including mobile homes; and the production of energy. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the general public is classified as retail sales and service; where the majority of traffic to the business is for retail sales and the manufacturing use is entirely indoors, the use will be categorized as retail sales and service. 
2.  Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material is classified as waste-related uses. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.150 - Warehouse, freight movement and distribution. 
A.  Characteristics. Warehouse, freight movement and distribution involves the storage, or movement of goods for the subject firm or other firms, including goods that are generally delivered to the final consumer. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer present, except for some will-call pickups. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking and maintenance areas, rail spur or lead lines, docks, repackaging of goods, and will-call pickups. 
C.  Examples. Examples include separate or off-site warehouses used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores; household moving and general freight storage; cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers; storage of weapons and ammunition; major wholesale distribution centers; truck, marine, or air freight terminals; bus barns; parcel services; major post offices; grain terminals; and the stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are classified as waste-related uses. 
2.  Mini-warehouses are classified as self-service storage uses. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.160 - Waste-related-Recycling facilities. 
A.  Characteristics. Waste-related uses are characterized by uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location, uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the biological decomposition of organic material. Waste-related uses also include uses that receive, store, sort, and distribute post-consumer recyclable materials; and those that receive hazardous wastes from others and are subject to the regulations of OAR 340-100-110, Hazardous Waste Management. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, repackaging and transshipment of byproducts, and recycling of materials. 
C.  Examples. Examples include sanitary landfills, limited use landfills, waste composting, energy recovery plants, sewer treatment plants, portable sanitary collection equipment storage and pumping, recycling centers, and hazardous waste collection sites. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Disposal of clean fill, as defined in OAR 340-093-0030, is considered a fill, not a waste-related use. 
2.  Sewer pipes that serve a development are considered a basic utility. 
3.  Excavation is considered development or mining, as applicable. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.170 - Wholesale sales. 
A.  Characteristics. Wholesale sales firms are involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order taking and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited as a result of the way in which the firm operates. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, product repair, warehouses, parking, minor fabrication services, and repackaging of goods. 
C.  Examples. Examples include sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and store fixtures; mail order houses; and wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts, building hardware, and office supplies. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public are classified as retail sales and service. 
2.  Firms that engage in sales on a membership basis are classified as either retail sales and service or wholesale sales, based on a consideration of characteristics of the use and the customer traffic generated. 
3.  Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity are classified as warehouse, freight movement, and distribution. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Article 5. - Institutional and Civic Use Categories 

17.12.180 - Basic utilities, private and public. 
A.  Characteristics. Basic utilities are infrastructure services which need to be located in or near the area where the service is provided. Basic utility uses generally do not have regular employees at the site. Services may be public or privately provided. All public safety facilities are basic utilities. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include parking; control, monitoring, data or transmission equipment. 
C.  Examples. Examples include water and sewer pump stations; sewage disposal and conveyance systems; electrical substations; water towers and reservoirs; water quality and flow control facilities; water conveyance systems; storm water facilities and conveyance systems; telephone exchanges; bus stops or turnarounds, suspended cable transportation systems, and public safety facilities, and emergency communication broadcast facilities when not accessory to a different primary use; except fire and police stations and holding cells within a police standard are community services or offices. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Services where people are generally present, other than bus stops or turnarounds, and public safety facilities, are classified as community services or offices. 
2.  Utility offices where employees or customers are generally present are classified as offices. 
3.  Bus barns and similar facilities are classified as warehouse and freight movement. 
4.  Public or private passageways, including easements, for the express purpose of transmitting or transporting electricity, gas, oil, water, sewage, communication signals, or other similar services on a regional level are classified as rail lines and utility corridors. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.190 - Community services-Government offices. 
A.  Characteristics. Community services are uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of the community, except for schools which are categorized separately. Generally, they provide the service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The service is ongoing, not just for special events. Private lodges, clubs, and nonprofit athletic or health clubs that have membership provisions are open to the general public to join at any time may be considered a community service. Uses providing mass shelter or short-term housing where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than one month when operated by a public or nonprofit agency may also be considered a community service. The use may also provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, nonprofit or charitable nature. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices; meeting areas; food preparation areas; parking, health and therapy areas; day care uses; and athletic facilities. 
C.  Examples. Examples include City Hall, county government and administrative offices, libraries, museums, senior centers, community centers, publicly owned swimming pools, youth club facilities, hospices, ambulance stations, drug and alcohol centers, social service facilities, mass shelters or short-term housing when operated by a public or nonprofit agency, vocational training for the physically or mentally disabled, soup kitchens, and surplus food distribution centers. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Private commercial athletic clubs, golf clubs (e.g., clubhouse or restaurant exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area), and private museums and similar commercial uses are classified as retail sales and services. 
2.  Parks are in parks and open areas. 
3.  Uses where tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period are residential, and are classified as household or group living. 
4.  Public safety facilities are classified as basic utilities. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.200 - Day care. 
A.  Characteristics. Day care use includes day or evening care of two or more children outside of the children's homes, for a fee. Day care uses also include the daytime care of teenagers or adults who need assistance or supervision. See also "Family day care," which is a different use category. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, play areas, and parking. 
C.  Examples. Examples include preschools, nursery schools, latch key programs, and adult day care programs. 
D.  Exceptions. Day care use does not include care given by the parents, guardians, or relatives of the children, or by babysitters. Day care use also does not include care given by a "family day care" provider as defined by ORS 657A if the care is given to sixteen (16) or fewer children at any one time, including the children of the provider. Family day care is care regularly given in the family living quarters of the provider's home, and is regulated as a home occupation. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.210 - Medical centers. 
A.  Characteristics. Medical centers include uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and offering overnight care. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include out-patient clinics, offices, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, parking, maintenance facilities, and housing facilities for staff or trainees. 
C.  Examples. Examples include hospitals and medical complexes that include hospitals. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Uses that provide exclusive care and planned treatment or training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents of the program, are classified in the group living category. 
2.  Medical clinics (medical, dental, vision, and similar clinics) that provide care where patients are generally not kept overnight are classified as office. 
3.  Urgency medical care clinics not otherwise part of a medical center use are classified as retail sales and service. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.220 - Parks and open space areas. 
A.  Characteristics. Parks and open space areas are uses of land focusing on natural areas, public parks, private open areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, community gardens, or public squares. Lands tend to have few structures and structures are accessory to the primary park or outdoor recreation use. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include club houses, maintenance facilities, concessions (as with athletic fields), caretaker's quarters, and parking. 
C.  Examples. Examples include parks, golf courses, cemeteries, public squares, plazas, recreational trails, botanical gardens, boat launching areas, nature preserves, and open space that is not part of an agricultural use. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.230 - Religious institutions and places of worship. 
A.  Characteristics. Religious institutions are intended to primarily provide meeting areas for religious activities. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include Sunday school facilities, parking, caretaker's housing, one transitional housing unit, and group living facilities such as convents. A transitional housing unit is a housing unit for one household where the average length of stay is less than sixty (60) days. Religious schools, when accessory to a religious institution, are different than a school as a primary use. Additional housing may be permitted as a primary use on the same site as a religious institution or place of worship subject to applicable code requirements. 
C.  Examples. Examples include churches, temples, synagogues, and mosques. See also religious schools included in Section 17.12.240, Schools. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.240 - Schools. 
A.  Characteristics. This category includes public and private schools, secular or parochial, at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level that provide state-mandated basic education. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school day care. 
C.  Examples. Examples include public and private daytime schools, boarding schools and military and similar academies. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Preschools are classified as day care uses. 
2.  Business and trade schools are classified as retail sales and service. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.250 - Incarceration facilities. 
A.  Characteristics. This category includes law enforcement incarceration facilities that are not accessory to a police station or law enforcement office. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include visitor areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, and educational facilities. 
C.  Examples. Examples include short- and long-term city, county, state, or federal law enforcement facilities, at any designated level of security. 
D.  Exceptions. (Reserved) 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Article 6. - Other Use Categories 

17.12.260 - Agriculture. 
A.  Characteristics. Agriculture includes activities that raise, produce or keep plants or animals. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include dwellings for proprietors and employees of the use, and animal training and veterinary services. 
C.  Examples. Examples include breeding or raising of fowl or other animals; dairy farms; stables; riding academies; kennels or other animal boarding places; veterinary services; farming, truck gardening, forestry, tree farming; and wholesale plant nurseries. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Processing of animal or plant products, including milk, and feed lots, are classified as manufacturing and production. 
2.  Livestock auctions are classified as wholesale sales. 
3.  Plant nurseries that are oriented to retail sales are classified as retail sales and service. 
4.  When kennels are limited to boarding, with no breeding, the city may determine the use category is agriculture or retail sales and service. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.270 - Mining. 
A.  Characteristics. Mining includes mining or extraction of mineral or aggregate resources from the ground for off-site use. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include storage, sorting, stockpiling, or transfer off-site of the mined material. 
C.  Examples. Examples include quarrying or dredging for sand, gravel or other aggregate materials; mining; and oil, gas, or geothermal drilling. Note: land use approval is required prior to any grading or clearing of vegetation from a site, even if the intended use is not mining. In such case, the land use designation is the same as that for which the clearing or grading is proposed. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.280 - Radio frequency transmission facilities. 
A.  Characteristics. Radio frequency transmission facilities include all devices, equipment, machinery, structures or supporting elements necessary to produce nonionizing electromagnetic radiation within the range of frequencies from one hundred (100) KHz to three hundred (300) GHz and operating as a discrete unit to produce a signal or message. Towers may be self-supporting, guyed, or mounted on poles or buildings. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory use may include transmitter facility buildings. 
C.  Examples. Examples include broadcast towers, communication/cell towers, and point to point microwave towers. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Receive-only antennae are not included in this category. 
2.  Radio and television studios are classified in the office category. 
3.  Radio frequency transmission facilities that are public safety facilities are classified as basic utilities. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.12.290 - Utility corridors. 
A.  Characteristics. The category includes public or private passageways, including easements, for the express purpose of transmitting or transporting electricity, gas, oil, water, sewage, communication signals, natural gas, or other similar services on a regional level. 
B.  Examples. Examples include regional electrical transmission lines; and regional gas and oil pipelines. 
C.  Exceptions. (Reserved) 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.16 - ENFORCEMENT 

17.16.010 - Provisions of this code declared to be minimum requirements. 
A.  Minimum Requirements Intended. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this code shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  Most Restrictive Requirements Apply. When the requirements of this code vary from other provisions of this code or with other applicable standards, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standard shall govern. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.16.020 - Violation of code prohibited. 
    No person shall erect, construct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure or shall use, divide or transfer any land in violation of this code or any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.16.030 - Penalty. 
A.  Class 1 Penalty. A violation of this code shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor/civil infraction, which shall be processed accordingly. 
B.  Each Violation a Separate Infraction. Each violation of a separate provision of this code shall constitute a separate infraction, and each day that a violation of this code is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate infraction. 
C.  Abatement of Violation Required. A finding of a violation of this code shall not relieve the responsible party of the duty to abate the violation. The penalties imposed by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies available to the city. 
D.  Responsible Party. If a provision of this code is violated by a firm or corporation, the officer or officers, or person or persons responsible for the violation shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this section. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.16.040 - Complaints regarding violations. 
A.  Filing Written Complaint. Whenever a violation of this code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a signed, written complaint. 
B.  File Complaint with Planning Official. Such complaints, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the planning official. The planning official shall properly record such complaints, investigate and take action thereon as provided by this code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.16.050 - Inspection and right of entry. 
    The police chief or his or her designee, with due cause, shall have the right to enter and inspect private property for the purpose of abating any suspected violation of the development code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.16.060 - Abatement of violations. 
    Any development or use that occurs contrary to the provisions of this code or contrary to any permit or approval issued or granted under this code is unlawful, and may be abated by appropriate proceedings. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.16.070 - Stop order hearing. 
A.  Stop Order Issued. Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of the code or a condition of any permit or other approval granted pursuant hereto, the planning official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on persons engaged in doing such work or causing such work to be done. All work under the permit or approval shall cease until it is authorized in writing by the city to continue. 
B.  Appeal Opportunity. A person or organization that has been served the stop work order may appeal the decision by submitting a letter to the city recorder requesting a hearing with the city council. The city council shall hold this hearing and make written findings as to the violation within thirty (30) days. 
C.  Stop Order Hearing. The planning official may schedule a city council hearing on the stop order. At the discretion of the planning official, such hearing may be: 
1.  Part of a hearing on revocation of the underlying development approval; or 
2.  Solely to determine whether a violation has occurred. 
    The city council shall hold this hearing and shall make written findings as to the violation within thirty (30) days. Upon finding a violation, the stop order shall continue to be effective until the violating party furnishes sufficient proof to the planning official that the violation has been abated. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Division II. - Land Use Districts 
Chapter 17.20 - ORGANIZATION OF LAND USE DISTRICTS 

17.20.010 - Classification of land use districts. 
    Every parcel, lot, and tract of land within the City of Coquille is designated with a land use (zoning) district. The use of land is limited to the uses allowed by the applicable land use district and/or overlay zone. The applicable land use districts and overlay zone(s) are determined based on the land use district map and the provisions of this chapter, which shall be consistent with the City of Coquille comprehensive plan, as indicated in Table 17.20.010 
Table 17.20.010 
Comprehensive Plan Designation Applicable Land Use District Residential R Commercial-Central Business District C-1 General Commercial; Commercial Retail C-2; CR Commercial Office CO Industrial I Mobile Home/Recreational Vehicle MH/RV Open Space OS Overlay Zones Hazards /HZ Historical-Cultural Resources /HC Estuarine/Coastal Shorelands /EC  
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.20.020 - Land use district map. 
A.  Consistency with Land Use District Map. The boundaries of the land use districts contained within this chapter shall coincide with the land use district boundaries identified on the city's official zoning map, retained by the city recorder. Said map by this reference is made a part of this development code. The official zoning map, and any map amendments, shall be maintained by the city. See Chapter 17.104 for a compilation of recent map and text amendments. 
B.  Applicability of Land Use Standards. Each lot, tract, and parcel of land or portion thereof within the land use district boundaries designated and marked on the zoning map, is classified, zoned and limited to the uses hereinafter specified and defined for the applicable land use district. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.20.030 - Determination of land use district boundaries. 
    Where due to the scale, lack of scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the city zoning map, or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of a district boundary line, the boundary line shall be determined by the planning official in accordance with all of the following criteria: 
A.  Rights-of-Way. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, railroad tracks, alleys, irrigation canals, bridges, or other right-of-way shall be construed to follow such centerlines. Whenever any public right-of-way is lawfully vacated, the lands formerly within the vacated right-of-way shall automatically be subject to the same land use district designation that is applicable to lands abutting the vacated areas. In cases where the right-of-way formerly served as a land use district boundary, the lands within the right-of-way now vacated shall be allocated proportionately among the subject land use districts. 
B.  Parcel, Lot, Tract. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the boundaries of a parcel, lot, or tract shall be construed as following such boundaries. 
C.  Jurisdiction Boundary. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a city or county boundary, or the urban growth boundary, shall be construed as following said boundary. 
D.  Natural Features. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a river, stream, drainage channel, drainage basin, topographic contour or other changeable natural feature not corresponding to any feature listed in subsections A through C of this section, shall be construed as following such feature, except that the location may be corrected administratively through a Type II 
(Code Interpretation) procedure, in accordance with Chapter 17.108. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.24 - RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DISTRICT 

17.24.010 - Residential district-Purpose. 
    The residential district is intended to promote the livability, stability and improvement of the city's neighborhoods, while accommodating a wide variety of needed housing types, including attached and detached housing, multiple-family housing, senior housing, manufactured and site-built housing, group housing, and other special needs housing. The residential district also accommodates parks, schools, places of worship, and other services that are necessary to serve the neighborhoods. The district standards are based on the following principles: 
A.  Promote the orderly development and improvement of Coquille's neighborhoods; 
B.  Make efficient use of land and public services and implement the comprehensive plan; 
C.  Designate land for the range of housing types and densities needed by the community, including owner-occupied, rental housing, and special needs housing; 
D.  Provide flexible lot standards that encourage compatibility between land uses, efficiency in site design, and environmental compatibility; 
E.  Provide for compatible building and site design at an appropriate scale; provide standards that are in character with the landforms and architecture existing in the community; 
F.  Apply the minimum amount of regulation necessary to ensure compatibility with existing residences, schools, parks, transportation facilities, and neighborhood services; 
G.  Reduce reliance on the automobile for neighborhood travel and provide options for walking and bicycling; 
H.  Provide direct and convenient access to schools, parks and neighborhood services; 
I.  Maintain and enhance the city's historic character and traditional neighborhood lot and block development patterns. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.020 - Residential district-Allowed land uses. 
    Table 17.24.020 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the residential district. The specific land use categories are described and uses are defined in Chapters 17.08 and 17.12. 
Table 17.24.020 Land Uses Allowed in Residential District (R) 
Uses Use Categories (Examples of uses are in Chapter 17.12; definitions are in Chapter 17.08) Allowed or Not Allowed Special Use Requirements (See also any applicable overlay zones) Residential Categories Household Living Single-Family (not attached) P Accessory Dwelling S Section 17.24.110(A) Duplex (2 dwellings sharing a common wall on one lot)  -  One duplex on a corner lot P  -  One duplex on an interior lot P  -  More than one duplex (4+ units) attached S Section 17.24.110(B) Single-Family Attached (2 or more common-wall single-family dwellings), each on its own lot S Section 17.24.110(B) Cottage Cluster (3-4 single-family dwellings on one lot, oriented to an alley or common green, and each containing less than 1,000 square feet of floor area) S Section 17.24.110(H) Manufactured Home S Section 17.24.110(F) Manufactured Home Park Section 17.24.110(G)  -  In MH/RV Overlay S  -  Outside MH/RV Overlay CU+S Mixed-Use (e.g., residential and commercial uses in same building) CU+S Commercial component must be a permitted use in Residential District, and is limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area. Multifamily (3 or more dwellings on lot); includes Senior Housing, Assisted Living, and Single Room Occupancy Uses, but not Group Living) S Section 17.24.110(H) Zero Lot Line Housing (not common wall) CU+S Section 17.24.110(J) Group Living Group Care Home S Section 17.24.110(D) Group Care Facility S Section 17.24.110(D) Commercial Categories Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATMs, similar uses/facilities) N Bed and Breakfast Inn CU+S Section 17.24.110(C) Educational Services, Commercial (e.g., tutoring or similar services); not a home occupation CU+S Limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area Entertainment, Major Event N Home Occupation S Per standards of Section 17.24.110(E) and procedures in Section 17.112.020 Office, not a home occupation; fully enclosed in primary and/or accessory building CU+S Limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area Outdoor Recreation, Commercial N Quick Vehicle Servicing or Vehicle Repair N Recreational Vehicle Park N Retail Sales and Service; fully enclosed in primary building and/or accessory building CU+S Limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area Self-Service Storage N Short-Term Vacation Rental, primary dwelling or accessory dwelling; not a recreational vehicle or mobile home CU+S Section 17.24.110(I) Industrial Categories Industrial Service, enclosed in primary building N Manufacturing and Production, fully enclosed in primary and/or accessory building CU+S Limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area Warehouse and Freight Movement N Waste-Related N Wholesale Sales, fully enclosed in primary and/or accessory building CU+S Limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area Institutional Categories Basic Utilities P Community Service, no drive-up uses  -  Clubs and lodges CU  -  Public and quasi-public buildings CU  -  Other Community Services N Day Care, adult or child day care; does not include Family Day Care (16 or fewer children) P Provide City with evidence of compliance with ORS 657A.250 and 657A.440(4) Hospitals and Medical Clinics CU Parks and Open Space P Religious Institutions and Houses of Worship CU Schools CU Other Categories Accessory Structures 
(with a permitted use)  -  No taller than 14 ft. and no larger than 1,000 square feet of building footprint or 50% of primary structure footprint, whichever is less P Structures lawfully established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may continue. See also lot coverage, height, setback, and vision clearance standards.  -  Taller than 14 ft. or larger than 1,000 square feet of building footprint, but less than 50% of primary structure footprint CU Agriculture-Animals  -  Livestock, limited to 1 head of cattle, horse, sheep, or similar size animal per 1/2 acre undeveloped pasture P  -  Small Animals, excluding roosters and swine limited to 5 of each type of animal (e.g., chickens, rabbits, and similar) per 1/2 acre P Agriculture-Nurseries and similar horticulture (indoor or outdoor); when not classified as Retail Sales and Service CU Mining N Radio Frequency Transmission Facilities CU Utility Corridors, except those existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title are permitted CU Temporary Uses P/CU Only those uses herein classified as "P" or "CU" may be allowed as temporary, subject to Section 17.112.010. Transportation Facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city or state standards, as applicable) P  
Key: 
 P = Permitted, subject to site/development review 
 S= Permitted with standards (Section 17.24.110) 
 CU = CU permit required (Chapter 17.92) 
 N = Not permitted 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.030 - Residential district-Development standards. 
    The development standards in Table 17.24.030 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development, and major remodels, in the residential district. 
Table 17.24.030 Development Standards for Residential District 
(Except as modified by Section 17.24.050, Residential infill standards or Section 17.96.040, Master planned development) 
Standard Residential District Residential District with Hazards Overlay (Chapter 17.40) Minimum Lot Area 1 (square feet) Single-Family 5,000 sf 10,000 sf Single-Family Attached (2-4 lots) 4,000 sf Per Master Planned Development Approval Single-Family with Accessory Dwelling Unit 7,500 sf 12,500 sf Duplex 7,500 sf 12,500 sf Multiple-Family or Cottage Cluster 7,500 sf for first 2 dwelling units, plus 1,500 sf for each additional unit 12,500 sf for first 2 dwelling units, plus 1,500 sf for each additional unit Nonresidential Uses 7,500 sf 10,000 sf Master Planned Development Flexible Lot Sizes within allowable density of one unit per 5,000 sf of net site area after subtracting right-of-way Flexible Lot Sizes within allowable density of one unit per 10,000 sf of net site area after subtracting right-of-way and subject to Chapter 17.40 Minimum Lot Width Single-Family 50 ft 50 ft Single-Family with Accessory Dwelling Unit 50 ft 50 ft Duplex 75 ft 75 ft Multiple-Family or Cottage Cluster 75 ft 75 ft For flag lots, a 20-foot minimum width access "pole" is required; the 50-foot lot width is measured at the front setback line Minimum Lot Depth 100 ft 100 ft Building/Structure Height Except as modified by Sections 17.24.040, Setbacks; 17.24.050, Infill standards; clear vision requirements, and 17.64.050, Fences and walls 35 ft primary structure 20 ft accessory structures Same as for Residential District, except may be adjusted through Master Planned Development procedure in Section 17.96.040 Building Height Transition Required per Section 17.24.080 Yes Fences, Retaining/Garden Walls Max. Height-Front Yard 4 ft Same as for Residential District, except may be adjusted through Master Planned Development procedure in Section 17.96.040 Max. Height-Interior Side 6 ft; 8 ft with permit Max. Height-Rear Yard 6 ft; 8 ft with permit Max. Height-Street Side or Reverse Frontage Lot (rear) 4 ft, or 6 ft with 5 ft landscape buffer adjacent to street ROW Lot Coverage Max. Lot Coverage by All Impervious Surfaces (Building Foundation, Pavement, etc.) 50%, 
except 65% for townhomes As required by Geologic Hazards Overlay Chapter 17.40 Coverage Bonus The allowable building coverage may increase from 35% by a ratio of one-half (1/2) square foot for every one (1) square foot of required parking area that is paved using a City-approved porous/permeable paving material (i.e., allowing storm water infiltration) or one-half (1/2) square foot for every one (1) square foot of City-approved water quality treatment area (e.g., vegetative swale or biofiltration) on the development site. Minimum Landscape Area (% site area), except does not apply to Single-Family Dwellings. Landscape area may include plant areas and some nonplant areas as allowed under Section 17.64.030(D). 10% 25% open space requirement for Master Planned Developments, inclusive of common area landscaping Minimum Setbacks (feet), except as modified by: Sections 17.24.050, Infill standards; clear vision requirements; and 17.64.050, Fences and walls Front/Street Setback (includes corner yards adjacent to street) 20 ft, except setback of 14 ft allowed for open structures (e.g., porch, balcony, portico, patio, wall), where structure is less than 50% enclosed on all elevations and floor/surface is not more than 5 ft above finished grade Same as for Residential District, except may be adjusted through Master Planned Development procedure in Section 17.96.040 Note: Other standards may preclude building at a minimum setback. Be sure to avoid utilities and easements. See also special setback for planned street improvements. Side Setback, except alleys and corner lots (total of 2 sides, 3' min.) Internal Side (not adjacent to street) 12 ft total, with no side less than 5 ft Side Adjacent to Street 15 ft, except 20 ft for garage or carport opening Side Opposite Street Side 5 ft Same as for Residential District, except may be adjusted through Master Planned Development procedure in Section 17.96.040 Exceptions 2 Alley 3 ft Common Walls/Zero Lot Line 0 ft attached side/10 ft nonattached side Rear Setback 7 ft from property line; and no less than 14 ft from centerline of alley Same as for Residential District, except may be adjusted through Master Planned Development procedure in Section 17.96.040 Note: Other standards may preclude building at a minimum setback. Avoid utilities and easements. See also special setbacks for planned street improvements. Special Setback for Planned Street Improvements in Residential District The City may require an additional setback measured from the street or alley centerline to any structure, when a structure abuts a public way containing less than the standard width for the subject street or alley classification. Street classification and required right-of-way width for public ways other than City streets shall conform to the standards of the applicable roadway authority.  
1 Lot size may be adjusted by up to twenty (20) percent through lot size averaging following the land division procedures in Section 17.88.040. Minimum lot sizes do not apply to open space tracts where as a condition of land division approval the use is limited to open space or utilities only. 
2 Sight distances shall be maintained per city standards. The city may defer to guidelines from the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHTO). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.040 - Residential district-Setbacks-Exceptions, reverse frontage lots, flag lots. 
A.  Residential Yard Setbacks-Purpose. Residential setback yards provide space for private yards and building separation for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation. The setback yard standards contained in Table 17.24.030 encourage the orientation of buildings with street visibility for public safety and neighborhood security. The standards also promote human-scale design and traffic calming by diminishing the visual presence of garages along the street and encouraging the use of front porches and house entrances oriented to street sidewalks, as is commonplace in Coquille's neighborhoods. 
B.  Setback Yards-Exceptions. 
1.  Where existing lawfully established buildings have yard setbacks that are less than the minimum standards of this code, they are allowed to remain as legal, nonconforming structures. 
2.  The following architectural features may encroach into the setback yards by no more than thirty-six (36) inches, provided that a setback of not less than thirty-six (36) inches is preserved, all applicable building and fire codes are met, and the clear vision standards in Section 17.60.030 are met. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, and similar architectural features may encroach into a setback yard by not more than thirty-six (36) inches. Porches, decks and similar unenclosed structures may extend into front yard setbacks as provided in Table 17.24.030. Walls and fences built on property lines are subject to the height standards in Table 17.24.030 and the provisions of Sections 17.60.020(N), Vision Clearance, and 17.64.050, Fences and walls. 
C.  Setback Yards-Reverse Frontage Lots. On reverse frontage lots (through lots), the front yard setback standard shall apply to both streets. Reverse frontage lots are also subject to the fence height and setback requirements in Section 17.24.030 and the landscape buffer requirements in Section 17.64.030. 
D.  Setback Yards-Flag Lots. The front yard of a flag lot shall be determined based on one of two options: 
1.  Parallel to the street from which access is taken; or 
2.  Parallel to the flag pole from which access is taken. 
    The applicant for a building permit may choose either subsection (D)(1) or (D)(2), except as otherwise prescribed by conditions of a prior land use approval (e.g., partition or subdivision conditions of approval). The city may impose such conditions as provided for infill development under Section 17.24.050, or as provided for land divisions under Section 17.88.040. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.050 - Residential district-Infill standards. 
    The purpose of this section is to ensure compatibility of new development and redevelopment to existing residences and to provide flexibility in code standards. The setback standards in this section supersedes those in Table 17.24.030 when a building or building addition is proposed on a lot in a residential district that was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the planning official shall use the criteria and standards in subsections A and B of this section, in determining applicable setbacks and building heights. 
A.  Compatibility with Yards of Adjacent Residence(s). Except as provided in subsection D of this section, when an existing single-family residence is located within twenty (20) feet of the subject site on the same side of the street, and said residence has a front yard setback that is greater than the minimum setback in Section 17.24.030, a front yard setback similar to that of the nearest single-family residence(s) shall be used. "Similar" means the setback is equal to or within five feet of the setback provided by the nearest single-family residence on the same side of the street (Figure 17.24.050(A)). For example, if the existing single-family residence has a front yard setback of thirty (30) feet, then the new building shall have a front yard setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet and not more than thirty-five (35) feet. If the new building is to be located between two existing residences, then the owner may choose a setback for the new building that is within five feet of the average setback of both adjacent residences. In no case may a front setback be less than five feet, or less than the minimum special street setback along such designated streets. 
Figure 17.24.050(A) Residential Infill Front Yards

B.  Exception to Standard for Redevelopment Potential on Adjacent Lot(s). The planning official may waive the provisions of subsection A of this section upon determining that the subject single-family residential building located closest to and within twenty (20) feet of the subject site is redevelopable. "Redevelopable," for the purposes of this section, means a lot either has an assessed market value that exceeds the assessed market value of all improvements on the lot, based on the most recent data from the Coos County assessor's office. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.060 - Residential district-Housing density. 
    Allowable housing densities are calculated by dividing the total parcel or lot area by the applicable lot size standard after subtracting street rights-of-way. Areas reserved for flag lot access (flag poles) are not counted for the purpose of calculating minimum lot sizes. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.070 - Residential district-Lot coverage and impervious surfaces. 
    The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be as provided in Table 17.24.030. For the purposes of residential district development, lot coverage is calculated as the percentage of a lot or parcel covered by impervious surfaces (e.g., asphalt, concrete, and similar impervious paving). It does not include planted areas, and other areas allowing storm water infiltration, as approved by the city. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.080 - Residential district-Structure height-Measurement, exceptions. 
    Building heights shall conform to the standards in Table 17.24.030, and subsections A and B of this section: 
A.  Building/Structure Height Measurement. Building height for the purposes of this code is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum (grade plane) to the highest point (peak) of a roof. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
B.  Exclusions from Maximum Building Height Standards. Chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flag poles, and similar features not for human occupancy are exempt from the maximum building heights, provided that all applicable fire and building codes are met. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.090 - Residential district-Building orientation. 
A.  Purpose. The following standards are intended to orient building entrances toward streets to promote pedestrian-oriented development where walking is encouraged, and to discourage automobile-oriented development. Placing residences and other buildings close to the street also encourages crime prevention, natural surveillance or security, and safety by having more "eyes-on-the-street." 
B.  Applicability. This section applies to buildings and developments that are subject to site design review (e.g., multifamily, attached single-family/townhomes, commercial buildings). 
C.  1.  Residential District Building Orientation. 
Figure 17.24.090(C)(1) 
Site Plan-Acceptable

Site Plan-Unacceptable

2.  Off-street parking, driveways, and other vehicle areas shall not be placed between buildings and the street(s) to which they are oriented, as per this subsection and Figure 17.24.090(C)(1); except the following vehicle areas are allowed where the approval body finds that they will not adversely affect pedestrian safety and convenience: 
a.  Nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and similar institutional uses may have one driveway located between the street and the primary building entrance, provided that the building's primary entrance is connected to an adjacent street by a pedestrian walkway and the driveway/parking area is crossed by a clearly defined pedestrian walkway, as required by Section 17.60.030. The intent of this exception is provided for one drop-off/loading zone where necessary to serve building occupants with special needs. 
b.  Single-family dwellings may have one paved driveway for the purpose of accessing garages and/or other on-site parking areas conforming to the requirements of this code. 
c.  Attached single-family housing developments (townhomes) with street-facing garages may have one combined driveway access located between the street and the primary building entrance for every two attached dwelling units, provided the driveway meets the following criteria, as generally shown in Figure 17.24.090(C)(2): 
i.  Where two abutting townhomes have street-facing garages, they shall share one driveway access that does not exceed sixteen (16) feet in width where it crosses the sidewalk and where it intersects the street (excluding driveway apron); 
ii.  All primary building entrances shall be connected to the driveway (and sidewalk) via a pedestrian walkway that is not less than three feet wide; 
iii.  The maximum number of consecutively attached townhomes with garages facing the same street is four (two driveways); and 
iv.  All garage openings and carport openings shall be setback at least twenty (20) feet from the street, and shall be recessing at least six feet behind the front building elevation closest to subject street. 
Figure 17.24.090(C)(2) Townhome Building Orientation

d.  Commercial buildings and uses (e.g., neighborhood commercial or mixed-use) shall have all of their off-street parking located behind or to the side of such buildings and uses and screened from abutting properties in accordance with Chapter 17.68, as generally shown in Figure 17.24.090(C)(3). Off-street parking shall not be located between any building and any street. 
Figure 17.24.090(C)(3) Commercial Orientation in a Residential District

3.  Where a site contains multiple buildings and there is insufficient street frontage to which buildings can be oriented, a primary entrance may be oriented to common green, open space, plaza, or courtyard (e.g., cottage cluster). When oriented in this way, the primary entrance(s) and green, plaza, or courtyard shall be connected to the street by a pedestrian walkway meeting the standards in Section 17.60.030. See example in Figure 17.24.090(C)(1), "Site Plan-Acceptable." 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.100 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.24.110 - Residential district-Special use standards. 
    This section provides standards for the specific land uses and building types identified in Table 17.24.020. The standards are intended to control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the residential district. The standards in Section 17.24.040 supplement (are in addition to and do not replace) the standards in Section 17.24.030. This section applies to the following uses and building types, as specified in subsections A through K of this section: accessory dwelling; attached single-family (townhouses or rowhouses) and attached duplexes; bed and breakfast inns; group living (residential care homes and residential care facilities); home occupations; manufactured homes; manufactured/mobile home parks; multiple-family housing; short-term vacation rentals; zero-lot line housing (not common wall); temporary medical hardship dwellings. 
A.  Accessory Dwelling (Attached, Separate Cottage, or Above Detached Garage). Accessory dwellings shall conform to all of the following standards: 
1.  Floor Area. Accessory dwellings shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area, or forty (40) percent of the primary unit, whichever is smaller. The unit can be a detached cottage, a unit attached to a garage, or in a portion of an existing house. 
2.  Exempt from Density. Accessory dwellings are exempt from the housing density standards of the residential district, due to their small size and low occupancy levels. 
3.  Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The structure shall comply with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. 
4.  Owner-Occupied. The primary residence or accessory dwelling shall be owner-occupied. Alternatively, the owner may appoint a resident caretaker of the principal house and manager of the accessory dwelling. The owner may be required to provide evidence of owner-occupancy upon request by the city. 
5.  One Unit. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot. 
6.  Building Height. The building height of detached accessory dwellings (i.e., separate cottages) shall not exceed the height of the primary dwelling. 
7.  Buffering. The approval body may require a landscape hedge or fence be installed on the property line separating a detached accessory dwelling from an abutting single-family dwelling, unless the applicant and the owner of the abutting single-family dwelling agree in writing not to install the hedge or fence, and such evidence is presented to the city. 
B.  Attached Single-Family (Townhouses and Rowhouses) and Duplexes. Single-family attached housing with three or more dwellings (lots), and attached duplex housing (two or more consecutively attached duplexes containing four or more dwellings), shall comply with the standards in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section, which are intended to control development scale; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic, parking, and design compatibility; and ensure management and maintenance of common areas. 
1.  Alley Access Required for Subdivisions Principally Containing Townhomes or Duplexes. Subdivisions, or phases of subdivisions, proposed to contain three or more consecutively attached single-family dwellings on any block, and developments with two or more attached duplexes (four plus dwelling units), shall provide vehicle access to all such lots and units from an alley or interior parking court, as described in Section 17.60.020. Alley(s) and parking court(s) shall be created at the time of subdivision approval, and may be contained in private tracts or, if approved by the city, in public right-of-way, in accordance with Section 17.72.020, Transportation standards, and Chapter 17.88, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments. 
2.  Common Areas. Any common areas (e.g., landscaping, private tracts, common driveways, private alleys, building exteriors, and/or similar common areas) shall be owned and maintained by a homeowner's association or other legal entity as approved by the city. A copy of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the city prior to building permit approval. 
C.  Bed and Breakfast Inns. Where bed and breakfast inns are allowed in the residential district, they shall comply with all of the following standards. (See also vacation rentals, which are different than bed and breakfast inns, under subsection I of this section.) 
1.  Accessory Use. The use must be accessory to a household already occupying the structure as a residence. 
2.  Maximum Size. Not more than four bedrooms for guests, and a maximum of eight guests are permitted per night. A bed and breakfast use may occupy the primary dwelling and/or not more than one lawfully established guest cottage or accessory dwelling unit. 
3.  Length of Stay. Maximum length of stay is twenty-eight (28) days per guest; anything longer is classified as a hotel or commercial lodging. 
4.  Employees. Up to two nonresident employees. There is no limit on residential employees. 
5.  Food Service. May be provided only to overnight guests of the business, except where a restaurant use is also permitted (e.g., conditional use in the residential district). 
6.  Owner-Occupied. The primary dwelling shall be owner-occupied. 
7.  Signs. Signs shall not exceed a total of four square feet of surface area on each side. 
8.  Business License. Where a business license is required, the bed and breakfast inn owner shall maintain a current business license. 
D.  Group Living (Residential Care Homes and Residential Care Facilities). Residential care homes are residential treatment or training homes or adult foster homes licensed by the state of Oregon. They may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with treatment and/or training, for five or fewer individuals ("homes") or six to fifteen (15) individuals ("facilities") who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet state licensing requirements are not counted in the number of facility residents and need not be related to each other or the residents. Residential care homes and facilities shall comply with the following standards, consistent with ORS 197.660 through 197.670: 
1.  Licensing. All residential care homes and facilities shall be duly licensed by the state of Oregon. 
2.  Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.68. 
3.  Site Development Review. Site development review shall be required for new structures to be used as residential care homes or facilities, to ensure compliance with the licensing, parking, landscaping, and other requirements of this code. 
E.  Home Occupations. The purpose of this section is to encourage those who are engaged in small commercial ventures that could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters, or which by the nature of the venture, are appropriate in scale and impact to be operated within a residence. Home occupations are encouraged for their contribution in reducing the number of vehicle trips often generated by conventional businesses. Two types of home occupations are contemplated by this code: (1) Home occupations meeting the standards in subsections (E)(1) through (E)(8) of this section are allowed by right, provided all uses and structures on the subject property are in conformance with the applicable zoning; and (2) Home occupations exceeding any of the threshold standards in subsections (E)(1) through (E)(8) of this section may receive approval through the Type III home occupation permit procedure under Section 17.112.020. 
    Type I standards for home occupations: 
1.  Appearance of Residence. 
a.  The home occupation shall be restricted to lawfully built enclosed structures and be conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance of a business. 
b.  The home occupation shall not result in any structural alterations or additions to a structure that will change its primary use or building code occupancy classification. 
c.  The home occupation shall not violate any conditions of development approval (i.e., prior development permit approval). 
d.  No products and/or equipment produced or used by the home occupation may be displayed to be visible from outside any structure. 
2.  Storage. 
a.  Outside storage, visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties, that exceeds what is customary for a single-family residence in the vicinity, is prohibited. 
b.  On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, noxious, combustible or flammable) beyond those normally incidental to residential use is prohibited. 
c.  Storage of inventory or products and all other equipment, fixtures, and activities associated with the home occupation shall be allowed in any structure. 
3.  Employees. 
a.  Other than family members residing within the dwelling located on the home occupation site, there shall be no other/not more than one full-time equivalent employee at the home occupation site at any given time. As used in this chapter, the term "home occupation site" means the legal lot on which the home occupation is conducted. 
b.  Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the home occupation, so long as they do not report to work or pick up/deliver at the home occupation site. 
c.  The home occupation site shall not be used as a headquarters for the assembly of employees for instruction or other purposes, including dispatch of employees to other locations. 
4.  Advertising and Signs. Signs shall comply with all applicable sign regulations. In no case shall a sign in the residential district exceed four square feet of surface area on each sign face, not to exceed a total surface area of eight square feet. 
5.  Vehicles, Parking and Traffic. 
a.  One commercially licensed vehicle associated with the home occupation is allowed at the home occupation site. It shall be of a size that would not overhang into the public right-of-way when parked in the driveway or other location on the home occupation site. 
b.  There shall be no more than three commercial vehicle deliveries to or from the home occupation site daily. There shall be no commercial vehicle deliveries during the hours of nine p.m. to seven a.m. 
c.  There shall be no more than one client's or customer's vehicle at any one time and no more than eight per day at the home occupation site. 
6.  Business Hours. There shall be no restriction on business hours, except that clients or customers are permitted at the home occupation from seven a.m. to nine p.m. only, subject to subsections (E)(1) and (E)(5) of this section. 
7.  Prohibited Home Occupation Uses. 
a.  Any activity that produces radio, TV, or other electronic interference; noise, glare, vibration, smoke, or odor beyond allowable levels as determined by local, state or federal standards, or that can be detected beyond the property line; is prohibited. 
b.  Any activity involving on-site retail sales, including garage sales exceeding the thresholds of a temporary use, is prohibited, except that the sale of items that are incidental to a permitted home occupation is allowed. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music from music teachers, art or craft supplies from arts or crafts instructors, computer software from computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by home business is allowed subject to subsections (E)(1) through (E)(6) of this section. 
c.  The following uses and uses with similar objectionable impacts because of motor vehicle traffic, noise, glare, odor, dust, smoke or vibration, are prohibited: 
i.  Ambulance service; 
ii.  Animal hospital, veterinary services, kennels or animal boarding; 
iii.  Auto and other vehicle repair, including auto painting; and 
iv.  Repair, reconditioning or storage of motorized vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, airplanes or large equipment on-site. 
8.  Business License. Where a business license is required, the owner of the home occupation shall maintain the required business license. 
9.  Enforcement. The planning official or designee may visit and inspect the site of a home occupation in accordance with this chapter periodically to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations, during normal business hours, and with reasonable notice, in accordance with Chapter 17.16. 
F.  Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots. Manufactured homes are permitted on individual lots, subject to all of the following design standards. Exceptions: the standards in subsections (F)(1) through (F)(8) of this section do not apply to units that lawfully existed within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; except that when a unit is removed and/or relocated to another lot or parcel, then its replacement shall conform to this subsection; new or replacement units in a manufactured home park need not conform to subsections (F)(1) through (F)(8) of this section, but shall conform to Section 17.24.110(G). 
1.  Floor Plan. The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and have an enclosed floor area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
2.  Roof. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope not less than three feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width (fourteen (14) degrees). 
3.  Residential Building Materials. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are similar or superior to the exterior siding and roof material used on nearby residences (e.g., horizontal wood, vinyl, or similar wood-appearance siding is considered "superior" to metal siding and roofing). 
4.  Garages and Carports. If a single-family dwelling on any abutting lot with frontage on the same street as the proposed manufactured dwelling contains a garage, the manufactured home shall have a garage. If the abutting single-family dwelling lot contains a carport, the proposed manufactured home shall have a garage or carport. Manufactured home garages and carports shall be constructed of materials like those used on the proposed dwelling. 
5.  Thermal Envelope. The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the thermal envelope requirements equivalent to those for a single-family dwelling constructed under the state building code. Evidence from a qualified expert demonstrating that the manufactured home meets Northwest Energy Efficiency Manufactured Housing (NEEM) standards, or equivalent standards, is deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope certification requirement; manufacturer certification may be required. 
6.  Placement. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than sixteen (16) inches above grade, and complies with the minimum set-up standards of the state Administrative Rules for Manufactured Dwellings, OAR Chapter 918. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than sixteen (16) inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home. 
7.  Foundation Skirt. The foundation area of the manufactured home shall be fully skirted with concrete block or similar materials that resemble a concrete foundation. 
8.  Prohibited. The manufactured home shall not be located in a designated historic district. 
G.  Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks. Manufactured/mobile home parks are permitted in the residential district on parcels of one acre or larger, subject to compliance with subsections (G)(1) through (G)(5) of this section: 
1.  Permitted Uses. Single-family residences, manufactured home park manager's office, home occupations, and accessory structures that are necessary for the operation and maintenance of the manufactured dwelling park (e.g., landscape maintenance). A recreational vehicle may be permitted in a city-approved mobile home park or manufactured home park where the vehicle is connected to an electrical utility and city sewer and water systems, in accordance with ORS 197.493. 
2.  Space. The minimum size pad or space for each dwelling is two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, provided that the overall density of the park does not exceed twelve (12) units per acre. Each space shall be at least thirty (30) feet wide and forty (40) feet long, in accordance with ORS 446.100(c). 
3.  Setbacks and Building Separation. The minimum setback between park structures and abutting properties is five feet. The minimum setback between park structures and public street right-of-way is fifteen (15) feet. At least a ten (10) foot separation shall be provided between all dwellings. Dwellings shall be placed a minimum of fourteen (14) feet apart where flammable or combustible fuel is stored between units. Park structures shall be placed no closer than five feet to a park street or sidewalk/pathway. An accessory structure shall not be located closer than six feet to any other structure or dwelling, except that a double carport or garage may be built which serves two dwellings. When a double carport/garage is built, the carport/garage shall be separated from all adjacent structures by at least three feet. 
4.  Perimeter Landscaping. When manufactured dwellings are oriented with their back or side yards facing a public right-of-way, the city may require installation of fencing and planting of a ten (10) foot wide landscape buffer between the right-of-way and a manufactured home park for the privacy and security of residents or aesthetics of the streetscape. 
5.  Dwelling Design (for parks smaller than three acres). Manufactured dwellings in parks smaller than three acres shall additionally meet the design standards in subsections (G)(5)(a) through (b) of this section, consistent with ORS 197.314(6): 
a.  The manufactured dwelling shall have a pitched roof with a slope not less than three feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width (fourteen (14) degrees); and 
b.  The manufactured dwelling shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are similar or superior to the exterior siding and roof material used on nearby residences (e.g., horizontal wood or wood-appearance siding is considered "superior" to metal siding and roofing); 
c.  Exception: subsections (G)(5)(a) and (b) of this section, do not apply to lawfully established manufactured dwellings existing within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. The standards do apply to new or replacement dwellings, including those relocated from one park to another. 
H.  Multiple-Family Housing. Where multiple-family housing is allowed, it shall conform to all of the following standards, which are intended to promote livability for residents and compatibility with nearby uses. Figure 17.24.110(H) provides a conceptual illustration of the requirements listed below. 
1.  Building Mass. The maximum width or length of a multiple-family building shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet from end-wall to end-wall, not including outdoor living areas (e.g., porches, balconies, patios, and similar unenclosed spaces). 
2.  Common Open Space. A minimum of ten (10) percent of the site area shall be designated and permanently reserved as common open space in all multiple-family developments with more than twenty (20) dwellings, in accordance with all of the following criteria: 
a.  The site area is defined as the lot or parcel on which the development to be located, after subtracting any required dedication of street right-of-way and other land for public purposes (e.g., public park or school grounds, etc.). 
b.  In meeting the common open space standard, the multiple-family development shall contain one or more of the following: outdoor recreation area, protection of sensitive lands (e.g., trees preserved), play fields, outdoor playgrounds, outdoor sports courts, swimming pools, walking fitness courses, pedestrian amenities, or similar open space amenities for residents. 
c.  Historic buildings or landmarks that are open to the public may count toward meeting the common open space requirements when approved by planning commission or city council. 
d.  To receive credit under this subsection, a common open space area shall have an average width that is not less than twenty (20) feet and an average length that is not less than twenty (20) feet. 
e.  Where the development contains pedestrian amenities located between primary building entrance(s) and adjoining streets, such area may count toward fulfilling; however, parking area landscaping shall not count as required open space. 
f.  The approval body may waive the common open space requirement for the first twenty (20) dwelling units in a multiple-family project that is located within one-quarter mile (measured walking distance) of a public park, where there is a direct, accessible (i.e., Americans with Disabilities Act compliant), lighted walkway connecting the site to the park. If the park is not developed, or only partially developed, the approval body allow the multiple-family housing developer to improve park land in an amount comparable to that which he or she would otherwise be required to provide in his or her development in waiving the on-site common open space requirement. 
3.  Private Open Space. Private open space areas shall be required for ground floor and upper floor housing units based on all of the following criteria: 
a.  A minimum of forty (40) percent of all ground floor housing units shall have front or rear patios or decks measuring at least forty-eight (48) square feet. Ground floor housing means the housing unit entrance (front or rear) is within five feet of the finished ground elevation (i.e., after grading and landscaping); 
b.  A minimum of forty (40) percent of all upper floor housing units shall have balconies or porches measuring at least forty-eight (48) square feet. Upper floor housing means housing units that are more than five feet above the finished grade; and 
c.  Areas used to fulfill the common open space requirements of this section shall not be used to fulfill the private open space requirement. 
Figure 17.24.110(H) Examples of Multiple-Family Open Space

4.  Trash Receptacles. Trash receptacles shall be oriented away from building entrances, setback at least ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way and adjacent residences and shall be screened with an evergreen hedge or solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height. Receptacles must be accessible to trash pick-up trucks. 
I.  Short-Term Vacation Rentals. Where short-term vacation rentals are allowed, they shall conform to all of the following criteria: 
1.  Vacation rentals allowed under this subsection are those with twenty-eight (28) or fewer days continuous occupancy by the same tenant. 
2.  Where a business license is required to operate one or more short-term vacation rentals, the license application shall identify all short-term rental properties under the same ownership or management, and shall provide the city with information regarding the name, address and telephone number of a contact person who can be on the vacation home rental site within four hours to respond to problems. 
3.  A conditional use permit is required. 
4.  The vacation rental unit shall provide two off-street parking spaces (not in addition to those otherwise required for a single-family dwelling). 
5.  All required parking shall be provided on the same lot as the vacation home rental unit. 
6.  All vacation home rentals shall have a maximum occupancy of one person per two hundred (200) square feet or not more than sixteen (16) people, whichever is more restrictive. 
7.  All other requirements of the code as applicable to single-family dwellings shall apply. 
J.  Zero-Lot Line Housing. Zero-lot line houses are subject to the same standards as other nonattached single-family housing, except that a side yard setback is not required on one side of the lot, as generally shown in Figure 17.27.110(J). The standards for zero-lot line housing are intended to ensure adequate outdoor living area, compatibility between adjacent buildings, and access to side yards for building maintenance. All zero-lot line houses shall conform to all of the criteria in subsections (J)(1) through (J)(4) of this section. 
1.  Site Design Review Required. Site design review is required for new zero-lot line developments. When a zero-lot line development is proposed as part of a land division, master planned development, or other application, the site design review may be combined with the other application(s). 
2.  Setbacks for Primary and Accessory Structures. The allowance of a zero side yard setback is for one single-family dwelling on each lot; it does not extend to accessory structures which shall conform to the applicable setback requirements of the zone. 
3.  Setbacks Adjacent to Nonzero-Lot Line Development. When a zero-lot line house shares a side property line with a nonzero-lot line development, the zero-lot line building shall be setback from that common property line by not less than ten (10) feet. 
4.  Building Orientation and Design. The building placement and/or design shall encourage privacy for the occupants of abutting lots. For example, this standard can be met by staggering foundation plans, by placing windows (along the zero-lot line) above sight lines with direct views into adjacent yards, by using frosted/nonsee-through windows, by avoiding placement of windows on the zero-lot line, or other designs approved by the approval body through site design review. 
5.  Construction and Maintenance Easement. Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall submit a copy of a recorded easement for every zero-lot line house that guarantees access onto adjoining lot for the purpose of construction and maintenance of the zero-lot line house. The easement shall require that no fence or other structure shall be placed in a manner that would prevent maintenance of the zero-lot line house. The easement shall not preclude the adjoining owner from landscaping the easement area. 
Figure 17.24.110(J) Zero-Lot Line Housing

K.  Temporary Medical Hardship Dwellings. A temporary medical hardship dwelling must meet the following requirements: 
1.  The temporary hardship dwelling must either be occupied by someone who will care for the resident of the subject property, or it may be occupied by a relative of the resident when the relative has the medical hardship and the resident of the property will be the caregiver. (Relative is defined as a parent, child, grandparent, grandchild, brother, or sister of the existing resident.) 
2.  The temporary hardship dwelling must use the same subsurface sewage disposal system as the existing dwelling, provided that the system is adequate to accommodate the additional dwelling. If on an existing septic system, the system will need to be inspected and approved by a county sanitarian. Once the hardship has ended, the system must be abandoned in accordance with DEQ requirements. 
3.  The application must include a written statement from the patient's primary care medical doctor (MD) or osteopath (DO). The statements must be on the doctor's stationery or stamped by their office. The statement must indicate that, for health or age-related reasons, the patient is unable to maintain a residence on a separate property and is dependent upon someone being close by for assistance. 
4.  The permit authorizing the temporary hardship dwelling must be renewed every two years. In order to renew the temporary hardship permit, a letter from a doctor stating that the hardship still exists must be submitted to the department, along with the renewal fee. If the hardship dwelling is connected to the same septic system as the existing dwelling, the septic system may also need to be reinspected. 
5.  Within three months of the end of the hardship, the manufactured dwelling, recreational vehicle, or travel trailer must be removed from the property or demolished. In the case of an existing building which has been converted for temporary residential use, the building must be removed, demolished or returned to an allowed use. 
6.  The temporary dwelling must comply with applicable fire safety standards. 
7.  A temporary medical hardship dwelling permit is obtained through a Type I land use review, in accordance with Chapter 17.80. The application must include the following information: 
a.  The aforementioned letter from a medical doctor or osteopath confirming that the person with the hardship is unable to maintain their own separate residence because of a health or age-related condition or infirmity; and 
b.  A site plan, drawn to scale on eight and one-half inch by eleven (11) inch paper, showing property lines, existing streets and driveways, existing and proposed buildings, including distances to property lines, location of any existing wells and/or septic systems, location of any physical features on the parcel such as streams, irrigation ditches, steep slopes, etc., must be submitted with the application. 
8.  The planning official will review the application to determine whether it conforms to the approval criteria listed above. If approved, a manufactured dwelling installation permit must be obtained from Coos County. If the hardship dwelling is to be a recreational vehicle or travel trailer, applicable sewage disposal requirements shall be met. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.28 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

17.28.010 - Commercial districts-Purpose. 
    This chapter provides three commercial districts to accommodate the range of commercial land uses in the community. The downtown district is focused on the core commercial and civic (i.e., the central business) area of the community. The general commercial and commercial retail district regulations apply to those commercial areas outside or adjacent to the central business area. The mixed-use commercial district applies to those commercial areas along Central Boulevard north of downtown that contain a mixture of commercial and residential uses. All three districts are intended to: 
A.  Promote efficient use of land and urban services; 
B.  Create a mixture of land uses that encourages employment and housing options in close proximity to one another; housing is allowed above permitted commercial uses, and in limited areas west of the downtown with a mixed-use commercial designation; 
C.  Provide formal and informal community gathering places and opportunities for socialization (i.e., along an active street front); 
D.  Encourage pedestrian-oriented development in all commercial areas; 
E.  Create a distinct storefront character in the downtown district; 
F.  Provide connections to and appropriate transitions between residential areas and commercial areas; 
G.  Discourage automobile-oriented and automobile-dependent uses in the downtown district, and accommodate those uses with appropriate design standards in the general commercial and commercial retail districts; 
H.  Provide for visitor accommodations and tourist amenities; 
I.  Reduce reliance on the automobile and minimize the need for off-street parking; and 
J.  Maintain and enhance the downtown's pedestrian orientation and human scale. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.020 - Commercial districts-Allowed land uses. 
    Table 17.28.020 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the commercial districts. The specific land use categories are described and uses are defined in Chapters 17.08 and 17.12. 
Table 17.28.020 Land Uses Allowed in Commercial Districts (C-1, C-2, CO, C-3) 
Uses Status of Use in District Use Categories 
(Examples of uses are in Chapter 17.12; definitions are in Chapter 17.08) Downtown 
(C-1) General 
Commercial and 
Commercial 
Retail (C-2; CR) Commercial 
Office 
(CO) Mixed-Use 
Commercial 
(C-3) Related 
Special Use 
Standards Residential Categories Household Living Residential Uses (Household Living and Group Living) allowed, if:  - Lawfully existing in its current location as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title (may be rebuilt in the event of involuntary damage or destruction due to fire or other event beyond owner's control); or P P P P Residential uses, including attached housing, multifamily, group living, and accessory dwellings, must conform to the use and design standards contained in Sections 17.24.090 and 17.24.110, as applicable.  - New dwelling built in conjunction with a permitted commercial use, exclusive of the main floor P P P P  - New dwellings not in conjunction with a permitted commercial use N N N P Commercial Categories Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive- 
Through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATMs, similar uses/facilities) CU+S CU+S CU+S CU+S Section 17.28.100(B) Transient Lodging, including hotel, motel, bed and breakfast inn, and similar uses; excluding recreational vehicle park CU P P CU Educational Services, Commercial CU P P P Entertainment, Major Event CU CU CU N Offices P P P P For developments >40,000 square feet, see Section 17.28.060(D) Outdoor Recreation, Commercial CU CU CU CU Parking Lot (when not an accessory use and not a recreational vehicle park) CU CU CU CU Quick Vehicle Servicing or Vehicle Repair (see also Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive- 
Through Uses) CU  - Fully enclosed in a building CU P P CU Section 17.28.100(B) applies to uses with drive-up/ 
drive-in/ 
drive-through facilities  - Not fully enclosed in a building N CU CU N Retail Sales and Service, enclosed  - Less than 20,000 square feet floor area P P CU P Section 17.28.100(B) applies to uses with drive-up/ 
drive-in/ 
drive-through facilities. For developments >40,000 sf, see Section 17.28.060(D).  - 20,000 square feet or more floor area P P CU CU  - Accessory outdoor sales and service (e.g., nursery, outdoor dining, and similar uses when accessory to primary use) P P CU P Recreational Vehicle Park (3 or more RVs) N CU CU CU Self-Service Storage N CU N CU Section 17.32.050 applies Industrial Categories Industrial Service (see also Drive-Up Uses)  - Fully enclosed (e.g., similar to office) P P N CU Industrial compatibility criteria in Section 17.32.050 apply to industrial service, manufacturing and production, warehouse and freight movement, and wholesale sales. 
  
For developments >40,000 square feet, see Section 17.28.060(D).  - Not enclosed (e.g., with some outdoor storage or activity) N CU+S N N Manufacturing and Production  - Fully enclosed P P N CU  - Not enclosed N CU N N Warehouse and Freight Movement N CU N N Waste-Related N N N N Wholesale Sales  - Fully enclosed, less than 20,000 square feet of floor area CU P N P  - Fully enclosed, equal to or greater than 20,000 square feet of floor area N CU N CU  - Not enclosed N CU N N Institutional Categories Basic Utilities P P P P Community Service P P P P Day Care, adult or child day care; not Family Day Care under ORS 657A.250 CU CU CU CU Parks and Open Space  - Pedestrian amenities (e.g., plaza or outdoor seating, subject to Site Design Review) P P P P  - Parks and recreation facilities CU CU CU CU  - Other open space CU P P P Religious Institutions and Houses of Worship  - Lawfully existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title P P P P  - New CU CU CU CU Schools  - Lawfully existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title P P P P  - New CU CU CU CU Other Categories Accessory Structures (with a permitted use) P P P P Buildings and Structures exceeding 50 ft height in C-1 or exceeding 35 ft height in C-2 or C-3 (see Table 17.28.030) CU CU CU CU Height bonus allowed for mixed-use buildings only Radio Frequency Transmission Facilities CU CU CU CU Utility Corridors CU CU CU CU Temporary Uses P/CU P/CU P/CU P/CU Only those uses designated as "P" or "CU," may be allowed per Section 17.112.010. Transportation Facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with applicable standards of the roadway authority) P P P P  
Key:  
P = Permitted, subject to site/development review 
S = Permitted with standards (Section 17.28.100) 
CU = CU permit required (Chapter 17.92) 
N = Not permitted 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.030 - Commercial districts-Development standards. 
    The development standards in Table 17.28.030 apply to all new structures, buildings, and development, and major remodels, in the commercial districts. 
Table 17.28.030 Development Standards for Commercial Districts 
Standard C-1 CO C-3 Minimum Lot Area 1 
(square feet) No Standard No Standard 5,000 sf., first dwelling + 2,500 sf., 2nd dwelling + 1,500 sf., each additional dwelling unit Minimum Lot Dimensions None None None Building/Structure Height 2 Maximum Building Height 50 ft 35 ft 35 ft Maximum Building Height with Conditional Use Permit: allowed for mixed-use projects (residential above commercial) where structured parking is provided (see Section 17.28.070(B) 75 ft Not applicable 50 ft Fences and Screening Walls Allowed for screening and security only, height subject to Site Design Review Allowed for screening and security only; height subject to Site Design Review Allowed for screening and security only; height subject to Site Design Review Lot Coverage Max. Lot Coverage by All Impervious Surfaces (Building Foundation, Pavement, etc.) 100%, subject to minimum civic space requirement 90%, subject to minimum landscaping and parking 80%, subject to minimum open space for multifamily; and landscaping and parking regulations Minimum Landscape 
Area/Civic Space Requirement 
(% site area) See Section 17.64.030(D) 5% 10% 10% Minimum Setbacks (feet) Front, Street, Side, and Rear property lines, except as otherwise required by Building Code 0 ft 0 ft 0 ft Garage/Carport Opening, setback from street (no backing onto street) 10 ft 20 ft 20 ft Alley Setback 3 ft 3 ft 3 ft Build-To Line (feet) New Buildings Only: at least one primary building entrance shall be built no farther from the street right-of-way than the build-to line; except where a greater setback is required for a Planned Street Improvement, then the build-to line increases proportionately. The build-to line may also be increased through Site Design Review when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and the street right-of-way (see also Section 17.28.090). 0 ft; may be increased when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and street 60 ft; may be increased for sites with multiple buildings when a shopping street connects the primary building entrances of each building to the street sidewalk, per Section 17.28.060(D) 60 ft; may be increased for sites with multiple buildings when a shopping street connects the primary building entrances of each building to the street sidewalk, per Section 17.28.060(D) Special Setback for Planned 
Street Improvements The City may require an additional setback measured from the street or alley centerline to any structure, when a structure abuts a street or alley containing less than the standard right-of-way for the subject street classification. Street classification and required right-of-way width shall conform to the standards of the applicable roadway authority.  
1  Development must conform to lot width, depth, yard setback, landscaping, and coverage standards. 
2  See also Sections 17.60.020(N), Vision Clearance; and 17.64.050, Fences and Walls. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.040 - Commercial districts-Setbacks and build-to line. 
A.  Zero Setbacks and Build-To Line-Purpose, Fire Code and Clear Vision. Zero setbacks and build-to lines, as provided in Table 17.28.030, are intended to encourage pedestrian-oriented development, while providing more flexibility in site design than what is possible with large setbacks. With buildings placed close to the street, a development can afford good access for emergency service providers in the case of a fire or other emergency. Where no minimum setback is required, all structures and buildings shall conform to the vision clearance standards in Chapter 17.60 and the applicable fire and building codes (e.g., for attached structures, fire walls, and related requirements). 
B.  Setback Yards-Reverse Frontage Lots. Buildings on reverse frontage lots (through lots) shall be required to meet the build-to line standard on only one street. Reverse frontage lots are subject to the landscape buffer requirements in Section 17.64.020. 
C.  Setback Yards-Flag Lots. The front yard of a flag lot (e.g., as required to accommodate a rear commercial pad within a shopping center or office complex) shall be determined based on one of two options: 
1.  Parallel to the street from which access is taken; or 
2.  Parallel to the flag pole from which access is taken. 
    The applicant for a building permit may choose either subsection (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, except as otherwise prescribed by conditions of a prior land use approval (e.g., partition or subdivision conditions of approval). 
D.  Setback Yards-Exceptions. Where existing lawfully established buildings have yard setbacks that are less than the minimum standards of this code, they are allowed to remain as legal, nonconforming structures. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.050 - Commercial districts-Lot coverage and impervious surface. 
    The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be as provided in Table 17.28.030. Lot coverage is calculated as the percentage of a lot or parcel covered by buildings and impervious surfaces (e.g., asphalt, concrete, and similar impervious paving). It does not include planted areas, and other areas allowing storm water infiltration, as approved by the city. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.060 - Commercial districts-Building orientation and commercial block layout. 
A.  Purpose. This section orients buildings close to streets to promote pedestrian-oriented development where walking is encouraged, and to discourage automobile-oriented development. Placing residences and other buildings close to the street also encourages crime prevention, natural surveillance or security, and safety by having more "eyes-on-the-street." 
B.  Applicability. This section applies to projects that are subject to site design review or land division review, including master planned developments. 
C.  Building Orientation Standards. Developments subject to this section shall have their buildings oriented to a street, as generally shown in Figure 17.28.060(C)(1). This standard is met when all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  Compliance with the setback and build-to line standards in Section 17.28.030, where applicable. The build-to line may be setback to provide pedestrian amenities between a building and its adjoining street. 
2.  Except as provided in subsections (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section, all buildings shall have at least one primary building entrance (i.e., dwelling entrance, a tenant entrance, lobby entrance, or breezeway/courtyard entrance) facing an adjoining street (i.e., within forty-five (45) degrees of the street property line), or if the building entrance is turned more than forty-five (45) degrees from the street (i.e., front door is on a side elevation), the primary entrance shall not be more than twenty (20) feet from a street sidewalk in the C-1 district, or forty (40) feet from a street/shopping street sidewalk in the C-2 or C-3 districts, except where pedestrian amenities are provided, in which case a walkway shall connect the primary entrance to the sidewalk. 
Figure 17.28.060(C)(1) Building Orientation

3.  In the C-1 district, off-street parking, trash pick-up, and aboveground utilities (e.g., utility vaults) shall not be placed between building entrances and the street(s) to which they are oriented, but shall be oriented internally to the block and accessed by alleys to the extent practicable. Off-street parking in the C-1 district shall be oriented internally to the site to the extent practicable, and shall be divided by landscape areas into bays of not more than twenty-four (24) parking spaces per bay, as generally shown in Figures 17.28.060(C)(1) and 17.28.060(C)(2); incidental breaks in the building wall to accommodate pedestrian and vehicle access into the block is permitted. Exceptions to alley access provision are allowed where no system of alleys exist and where extension of alleys is precluded by existing development. 
Figure 17.28.060(C)(2) Building Orientation with Internal Parking

4.  In the GC district, the building orientation standard may be met with vehicle areas allowed between the street right-of-way and a building's primary entrance when the approval body finds that the following criteria are met: 
a.  Placing vehicle areas between the street right-of-way and building's primary entrance will not adversely affect pedestrian safety and convenience, based on the distance from the street sidewalk to the building entrance, projected vehicle traffic volumes, and available pedestrian walkways; 
b.  The proposed vehicle areas are limited to one driveway of not more than twenty-four (24) feet in width with not more than one row of parking spaces on both sides of the drive aisle (including ADA accessible spaces), divided by landscape areas into bays of not more than eight parking spaces each. The intent is to create a drive aisle that is street-like, and break up parking into small bays with landscaping; and 
c.  The building's primary entrance is connected to an adjoining street by a pedestrian walkway that meets the standards for pedestrian walkways under Section 17.60.030. 
5.  Where a development contains multiple buildings and there is insufficient street frontage to which buildings can be oriented, a primary entrance may be oriented to plaza, courtyard, or similar pedestrian space containing pedestrian amenities, subject to site design review. When oriented in this way, the primary entrance(s), plaza, or courtyard shall be connected to the street by a pedestrian walkway meeting the standards in Section 17.60.030. 
D.  Block Layout Standard. Commercial developments (office, or retail/wholesale/service) containing more than one building, with the sum total of buildings equal to or greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area, shall meet all of the following standards: 
1.  The site shall be configured into blocks that have frontage onto streets, interior parking courts (as generally shown in Figure 17.28.060(C)(2) above), or "shopping streets" (as generally shown in Figure 17.28.060(C)(3) below). All shopping streets shall contain on-street parking (parallel or angled parking), sidewalks, street trees, and pedestrian lighting; and all buildings shall orient their primary entrances to a street, plaza or courtyard. Additionally, buildings placed at a street/block corner shall have a primary entrance within forty (40) feet of the street/block corner. 
2.  Where a subdivision or multi-building development is proposed, blocks shall be broken down into lengths of not more than four hundred (400) feet, and shall have a perimeter not exceeding one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet. 
3.  Walkways shall connect the street right-of-way to building entrances and the interior parking bays between buildings, as necessary to ensure reasonably safe, direct, and convenient access to building entrances and off-street parking. 
Figure 17.28.060(C)(3) Shopping Street Example

(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.070 - Commercial districts-Building and structure height-Mixed-use bonus. 
A.  Height Standards. Building and structure heights shall conform to the standards in Table 17.28.030. 
B.  Height Bonus for Housing. Additional building height may be permitted in the C-1 and C-3 districts, as provided in Table 17.28.030, when housing is provided aboveground floor commercial use(s), subject to approval of a conditional use permit. Off-street parking requirements shall be determined based on an analysis of parking demand prepared by the applicant and subject to review and approval by the city approval body. Where a second egress is required for fire safety, residences may have their entrances/egress oriented to any yard; such entrances need not be oriented to the street. 
Figure 17.28.070(B) Building Height Bonus for Housing

(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.080 - Commercial districts-Building design standards. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. This section is intended to provide detailed, pedestrian-oriented design that is characteristic of the City of Coquille while affording flexibility to use a variety of architectural building styles. All new buildings and major remodels shall meet the standards of subsections B through D of this section, which are applied through site design review. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with all criteria under each standard. 
B.  Pedestrian-Orientation. The design of all buildings on a site shall support a safe and attractive pedestrian environment. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(7) of this section are met. Alternatively, the approval body may modify one or more of the criteria and approve an alternate design upon finding that the design contains an equally good or superior way of achieving the above purpose and intent. 
1.  The building orientation standards under Section 17.28.060 shall be met. 
2.  Primary building entrances shall open directly to the outside and, if not abutting a street, shall have walkways connecting them to the street sidewalk; every building shall have at least one primary entrance that does not require passage through a parking lot or garage to gain access. 
3.  Corner buildings (i.e., buildings within twenty (20) feet of a corner as defined by the intersecting curbs) shall have corner entrances, or shall provide at least one entrance within twenty (20) feet of the street corner or corner plaza in the C-1 district, and within forty (40) feet of the street corner or corner plaza in the C-2 and C-3 districts. 
4.  In the C-1 district, at least sixty (60) percent of the building's street-facing elevation (measured horizontally in linear feet) shall be located at the build-to line or closer to the street. In the C-2 and C-3 districts, at least forty (40) percent of the building's street-facing elevation shall be located at the build-to line or closer to the street. Build-to lines are prescribed by Section 17.28.030. 
5.  In the C-1 district, ground floor windows or window displays shall be provided along at least forty (40) percent of the building's ground floor street-facing elevation(s). In the C-2 and C-3 districts, ground floor windows or window displays shall be provided along at least thirty (30) percent of the building's ground floor street-facing elevation. Windows and display boxes used to meet this standard shall be integral to the building design and not mounted to an exterior wall. 
6.  In the C-1 district, all building entrance(s) and at least sixty (60) percent of the building's ground floor street-facing elevation(s) shall incorporate weather protection, such as awnings, canopies, overhangs, or similar features, extending at least five feet over adjacent sidewalks. In the C-2 and C-3 districts, this requirement applies to building entrances and thirty (30) percent of the ground floor street-facing elevation(s). 
7.  Drive-up and drive-through facilities, when allowed, shall conform to Section 17.28.100; the provisions of which shall not be modified without a variance (Chapter 17.116). 
C.  Compatibility. All new buildings and major remodels shall be designed consistent with the architectural context in which they are located. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(6) of this section are met. Alternatively, the approval body may modify one or more of the criteria and approve an alternate design upon finding that the design contains an equally good or superior way of achieving the above purpose and intent. 
1.  There is continuity in building sizes between new and existing buildings, particularly where existing building are designated historic resources. 
2.  The ground floor and upper floor elevations and architectural detailing, including windows, are compatible with one another and with adjacent historic resources, if any. 
3.  Roof elevation is similar to commercial buildings in the vicinity (roof pitch, shape, projections). 
4.  There is continuity of building sizes on the site, if more than one building is proposed. 
5.  There is continuity in the rhythm of windows and doors on the proposed building(s). 
6.  The relationship of buildings to public spaces, such as streets, plazas, other areas, and public parking, including on-street parking, is strengthened by the proposed building(s). 
D.  Human Scale. The design of all buildings shall be to a human scale. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (D)(1) through (D)(8) of this section are met. Alternatively, the approval body may modify one or more of the criteria and approve an alternate design upon finding that the design contains an equally good or superior way of achieving the above purpose and intent. Figure 17.28.080(D) provides contrasting examples of building elevations that are consistent/inconsistent with human scale criteria. 
1.  Regularly spaced and similarly shaped windows are provided on all building stories. 
2.  Ground floor retail spaces have tall ceilings (i.e., twelve (12) through sixteen (16) feet) with display windows on the ground floor. 
3.  Display windows are trimmed, recessed, or otherwise defined by wainscoting, sills, water tables, or similar architectural features. 
4.  On multi-story buildings, ground floors are defined and separated from upper stories by appropriate architectural features (e.g., cornices, trim, awnings, canopies, arbors, trellises, overhangs, or other features) that visually identifies the transition from ground floor to upper story; such features should be compatible with the surrounding architecture. 
5.  The tops of flat roofs are treated with appropriate detailing (i.e., cornice, pediment, flashing, trim, or other detailing) that is compatible with the surrounding architecture. 
6.  Pitched roofs have eaves, brackets, gables with decorative vents, or other detailing that is consistent with the surrounding architecture. 
7.  For remodels of historic resources, the design maintains the historic integrity of the building exterior as evidenced by proposed materials, colors and detailing. 
8.  Where buildings with greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of enclosed ground floor space are proposed, they shall provide articulated facades on all street-facing elevations. This criterion is met when an elevation contains at least three of the following features for every forty (40) feet of building (horizontal length): transparent windows; primary entrances; weather protection (awnings or canopies extending at least five feet over adjacent walks); building offsets, projections, or changes in elevation or horizontal direction of at least three feet; sheltering roofs or terraces; a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials; screening trees; and/or small scale lighting (e.g., wall-mounted lighting, or up-lighting). Note: Figure 17.28.080(D) is intended to show how a variety of elements used to meet the articulation standard; it is not be interpreted as a required architectural style. 
Figure 17.28.080(D) Examples of Large Commercial Design Elements 
Large Commercial Massing-Acceptable

Large Commercial Massing-Unacceptable

(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.090 - Commercial districts-Pedestrian amenities. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. Pedestrian amenities such as plazas, benches, and other sidewalk furnishings serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting, and enjoyment along street frontages and contribute to a walkable commercial district. The standards in this section apply to new development and major remodels where site design review is required. 
B.  Standards. New developments and major remodels in the C-1 district shall provide at least one pedestrian amenity, as described below and as generally illustrated in Figure 17.28.090(B). Other developments where pedestrian amenities are to be provided shall also conform to the criteria below. Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a street furnishing zone, building frontage zone, or plaza, or within the pedestrian through zone, as shown in Figure 17.28.090(B), and shall be physically accessible to the public. Use of the public right-of-way requires approval by the road authority. Design standards for pedestrian amenities follow: 
1.  A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the building entrance (minimum sidewalk extension of four feet); 
2.  Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches, garden wall or ledges between the building entrance and sidewalk) with a minimum of sixteen (16) inches in height and thirty (30) inches in width; 
3.  Building canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection (minimum projection of five feet over a sidewalk, plaza or other pedestrian space); 
4.  Public art that incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, memorial or sculpture with seating). 
Figure 17.28.090(B) Examples of Pedestrian Amenities

(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.28.100 - Commercial districts-Special use standards. 
A.  This section supplements the standards contained in Sections 17.28.020 through 17.28.090. It provides standards for the following land uses to control the scale and compatibility of those uses: 
1.  Drive-up and drive-through uses and facilities; 
2.  (Reserved) 
B.  Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through Uses and Facilities. When drive-up or drive-through uses and facilities are allowed, they shall conform to all of the following standards, which are intended to calm traffic, and protect pedestrian comfort and safety. 
1.  The drive-up/drive-through facility shall orient to an alley, driveway, or interior parking area, and not a street. See Figure 17.28.100(B)(1). 
Figure 17.28.100(B)(1)

2.  None of the drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities (e.g., driveway queuing areas, windows, teller machines, service windows, kiosks, drop-boxes, or similar facilities) are located within twenty (20) feet of a street and shall not be oriented to a street corner. (Walk-up only teller machines and kiosks may be oriented to a street or placed adjacent to a corner.) 
3.  Drive-up/in queuing areas shall be designed so that vehicles do not obstruct a driveway, fire access lane, walkway, or public right-of-way. 
4.  In the C-1 district, no more than one drive-up, drive-in, or drive-through facility is allowed for a distance of four hundred (400) linear feet along the same block face (same side of street). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.32 - INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICTS 

17.32.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter accommodates a range of industrial land uses in one industrial (I) district. The district is intended to provide for land use compatibility while providing a high quality environment for businesses and employees. The I district is also intended to provide suitable locations for heavy industrial uses (e.g., raw materials processing; and manufacturing, assembly, packaging or distribution of heavy or large goods) that would not otherwise be compatible in other districts. This chapter guides the orderly development of industrial areas based on the following objectives: 
A.  Provide for efficient use of land and public services; 
B.  Provide appropriately zoned land with a range of parcel sizes for industry; 
C.  Provide transportation options for employees and customers; 
D.  Locate business services close to major employment centers; 
E.  Ensure compatibility between industrial uses and nearby commercial and residential areas; 
F.  Provide appropriate design standards to accommodate a range of industrial users; and 
G.  Provide attractive locations for business to locate. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.32.020 - Land uses allowed in the industrial district. 
    Table 17.32.020 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the industrial district. The specific land use categories are described and uses are defined in Chapters 17.08 and 17.12. 
Table 17.32.020 Land Uses Allowed in Industrial District 
Uses Status of Use in District Use Categories 
(Examples of uses are in Chapter 17.12; definitions are in Chapter 17.08) Industrial (I) Related Special Use Standards Residential Categories Household Living Residential Uses (Household Living and Group Living) allowed, if:  - Lawfully existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title P  - New dwelling N  - Manufactured dwelling park N Commercial Categories Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATMs, similar uses/facilities) S When in conjunction with Retail Sales and Services, must comply with Section 17.28.100(B) Bed and Breakfast Inn N Educational Services, commercial CU Entertainment, Major Event N Offices CU Outdoor Recreation, Commercial N Drive-up uses in conjunction with Retail Sales and Service are subject to Section 17.28.100(B) Parking Lot (when not an accessory use) CU Quick Vehicle Servicing or Vehicle Repair CU Recreational Vehicle Park N Retail Sales and Service  - Less than 10,000 square feet floor area CU  - Greater than 10,000 square feet floor area, per Section 17.32.050 N Self-Service Storage CU Industrial Categories Industrial Service  - Fully enclosed (e.g., office) P  - Not enclosed CU Manufacturing and Production  - Fully enclosed P  - Not enclosed CU Warehouse and Freight Movement CU Waste-Related CU Wholesale Sales  - Fully enclosed S  - Not enclosed S Institutional Categories Basic Utilities P Community Service CU Day Care, adult or child day care; does not include Family Day Care (12 or fewer children) under ORS 657A.250 N Parks and Open Space CU Religious Institutions and Houses of Worship N Schools N Other Categories Accessory Structures (with a permitted use) P Agriculture-Animals, when  - Existing use as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title P  - Accessory to a permitted industrial use P/CU  - New use N Agriculture-Nurseries and similar horticulture (see also Wholesale and Retail Uses) CU Buildings and Structures Exceeding the Height Limits in Table 17.32.060 CU Mining N Radio Frequency Transmission Facilities  - Within height limit of district P  - Exceeds height limit (freestanding or building-mounted facilities) CU Rail Lines and Utility Corridors, except those existing prior to effective date of Development Code are permitted CU Temporary Uses (only uses allowed as "P" and "CU"), per Section 17.112.010 P/CU Transportation Facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the standards of the applicable roadway authority) P  
Key: 
P = Permitted, subject to site/development review 
S = Permitted with standards (See cross-reference) 
CU = CU permit required (Chapter 17.92) 
N = Not permitted 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.32.030 - Industrial district-Setback yards-Industrial buffers. 
A.  Purpose. Setback yards and buffers provide separation between industrial and nonindustrial uses for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering, and visual separation. 
B.  Applicability. The setback yard and buffer standards in subsections C through F of this section are minimum standards that apply to buildings, accessory structures, parking areas, mechanical equipment, and other development, but not buffers as required under subsection F of this section. In granting a conditional use permit, the approval body may increase the standard yards and/or buffers consistent with the criteria in Chapter 17.92. The approval body may also decrease the standard yards and/or buffers through the CUP process, provided that all applicable building and fire safety codes (subsection G of this section) are met. 
C.  Front and Street Yard Setbacks. Minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
D.  Rear Yard Setbacks. 
1.  Minimum of twenty (20) feet where adjacent to a commercial or industrial district, except where common wall buildings with zero setback are permitted; 
2.  Abutting a residential district: minimum of forty (40) feet, including a minimum landscaped yard of fifteen (15) feet, or as required by conditional use permit. 
E.  Side Yard Setbacks. There are no required side yard setbacks, except a minimum of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum landscaped yard of ten (10) feet, is required when an industrial district abuts a residential district. 
F.  Landscaping, Buffering and Other Yard Requirements. 
1.  Buffering. A minimum of ten (10) percent of the site shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter 17.64. The approval body may require additional landscaping, fences, walls or other buffering that exceed the landscaping standards in Chapter 17.64 upon finding that more or different buffering is necessary mitigate adverse noise, light, glare, and/or aesthetic impacts to adjacent properties. 
2.  Pedestrian Access. The approval body may require the construction of pedestrian accessways through required buffers to ensure pedestrian connections are made between primary building entrances (e.g., for retail, service, institutional, or office uses) within large developments, between multiple development phases, or connecting to other streets or sidewalks. The design of accessways shall conform to Section 17.60.030. 
G.  Setback Yards-Exceptions. Where existing lawfully established buildings have yard setbacks that are less than the minimum standards of this code, they are allowed to remain as legal, nonconforming structures. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.32.040 - Industrial district-Lot coverage. 
    Maximum lot coverage, including all impervious surfaces, ninety (90) percent. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.32.050 - Industrial district-Site layout and design. 
A.  Development Compatibility. Industrial uses and developments shall be oriented on the site to minimize adverse impacts (e.g., noise, glare, smoke, dust, exhaust, vibration, etc.) and to provide compatibility with adjacent uses to the extent practicable. The following standards shall apply to all development in the industrial district: 
1.  Mechanical equipment, lights, emissions, shipping/receiving areas, and other components of an industrial use that are outside enclosed buildings, shall be located away from residential areas, schools, parks and other nonindustrial areas to the maximum extent practicable; and 
2.  The city may require a landscape buffer, or other visual or sound barrier (fence, wall, landscaping, or combination thereof), to mitigate adverse impacts that cannot be avoided, as provided in Section 17.32.030. 
B.  Pedestrian Accessibility. Where development consists of more than one building, and contains a total floor area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more of retail, service, office, and/or institutional use(s), the development shall meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The commercial block layout standards in Section 17.28.060(D) must be met; and 
2.  The commercial building setback and design standards in Sections 17.28.030 and 17.28.080 must be met. For the purpose of meeting the build-to line standards in Section 17.28.080(B)(4), the build-to line is parallel to all abutting street property lines at a distance of twenty (20) feet from the street property line. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.32.060 - Industrial district-Building and structure height. 
    The maximum allowable height of buildings and structures is thirty-five (35) feet, except that taller buildings and structures are allowed when approved as part of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.36 - MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 

17.36.010 - Purpose. 
    Provides regulations for mobile homes and recreational vehicles in mobile home parks and/or recreational vehicle parks. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.36.020 - Applicability. 
    Applies to properties zoned MH/RV and applies to other properties where mobile homes and/or recreational vehicles are to be placed. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.36.030 - Uses permitted outright. 
A.  Parks and open space; 
B.  Mobile home park; 
C.  Mobile home subdivision; 
D.  Recreational vehicle park; 
E.  Mobile homes meeting Oregon State mobile home standards; 
F.  Recreational vehicles; 
G.  Accessory uses related to the convenience needs of the people residing in the mobile home/recreational vehicle park or subdivision such as: playgrounds, RV and boat storage areas, small laundry facilities and grocery stores (not to exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area) to accommodate the park. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.36.040 - Conditional uses. 
    Public school facilities. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.36.050 - Property development standards. 
A.  Mobile home parks shall conform to the standards in Section 17.24.110(G); lot coverage of mobile homes shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the subject lot(s). 
B.  Manufactured home subdivisions shall conform to the residential district development standards in Chapter 17.24, except that the maximum allowable lot coverage is fifty (50) percent and a minimum of forty (40) percent open space shall be required in new subdivisions. 
C.  The siting of recreational vehicle parks shall meet Oregon State standards for recreational vehicle parks (Oregon Administrative Rules, Chapter 33, General Sanitation Division 31, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Recreational Vehicle Parks), subject to enforcement by Oregon State Department of Human Resources, Health Division. 
D.  A minimum of forty (40) percent open space shall be provided in new mobile home subdivisions and recreational vehicle parks. 
E.  All dwellings other than temporary dwellings (i.e., to be occupied less than twenty-nine (29) consecutive days) in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park shall be connected to an electric utility and have approved city sewer and water connections. 
F.  Mobile homes and accessory structures shall not exceed one and one-half stories in height. Accessory roof or structures to house or cover the mobile home are not allowed. 
G.  Where both mobile homes and recreational vehicles are allowed for residential purposes, separate areas shall be designated for mobile homes and recreational vehicles. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.36.060 - Additional requirements. 
A.  Compliance with applicable provisions of the development code and county and state permit requirements is required prior to installing or placing mobile home or recreational vehicle on any site in the city, including relocation of a mobile home or recreational vehicle from one site to another site in the city. 
B.  Trailers either without toilet facilities or with toilet facilities that are not connected to sanitary sewer line shall not be permitted in the MH/RV district. 
C.  No accessory building shall be constructed as a permanent part of a trailer, nor shall any other structures or devices be attached to a trailer other than a cloth awning or similar temporary device. 
D.  All entry ways to mobile homes shall be served by a permanent-type porch. 
E.  Cabanas, armadas, and other similar permanent structures erected in conjunction with a trailer or mobile home space shall be deemed to be part of the trailer or mobile home use for purposes of lot coverage and setbacks even though it shall not be permitted to be attached thereto. 
F.  The space between mobile home units shall be no less than ten (10) feet; where mobile homes are located near any permitted building other than another mobile home, regardless of the side or end relationship, the minimum space between the trailer and said building shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
G.  Fences and Walls. No wall over six feet in height shall be located on any lot in a MH/RV district, and the same shall conform to the building codes of the City of Coquille and all ordinances relating to the same. 
H.  Vision Clearance. Vision clearance areas shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the city and/or other roadway authority as applicable. 
I.  There is a six-month limitation on residential use of mobile home or recreational vehicle placed outside an approved mobile home park or recreational vehicle park in the city. Up to twelve (12) months residential occupancy may be allowed where a mobile home or recreational vehicle is placed on a property undergoing development, subject to review and approval by the planning official and compliance with other requirements of the development code. 
J.  Concrete block foundations with skirting is required for all mobile home units where such units are permitted to be used as permanent dwellings. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.40 - GEOLOGICAL HAZARD (GH) OVERLAY 

17.40.010 - Scope of regulations. 
    In any zone which is a GH geological hazard overlay, the requirements and standards of this chapter shall apply in addition to those herein specified for such zone previously; provided, that if a conflict in regulations or standards occurs, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.020 - Application of provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land, including any portion of a lot or parcel, containing an average slope of eighteen (18) percent or greater, and all other areas known to contain special geological hazards within the jurisdiction of the city, as determined by the City of Coquille. The areas of special geological hazard identified by the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries are incorporated by reference and declared to be a part of this code, and the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all geological hazard areas identified by DOGMI, the City of Coquille, or by a qualified professional as may be required through the city's land use review procedures. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.030 - Uses permitted outright in GH overlay. 
    In a zone with which the GH overlay applies, the following uses are the only uses permitted outright, and these uses are permitted only if such uses are permitted in the zone regulations for the primary zone: 
A.  Use allowed by the underlying land use district that does not require alteration of the ground or site. 
B.  Portions of a residential use that do not contain buildings such as a lawn, garden, parking area or play area, or a related use thereof that does not require alteration of the natural slope or geology, nor grading or excavation thereof. 
C.  Other uses allowed by the underlying land use district, subject to review through a master planned development application under Chapter 17.96. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.040 - Conditional use permitted in the GH overlay. 
    In a zone with the GH overlay, those uses allowed as conditional uses by the underlying land use district are allowed as conditional uses, subject to this chapter, the provisions of the underlying district, and the conditional use procedures in Chapter 17.92. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.050 - Permit for use or development in GH overlay. 
    No person shall construct, reconstruct or install a development, install a mobile or manufactured home, or divide land in a GH overlay unless a permit has been received for the work and the use conforms to the provisions of this chapter. Except for improvement of an existing structure which is less than substantial as determined by the City of Coquille building official, no permit shall be issued unless the work will be reasonably safe from geological hazard and otherwise comply with this chapter and this code, and other applicable city regulations. Said permits shall be processed in the same manner as a conditional use permit under this code as set forth in Chapter 17.92 of this code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.060 - Application requirements for use in GH overlay. 
    An application for a use or development in a GH overlay zone shall be accompanied by the following information prepared by a professional geotechnical engineer licensed in the state of Oregon: 
A.  Site Investigation Report. An application for a use or development in a GH overlay zone requires a site investigation report for the subject area. The site investigation report shall provide information on the site of the development and adjacent land that is likely to be affected by a proposed development. Unless the city determines specific terms are not required, the report shall include the information described in this section together with appropriate identification of information sources and the date of the information. Before a development permit can be issued, the site investigation report must be approved as part of the land use and building permit approval processes. The approved site investigation report shall be referred to in the deed and other documents of sale and its recommendations shall be binding on the subject property and development thereof (conditions of approval). The report and all amendments and supplements thereto shall be recorded with the record of deeds, though failure to record shall not nullify the report. 
B.  Background Data in Report. The site investigation report shall contain the following background information: 
1.  A general analysis of the local and regional topography and geology, including the faults, folds, geologic and engineering geologic units and any soil, rock and structural details important to engineering or geologic interpretations and their relative activity; 
2.  A history of problems on land adjacent to the site, which may be desired from discussions with local residents and officials and the study of old photographs, reports and newspaper files; 
3.  The extent of the surface soil formation and its relationship to the vegetation of the site, the activity of the land form, and the location of the site; 
4.  The following ground photographs of the site with information showing the scale and rate of the photographs and their relationship to the topographic map and profiles: 
a.  A view of the general area, 
b.  The site of the proposed development, 
c.  Any features which are important to the interpretation of the hazard potential of the site, including all sites of erosion and accretion. 
C.  Topography Map. A topography base map of one hundred (100) feet to one inch scale and with a contour interval of two feet or less, as determined by the reviewing city official, shall be prepared identifying the following features and shall be accompanied by references to the source and date of information used: 
1.  The position of the lot line; 
2.  The boundaries of the property; 
3.  Each geological feature classification type; 
4.  Areas of open ground and the boundaries and species identification of major plant communities; 
5.  Any springs, streams, marshy areas, standing bodies of water or intermittent waterways; 
6.  Cut terraces, erosion scarps and areas exhibiting significant surface erosion due to improper drainage and runoff concentration; 
7.  Geological information, including lithologic and structural details important to engineering and geologic interpretation. 
D.  Subsurface Analysis. If upon initial investigation it appears there are critical areas where the establishment of geologic conditions at depth is required, a subsurface analysis obtained by drill holes, well logs and other geophysical techniques shall be conducted by the person responsible for the site investigation report to include the following data, as appropriate: 
1.  The lithology and compaction of all subsurface horizons to bedrock; 
2.  The depth, width, slope and bearing of all horizons containing significant amounts of silt and clay and any other subsurface layers which could reduce surface water infiltration. 
E.  Development Proposals. The site investigation report shall include the following information on the proposed development as applicable: 
1.  Plans and profiles showing the position and height of each structure, paved area and area where cut and fill is required for the construction; 
2.  The percent and location of the surface of the site which will be covered by impermeable surfaces; 
3.  A stabilization program for the development describing: 
a.  How much of the site will be exposed during construction and what measures will be taken to reduce wind erosion and soil movement during construction, 
b.  A revegetation program designed to return open soil areas, both pre-existing and newly created, to a stable condition as soon as possible following construction and the period of time during which revegetated areas will receive revegetation maintenance. 
F.  Conclusions in the Site Investigation. 
1.  The site investigation report shall contain conclusions stating the following: 
a.  How the intended use of the land, including proposed grading of lots, and installation of streets and other public improvements, is compatible with the conditions; 
b.  Any existing or potential hazards noted during the investigation. 
2.  Mitigating recommendations for specific areas of concern shall be included. 
3.  Conclusions shall be based on data included in the report, and the sources of information and facts shall be specifically referenced. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.070 - Standards for building construction in GH overlay. 
A.  Building construction shall only be approved under conditions that do not adversely affect geologically stability or vegetation. The grading of land and the orientation and design of a building shall avoid creating conditions that will cause erosion or accretion of soil. Where there is some risk of these conditions occurring, a "qualified geological expert" shall certify that the design and control measures will comply with this standard. 
B.  Construction work shall be scheduled and constructed to avoid erosion and temporary stabilization measures may be needed until permanent installations are accomplished. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.080 - Standards for streets and accessways in GH overlay. 
    Streets and accessways serving a development within a GH overlay zone shall comply with the following: 
A.  All roads, streets, and other public and private ways shall be stabilized in accordance with the recommendations of the site investigation report and any other specifications required as a condition of permit approval. 
B.  All roads, streets, and other public and private ways shall be built without installation of excessive fill, diversion of water or excessive vegetation removal or slope cuts unless the site investigation determined that such conditions will not be detrimental to the area or create unwarranted maintenance problems or additional hazards. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.090 - Residential density and open space in GH overlay. 
    Residential density may be transferred from one portion of a site to another portion of the same site, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.96, Master Planned Developments; provided the overall development shall contain not less than twenty-five (25) percent open space. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.100 - Lot coverage in the GH overlay. 
    The GH overlay lot coverage standards are intended to minimize grading on steeper slopes through clustering of developing and by scaling the building footprint according to lot size. Allowable lot coverage by structures shall be as follows: 
A.  On portions of a site with slopes ranging from eighteen (18) percent to twenty-two (22) percent: lot coverage shall not exceed thirty (30) percent; 
B.  On portions of a site with slopes ranging from greater than twenty-two (22) percent to twenty-six (26) percent: lot coverage shall not exceed twenty (20) percent; 
C.  On portions of a site with slopes ranging from greater than twenty-six (26) percent to thirty (30) percent: lot coverage shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent; and 
D.  On portions of a site with slopes exceeding thirty (30) percent: lot coverage shall not exceed ten (10) percent. 
    Additional limitations on lot coverage may be required subject to engineering feasibility and permitting requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.40.110 - Regulations not a guarantee. 
    The degree of geological hazard protection afforded by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific methods of study. Greater hazards than those anticipated by these provisions may occur on occasion or the natural hazard may be increased by human or natural causes. The identification of areas subject to geological hazards pursuant to the provisions of this code and other applicable city regulations does not imply that lands outside such areas will be free from such hazards. This code shall not create liability on the part of the city or any office or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance of the provisions or designations of this code or any administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.44 - OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT 

17.44.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the OS district is to promote the public safety and welfare by preventing certain types of development in those areas which natural hazards or other factors pose threats to human occupancy safety, or to protect areas which are best suited or deemed necessary for public protection against development for open space or other natural resource qualities not protected by other zone designations. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.44.020 - Application. 
    The OS overlay zone shall be applied where development should be limited to either protect residents from natural hazards, such as flood or landslide hazards, or to protect an identified natural, open space or scenic resource that is either owned by a public agency has had its development rights removed (e.g., open space/conservation easement). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.44.030 - Uses permitted. 
    The following uses are permitted subject to land use review or site design review as applicable. 
A.  Parks, open space; 
B.  Playgrounds; 
C.  Commercial timber management, subject compliance with state forest practices regulations; 
D.  Aggregate and mineral, subject to city review and approval of erosion and sediment control plan and mining reclamation plan; 
E.  Public utility easements, transportation corridor, and associated facilities; 
F.  Agricultural uses; 
G.  Open space may be used as a portion of a lot size requirement for residential use but no dwelling or accessory residential structure may be built on that portion of the lot zoned as open space. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.44.040 - Use application. 
    An application for a use in an OS district shall meet application requirements set forth in Chapter 17.104, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.44.050 - Area. 
    Said OS district shall be applied to that area set forth on the zoning map. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.46 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

17.46.010 - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
1.  To protect human life and health; 
2.  To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects; 
3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
7.  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.46.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" means the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V. 
    "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood." Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V. 
    "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Below-grade crawl space" means an enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed four feet at any point. 
    "Critical facility" means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    "Elevated building" means for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter found at Section 17.46.070(B)(1)(b). 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "New construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this section. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of adopted floodplain management regulations. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently tow-able by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "State building code" means the combined specialty codes. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either: 
1.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
2.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    "Water dependent" means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 4-1-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1473, § 1, adopted April 1, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as § 17.48.201. At the direction of the city, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 17.46.020. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
17.46.030 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
1.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
4.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.46.040 - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Coquille. 
B.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Coos County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas," dated March 17, 2014, with accompanying flood insurance maps (FIRM) is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this code. The flood insurance study is on file at city hall, located at 851 N. Central Blvd. Coquille, Oregon. 
C.  Penalties for Non-compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this title and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day of the violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Coquille from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this code and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Coquille, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 4-1-2009; Ord. No. 1475, § 1, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1473, § 1, adopted April 1, 2009, set out provisions amending Section 17.48.230(B). At the direction of the city, said provisions have been included as amending Section 17.46.040(B). Additionally, Ord. No. 1475, § 1, adopted July 6, 2009, set out provisions amending Section 17.48.230(B). At the direction of the city, said provisions have been included as amending Section 17.46.040(B). 
17.46.050 - Administration. 
A.  Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17.46.040(B). The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in the "Definitions," and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the "Definitions." 
B.  Application for Development Permit. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Coquille and may include but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed; 
3.  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 17.46.070(B)(2); and 
4.  Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
C.  Designation of the City of Coquille. The City of Coquille is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
D.  Duties and Responsibilities of the City of Coquille. Duties shall include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Permit Review. 
a.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
b.  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
c.  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Section 17.46.070(C)(1) are met. 
2.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17.46.040(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the City of Coquille will obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Sections 17.46.070(B), Specific Standards, and 17.46.070(C), Floodways. 
3.  Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
a.  Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study or required as in Section 17.46.050(B), obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
b.  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
i.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and 
ii.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section 17.46.050(B)(3); 
iii.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Alteration of Watercourses. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development and other State and Federal Agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
b.  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 
5.  Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 17.46.060. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 4-1-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1473, § 1, adopted April 1, 2009, set out provisions intended to amend subsection 17.48.240 D.4.a. At the direction of the city, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as amending subsection 17.46.050 D.4.a. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
17.46.060 - Variance procedure. 
A.  Appeal Board. 
1.  The planning commission as established by the City of Coquille shall bear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the public works director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
3.  The applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission, may appeal such decision to the city council. Appeals following council decision will follow the applicable State of Oregon laws. 
4.  In passing upon such applications, the planning commission and council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding and erosion damage; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. Upon consideration of the factors of Section 17.46.060(A)(4) and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission and council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
5.  The city recorder shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
B.  Conditions for Variances. 
1.  Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (a)-(k) in Section 17.46.060(A)(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
2.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section. 
3.  Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
5.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Section 17.46.010, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
6.  Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare. 
7.  Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dryfloodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except [Section] l7.46.060(B)(1), and otherwise complies with Section 17.46.070(A)(1) and (2) of the General Standards. 
8.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.46.070 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
1.  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  All manufactured houses must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for additional techniques). 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
3.  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
4.  Subdivision Proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
d.  Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five acres (whichever is less). 
5.  Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source (Section 17.48.240(D)(2), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate the lowest floor at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. 
B.  Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 17.46.040(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or Section 17.46.050(D)(2), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential Construction. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum of one foot above base flood elevation. 
b.  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 17.46.050(D)(3)(b). 
d.  Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in 17.46.070(B)(1)(b). 
e.  Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g. a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level). 
3.  Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.48.260(A)(1)(b). 
4.  Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
c.  Meet the requirements of Section 17.46.070(A)(1)(b) above and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes. 
C.  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17.46.040(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectile, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If Section 17.46.070(C)(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 17.46.070, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 4-1-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1473, § 1, adopted April 1, 2009, set out provisions intended to amend subsections 17.48.260 A.5., B.1.a., and B.e.4. At the direction of the city, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as amending subsections 17.46.070 A.5., B.1.a., and B.3., respectively. Additionally, Ord. No. 1473, § 1, set out provisions intended to add subsection 17.48.260 B.e.5. At the direction of the city, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as subsection 17.46.070 B.4. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Chapter 17.48 - HISTORIC-CULTURAL (/HC) OVERLAY 

17.48.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the historic-cultural (/HC) overlay is to promote the historic, educational, cultural, economic, general welfare of the public through the preservation, restoration, and protection of buildings, structures and appurtenances, sites, places and elements of historic value to the City of Coquille. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.48.020 - Applicability-Overlay process. 
    The provisions of this chapter apply to properties with the historic-cultural (/HC) overlay, as designated by the City of Coquille, and those proposed for such designation as follows: as a part of the duties delegated to the Coquille planning commission, the reviewing of all applications for /HC overlay zoning (application or removal of /HC), a land use district amendment, shall be based on the following criteria, in addition to those provided in Chapter 17.104, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments: 
A.  The structure or site is recognized as a historic site by the Oregon Historic Preservation Office or is listed on the National Register of Historic Places; 
B.  The structure or site is recognized by a local or statewide organization as having historic value and is in the process of being designated as such by the state of Oregon or the federal government (i.e., pending nomination is acceptable); or 
C.  The site has been shown to be of archeological importance by a recognized state or federal agency; 
D.  In applying or removing an /HC overlay, the planning commission shall consider whether the proposed action or change will have any substantial economic, social, environmental, or energy consequences and the effect of such consequences on the public and private interests involved; 
E.  Upon approval, or repeal, of an /HC overlay, the City of Coquille zoning map shall be amended accordingly. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.48.030 - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted and conditionally allowed in the /HC overlay are the same as those permitted or conditionally allowed by the underlying land use district. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.48.040 - Alterations-Permit required. 
    Before any permit shall be issued for alteration, moving, demolition, renovation, or change of use of any site, structure or object that is designated /HC, approval of an application for alteration of a historic-cultural landmark is required. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.48.050 - Exempt from /HC review. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from /HC review: 
A.  Normal repair and maintenance other than change of facade color where exterior material or color is specifically listed by the Oregon Historic Preservation Office or in the National Register nomination as an attribute that contributes to the resource's historic value; 
B.  Changes that do not require a building permit and will not alter the exterior material of a historic resource; 
C.  Changes to exterior paint color unless the exterior color was specifically listed by the Oregon Historic Preservation Office or in the National Register nomination as an attribute that contributes to the resource's historic value; 
D.  Changes in landscaping unless the landscaping is identified by the Oregon Historic Preservation Office or in the National Register of Historic Places nomination as an attribute that contributes to the resource's historic value; 
E.  Parking lot landscaping that meets the City of Coquille parking standards and does not involve the installation of a wall or fence. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.48.060 - Alterations-Approval criteria. 
    The planning commission or, on appeal, the city council may approve an application for alteration of a historic-cultural landmark upon finding that the application complies with all of the following criteria: 
A.  The proposed alteration maintains the historic significance of the subject site, structure or object, including all historically significant elements thereof; except as provided in subsections B and C of this section; 
B.  Alterations that do not conform to subsection A of this section may be allowed where a hazard to the public exists, where the alteration is necessary to abate the hazard and is the minimum practicable to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
C.  Alterations that do not conform to subsection A of this section may be allowed where the public interest in preserving historic value is outweighed by the financial hardship to the owner in preserving the historic significance of the subject site, structure or object, as applicable; 
D.  In considering criteria in subsections A through C of this section, the reviewing body shall consider whether the site, structure, or object has maintained its historic significance since being designated /HC; whether the site, structure or object has deteriorated so as to become a public hazard; whether historic significance will be negatively effected by the proposed alteration; whether the financial hardship to the owner in maintaining historic significance is any greater than the financial obligation of other property owners in the same land use district in maintaining their properties; whether there are sources of compensation or financial assistance reasonably available to compensate the owner in the event that preservation is required; and whether there are alternative ways in which historic values may be preserved if the proposed action is carried out. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.52 - ESTUARINE/COASTAL SHORELANDS (/EC) RESOURCE OVERLAY 

17.52.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the estuarine/coastal shorelands resource overlay zone is to recognize and protect the unique environmental, economic, and social values of the Coquille River Estuary. For the purpose of this chapter, the lands and aquatic area subject to the requirements of this overlay zone are those areas within the coastal shoreland boundary and the water area within the city limits. It is further noted that the estuarine management unit classification is conservation, with adjacent industrial and commercial shoreland designations not suitable for water-dependent/water-related activities. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.52.020 - Conservation-Aquatic. 
A.  Permitted uses: 
1.  Docks; 
2.  Utilities (low and high); 
3.  Navigation (aides, structures); 
4.  Piling/dolphin installation; 
5.  Vegetative shoreline stabilization; 
6.  Mitigation; 
7.  Passive restoration; 
8.  Research and educational observations; 
9.  Protection of habitat, nutrient, fish, wildlife and aesthetics. 
B.  Conditional uses: 
1.  Aquaculture; 
2.  Commercial; 
3.  Recreation facilities (low and high); 
4.  Bridge crossing support structures and dredging necessary for installation; 
5.  Bridge crossing; 
6.  Installation of tidegates in existing functional dikes; 
7.  Dredging (new or maintenance of existing facilities); 
8.  Fill; 
9.  Shoreline stabilization (riprap, bulkheads); 
10.  Active restoration; 
11.  Temporary alterations; 
12.  Waste water/storm water discharge; 
13.  Research and educational observation structure. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.52.030 - Conservation-Shoreland. 
A.  Permitted uses: 
1.  Agriculture; 
2.  Aquaculture; 
3.  Land transportation facilities; 
4.  Mining/mineral extraction; 
5.  Utilities (low); 
6.  Dikes (maintenance/repair); 
7.  Excavation to create new water surface; 
8.  Vegetative shoreline stabilization; 
9.  Mitigation; 
10.  Passive restoration. 
B.  Conditional uses: 
1.  Shoreline stabilization (riprap, retaining wall); 
2.  Active restoration. 
C.  Lot Size. All lot size requirements shall be the same as either the adjacent upland zone or in the event the proposed use is inconsistent with the adjacent upland zone, yet allowed in the ER zone, the minimum lot size for the same use in another zone shall be used. 
D.  Setback. Setbacks shall meet the underlying zone requirements. 
E.  Height of Buildings. All structures shall meet the underlying zone district requirement. 
F.  Supplementary Requirements. 
1.  In no instance shall a use permitted outright or conditionally be allowed if the proposed use does not meet state and/or federal permit requirements. 
2.  In no instance will riparian vegetation be removed if it cannot be demonstrated that there will be no adverse effect on water quality or will not cause further sedimentation in the estuary. 
3.  Fill activities are allowed as part of maintenance and protection of man-made structures existing as of October 7, 1977. 
4.  Special conditions in addition to conditional use requirements. In general, conditional uses will be allowed only if the use is found to be consistent with the resource capabilities of the area and the purposes of the management unit as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
a.  The following activities requiring dredge, fill, or other degradation of natural estuarine values; aquaculture, high intensity water dependant reaction, minor navigational improvements and bridge crossings must make the following findings: 
i.  An estuarine location is required; 
ii.  A public need is demonstrated; 
iii.  No alternative upland locations exist for the portion requiring fill; and 
iv.  Adverse impacts are minimized as much as feasible. 
b.  Bridge crossings must make a finding that no alternative locations are available in a "shallow draft development" location. 
c.  Active restoration where a public need is demonstrated, and will meet the requirements of Oregon Administrative Rules adopted by Division of State Lands and only upon findings which demonstrate the following: 
i.  Factual assessment of the nature and extent of the estuarine resource believed to have existed at the proposed restoration site at some time in the past; 
ii.  Factual assessment of how the estuarine resource at the site was lost; 
iii.  Comparison of the resource enhancement expected to result from the proposed restoration project, together with a determination that the proposed project will, in fact, restore all or some of the resource values lost at the site; and 
iv.  Fill/removal findings at ORS 196. 
d.  All activities shall be reviewed and the appropriateness established by the following: 
i.  Identify total projected needs for the activity; 
ii.  Identify all areas suitable for activity; 
iii.  Analyze all suitable areas for compatibility with adjacent uses and characteristics, energy costs and commitment of the water surface area; 
iv.  Determination of why proposed site is best area to meet the needs based on subsections (F)(4)(d)(i) through (iii) of this section. 
e.  No use will degrade: 
i.  Major marsh; 
ii.  Significant wildlife habitat; 
iii.  Exceptional aesthetic resource; 
iv.  Historic or archeological site. 
5.  Land use management practices and nonstructural solutions of stream bank stabilization shall be preferred to structural solutions unless nonstructural solutions are demonstrated to be inadequate. 
6.  The city shall restrict the proliferation of single purpose docks and piers by encouraging community facilities common to several uses and interests. Docks and piers shall be the minimum size necessary. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.54 - RIPARIAN CORRIDORS (/R) OVERLAY 

17.54.010 - Riparian. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to protect and restore water bodies and their associated riparian areas, thereby protecting and restoring the hydrologic, ecological and land conservation functions these areas provide. Specifically, this chapter is intended to protect habitat for fish and other aquatic life, protect habitat for wildlife, protect water quality for human uses and aquatic life, control erosion and limit sedimentation and reduce the effects of flooding. This chapter attempts to meet these goals by excluding structures from buffer areas around fish-bearing lakes, streams and associated wetlands, and by prohibiting vegetation removal or other alteration in those buffers. For cases of hardship, this chapter provides a procedure to reduce the riparian buffer. Alteration of the riparian area in some cases shall be offset by appropriate restoration or mitigation, as stipulated in this chapter. 
B.  Riparian Corridor Boundaries. 
1.  Along all lakes and streams with average annual stream flow less than one thousand (1,000) cfs, the riparian corridor boundary shall be fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank, except as identified in subsection (B)(3) of this section. These corridors in Coquille are, but not limited to: Calloway Creek, Cunningham Creek, Crystal Creek, Dutch John Ravine, Fourth Street Creek and Logged Creek (unmapped tributary to Fourth Street Creek); 
2.  Along all streams with average annual flow greater than one thousand (1,000) cfs, the riparian boundary shall be seventy-five (75) feet upland from the top of each bank. This corridor is the Coquille River; 
3.  Where the riparian corridor includes all or portions of a significant wetland as identified in the Goal 5 or Goal 17 elements of the comprehensive plan, the standard distance to the riparian corridor boundary shall be measured from and include the upland edge of the wetland; 
4.  Except as provided for in subsection (B)(3) of this section, the measurement of distance to the riparian corridor boundary shall be from the top of the bank. The measurement shall be a slope distance. In areas where the top of the bank is not clearly defined, the riparian corridor boundary shall be from the ordinary high water level or the line of nonaquatic vegetation, whichever is most landward. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.54.020 - Activities within the riparian area. 
A.  The permanent alteration of the riparian area by grading or by the placement of structures or impervious surfaces is prohibited, except for the following uses provided they are designed to minimize intrusion into the riparian area and no other options or locations are feasible: 
1.  Streets, roads and paths; 
2.  Drainage facilities, utilities and irrigation pumps; 
3.  Water-related and water-dependent uses; 
4.  Replacement of existing structures with structures in the same location that do not disturb additional riparian surface area; 
5.  Structures or other nonconforming alterations existing fully or partially within the riparian area may be expanded, provided the expansion does not occur within the riparian area. Substantial improvement of a nonconforming structure in the riparian area shall require compliance with the standards of this chapter; 
6.  Existing lawn within the riparian may be maintained, but not expanded within the riparian area. Development activities on the property shall not justify replacement of riparian area with lawn; 
7.  Existing shoreline stabilization and flood control structures may be maintained. Any expansion of existing structures or development of new structures shall be evaluated by the city and appropriate natural resource agency staff. Such alteration of the riparian area shall be approved only if less invasive or nonstructural methods will not adequately meet the stabilization or flood control needs. 
B.  Removal of riparian vegetation is prohibited, except for: 
1.  Removal of nonnative vegetation and replacement with native plant species. The replacement vegetation shall cover, at a minimum, the area from which vegetation was removed and shall maintain or exceed the density of the removed vegetation; 
2.  Removal of vegetation necessary for the development of approved water-related or water-dependent uses. Vegetation removal shall be kept to the minimum necessary to allow the water-dependent or water-related use; 
3.  Trees in danger of falling and thereby posing a hazard to life or property may be removed, following consultation and approval from the city or their designate. Hilo hazard will be created, the city may require these trees, once felled, to be left in place in the riparian area. 
C.  Exceptions. The following activities are not required to meet the standards of this section: 
1.  Commercial forest practices regulated by the Oregon Forest Practices Act; 
2.  Normal and accepted farming practices other than buildings or structures, occurring on land zoned for exclusive farm use and existing in the riparian area since prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.54.030 - Alteration requiring mitigation. 
A.  Permanent alteration of the riparian area by placement of structures or impervious surface is allowed under the following procedures, subject to the mitigation requirements of subsection B of this section: 
1.  A variance to the riparian setback approved through the procedures of subsection C of this section; 
2.  On streams having average annual stream flow exceeding one thousand (1,000) cfs, and having a seventy-five (75) feet riparian buffer established under this chapter. The riparian setback may be reduced as allowed under subsection D of this section. 
B.  Proposals for development activities within the riparian area allowed in subsection A of this section shall be reviewed by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW), as per OAR 635-415, Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy. A mitigation recommendation shall be obtained from ODFW. Approval of the development shall be conditional, requiring compliance with the mitigation recommendations of ODFW and be based upon findings that there will not be any "net loss" to wildlife habitat. 
C.  Variance. 
1.  A property owner may request a variance, to be approved by the City of Coquille planning commission, to the riparian setback. Variances to the provisions of this chapter are processed under Chapter 17.116 and require findings that: 
a.  The proposed development requires deviation from the riparian standards; 
b.  Strict adherence to the riparian setback and other applicable standards would effectively preclude a use of the parcel that could be reasonably expected to occur in the zone, and that the property owner would be precluded a substantial property right enjoyed by the majority of landowners in the vicinity; and 
c.  The variance requested is the minimum amount necessary to accommodate the proposed use. 
D.  Large stream riparian reduction shall be approved by the City of Coquille planning commission. On streams having average annual stream flow exceeding one thousand (1,000) cfs and having a seventy-five (75) feet riparian buffer established under this chapter, structures and impervious surfaces may be placed within the riparian setback as follows: 
1.  The removal of vegetation shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary to accommodate the use. Any vegetation removed in excess of this standard shall be nonnative species, and the proposal shall specify replacement of that vegetation with native species. 
2.  The applicant shall provide sufficient information regarding the proposed development and potential impacts to riparian resources to allow the staff, in consultation with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, to determine whether the proposal will provide equal or better protection of riparian resources. This information includes, but is not limited to: a plot plan showing the top of the stream or waterway bank, the extent of development within the setbacks, uses that will occur within the riparian setback and potential impacts (for example: chemical runoff, noise, etc.), the types, density of any proposed alteration of topography or drainage patterns, existing uses on the property and any potential impacts they could have on riparian resources. 
3.  In no case shall such alterations occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the width of the riparian area measured from the upland edge of the corridor. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.55 - RIVERFRONT MIXED USE (RMU) OVERLAY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 1, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as chapter 17.56. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as chapter 17.55. 

17.55.010 - Purpose and definitions. 
A.  The RMU overlay facilitates an integrated mix of land uses to create a dynamic, seven-day-a-week environment for commercial, retail, employment, service, craft industrial, and ancillary residential development. The RMU overlay establishes design criteria to ensure that projects that will be built in the Coquille riverfront mixed use overlay district by different developers over several years all will meet a high design standard that respects the relationship to the Coquille River and results in complementary styles of architecture throughout. The RMU overlay will: 
1.  Encourage a variety of employment opportunities and subsidiary housing types, including residential over ground-floor retail and commercial uses. 
2.  Promote opportunities for community commercial and small scale businesses that are compatible with mixed-use residential development. 
3.  Promote pedestrian access within the Coquille riverfront area. 
4.  Promote pedestrian connections to the Riverwalk, a public pathway to be constructed in a corridor along the western boundary of the riverfront mixed use district. 
B.  Residential Development. The RMU overlay accommodates a mix of residential densities and a wide variety of housing types, including attached housing, multiple-family housing, cottage cluster, and senior housing. The RMU overlay also allows commercial uses in residential developments. 
1.  Townhouses. Townhouses are allowed along major streets, adjacent to open spaces, commercial, or multifamily development. Townhouses are single-family dwellings with common walls on one or both side lot lines and continuous front facades. They are the highest density housing type in the riverfront mixed use overlay district that allows fee simple ownership. Alleys may be provided to the rear of the building for parking and service access. 
2.  Cottage Cluster. Cottage clusters are allowed on minor streets, adjacent to other residential development. Cottage cluster housing responds to changing household sizes and ages (e.g., retirees, small families, single person households) and provides opportunities for ownership of small, detached dwelling units. Cottage cluster housing will: 
a.  Encourage the creation of more usable open space for residents through flexibility in density and lot standards. 
b.  Support more efficient use of urban residential land. 
c.  Support commercial or craft industrial uses in the district. 
4.  Multifamily Housing. Multifamily housing is allowed along major streets, adjacent to open spaces, townhouses, or commercial development. Multifamily housing includes senior housing and assisted living facilities. 
5.  Residential Mixed Use. Residential mixed use housing is allowed adjacent to major streets and commercial development to accommodate higher density residential uses and community commercial uses in the riverfront mixed use overlay district. Residential mixed use housing includes live/work townhouses and live/work apartments. The purpose is to create small areas of mixed use at specific locations in the riverfront mixed use overlay district. 
C.  Commercial Development. The RMU overlay zone accommodates retail sales and services and a mix of other commercial uses. 
D.  Craft Industrial Development. The RMU overlay zone accommodates craft industrial businesses such as microbreweries, furniture manufacturing, woodworking, artisan crafts, specialty foods, small metalworking, and glass blowing, which may combine production and studio space with retail sales. The RMU overlay zone also accommodates a range of light industrial and heavy commercial uses. It is intended to buffer industrial development from other types of development in the riverfront mixed use overlay district, while providing a high-quality environment for businesses, customers, pedestrians, and employees. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.020 - Area. 
    The RMU overlay shall be applied to those portions of the area between State Route 42 and the Coquille River that are shown on the zoning map and on Figure 17.55.020(A). 
Figure 17.55.020(A) Riverfront Mixed Use Overlay District Map

(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.030 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Allowed land uses. 
    Table 17.55.030 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the riverfront mixed use overlay district. 
Table 17.55.030 Land Uses Allowed in Riverfront Mixed Use Overlay District 
Use Categories 
(Examples of uses are in Chapter 17.12; Definitions are in Chapter 17.08) Allowed or 
Not Allowed Special Use Requirements 
(See also any applicable overlay zones) Residential Uses Single-Family (not attached) N Accessory Dwelling N Single-Family Attached (2 or more common wall single-family dwellings) (townhouses), each on its own lot CU Section 17.55.120(A) Cottage Cluster (3-4 detached single-family dwellings on one lot, oriented to an alley or common green, and each containing less than 1,200 square feet of floor area) CU Section 17.55.120(A) Multifamily (3 or more attached dwellings on lot); includes Senior Housing, Assisted Living, but not Single Room Occupancy or Group Living  Apartment Building CUS Section 17.55.120(8) Mixed-Use (e.g., residential and commercial uses in same building) CU-S Commercial component must be a permitted use in 17.24.020 Home Occupation S Per standards of Section 17.110(E)and procedures in Section 17.112.020 Bed and Breakfast Inn CU+S Section 17.24.110(C) Short Term Vacation Rental CU+S Section 17.24.110(1) Commercial Uses Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATMs, similar uses/facilities) CU Section 17.28.100(B). Additionally, drive-throughs in the RMU Overlay District are limited to a single lane; two-lane drive-throughs are not allowed. Transient Lodging, including hotel, motel, and similar uses; excluding recreational vehicle park CU Educational Services, Commercial (e.g., tutoring, or similar services); not a home occupation P Entertainment, Major Event N Offices P For developments >40,000 square feet, see Section 17.55.100(E) Outdoor Recreation, Commercial CU Parking Lot (when not an accessory use and not a recreational vehicle park) N Quick Vehicle Servicing or Vehicle Repair N Retail Sales and Service, enclosed  Less than 20,000 square feet floor area P  20,000 square feet or more floor area CU For developments >40,000 square feet, see Section 17.55.100(E)  Accessory outdoor sales and service (e.g., nursery, outdoor dining, and similar uses when accessory to primary use) P Self-Service Storage N Craft Industrial Uses Industrial Service N Manufacturing and Production  Fully enclosed P For developments >40,000 square feet, see Section 17.55.100(E)  Not enclosed CU Warehouse and Freight Movement N Waste-Related N Wholesale Sales N Institutional Uses Basic Utilities P Community Service, no drive-up uses  Clubs and lodges CU  Public and quasi-public buildings CU  Other Community Services CU Day Care, adult or child day care; does not include Family Day Care (16 or fewer children); does not include mass shelter or short-term housing CU Medical Clinics; does not include hospitals P Parks and Open Space  Pedestrian amenities (e.g., plaza or outdoor seating) P  Parks and recreation facilities CU  Other open space P Religious Institutions and House of Worship CU Schools N Other Uses Accessory Structures (with a permitted use)  No taller than 14 feet and no larger than 1,000 square feet of building footprint or 50% of primary structure footprint, whichever is less P  Taller than 14 feet or larger than 1,000 square feet of building footprint, but less than 50% of primary structure footprint CU Temporary Uses P/CU Only those uses herein classified as "P" or "CU" may be allowed as temporary, subject to Section 17.112.010. Public Transportation Facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city or state standards, as applicable) P  
Key: 
P = Permitted, subject to site/development review 
S = Permitted with standards 
CU = Conditional use permit required (Chapter 17.92) 
N = Not permitted 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.040 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Development standards. 
    The development standards in Table 17.55.040 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development, and major remodels, in the riverfront mixed use overlay district. 
Table 17.55.040 Development Standards for Riverfront Mixed Use Overlay District 
Standard Minimum Lot Area (square feet) Residential  Single-Family Attached 2,000 sf  Cottage Cluster or Multifamily 5,000 sf for first 2 dwelling units, plus 1,500 sf for each additional unit Commercial No Standard Industrial No Standard Minimum Lot Dimension Residential  Single-Family Attached 20 ft wide x 80 ft deep  Cottage Cluster or Multifamily 50 ft x 100 ft deep Commercial None Industrial None Building/Structure Height Except as modified by Sections 17.55.050 Setbacks; clear vision requirements; and 17.64.050, Fences and walls 35 ft primary structure, 20 ft accessory structures; except 25 feet for cottage cluster Maximum Building Height with Conditional Use Permit: allowed for mixed-use projects (residential above commercial) where structured parking is provided (see Section 17.55.090(C)) 50 ft Fences and Screening Walls (allowed for screening and security only); Retaining/Garden Walls  Max. Height-Front Yard 4 ft  Max. Height-Interior Side 6 ft; 8 ft with permit  Max. Height-Rear Yard 6 ft; 8 ft with permit  Max. Height-Street Side 4 ft or 6 ft with 5 ft landscape buffer adjacent to street ROW Lot Coverage Max. Lot Coverage by All Impervious Surfaces (Building Foundation, Pavement, etc.) Residential 75%, subject to minimum landscaping and parking Commercial 90%, subject to minimum landscaping and parking Industrial 90%, subject to minimum landscaping and parking Coverage Bonus The allowable building coverage may increase by a ratio of one-half (1/2) square foot for every one (1) square foot of required parking area that is paved using a city-approved porous/permeable paving material (i.e. allowing storm water infiltration) or one-half (1/2) square foot for every one (1) square foot of city-approved water quality treatment area (e.g., vegetative swale or biofiltration) on the development site. Landscape area; may include plant areas and some nonplant areas as allowed under Section 17.64.030(D) 10% Minimum Setbacks 
Except as modified by clear vision requirements and 17.64.050, Fences and walls Front/Street Setback  Residential 10 ft  Commercial 0 ft  Industrial 10 ft Side Setback  Residential 5 ft; except 0 internal side setback for townhouses  Commercial 0 ft  Industrial 0 ft; except 10 ft where an industrial development abuts a residential development Rear  Residential 5 ft; except 10 ft for cottages  Commercial 0 ft  Industrial 0 ft; except 10 ft where an industrial subdistrict abuts a residential subdistrict Alley 3 ft Garage/Carport Opening, setback from street 20 ft Build-To Line For commercial and industrial development, at least one primary building entrance shall be built no farther from the street right-of-way than the build-to line. The build-to line may be increased through Site Design Review when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and the street ROW (see also Section 17.28.090) 10 ft  
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.050 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Setbacks. 
A.  Residential Yard Setbacks-Purpose. Residential setback yards provide space for private yards and building separation for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation. The setback yard standards contained in Table 17.55.040 encourage the orientation of buildings with street visibility for public safety and neighborhood security. The standards also promote human-scale design and traffic calming by diminishing the visual presence of garages along the street and encouraging the use of front porches and house entrances oriented to street sidewalks, as is commonplace in Coquille's neighborhoods. 
B.  Zero Setbacks and Build-To Line-Purpose, Fire Code and Clear Vision. Zero setbacks and build-to lines, as provided in Table 17.55.040, are intended to encourage pedestrian-oriented development, while providing more flexibility in site design than what is possible with large setbacks. With buildings placed close to the street, a development can afford good access for emergency service providers in the case of a fire or other emergency. Where no minimum setback is required, all structures and buildings shall conform to the vision clearance standards in Chapter 17.60 and the applicable fire and building codes (e.g., for attached structures, fire walls, and related requirements). 
C.  Setback Yards-Exceptions. The following architectural features may encroach into the setback yards by no more than thirty-six (36) inches, provided that a setback of not less than thirty-six (36) inches is preserved, all applicable building and fire codes are met, and the clear vision standards in Section 17.060.030 are met. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, and similar architectural features may encroach into a setback yard by not more than thirty-six (36) inches. Porches, decks and similar unenclosed structures may extend into front yard setbacks. Walls and fences built on property lines are subject to the height standards in Table 17.55.040 and the provisions of Sections 17.60.020(N), Vision clearance, and 17.64.050, Fences and walls. 
D.  Industrial Buffers. 
1.  Purpose. Industrial buffers provide separation between industrial and nonindustrial uses for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering, and visual separation. 
2.  Applicability. The buffer standards in subsection 3 apply to buildings, accessory structures, parking areas, mechanical equipment and other development. In granting a conditional use permit, the approval body may increase the standard yards and/or buffers consistent with the criteria in Chapter 17.92. The approval body may also decrease the standard yards and/or buffers through the CUP process, provided that all applicable building and fire safety codes are met. 
3.  Landscaping, Buffering and Other Yard Requirements. 
a.  Buffering. A minimum of ten (10) percent of the site shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter 17.64. The approval body may require additional landscaping, fences, walls or other buffering that exceeds the landscaping standards in Chapter 17.64 upon finding that more or different buffering is necessary to mitigate adverse noise, light, glare, and/or aesthetic impacts to adjacent properties. 
b.  Pedestrian Access. The approval body may require the construction of pedestrian access ways through required buffers to ensure pedestrian connections are made between primary building entrances (e.g., for retail, service, institutional, or office uses) within large developments, between multiple development phases, or connecting to other streets or sidewalks. The design of access ways shall conform to Section 17.60.030. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.060 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Housing density. 
A.  Minimum Housing Density. 
1.  Townhouse and cottage cluster development in the riverfront mixed use overlay district shall have a minimum density of twenty (20) dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Multi-family development in the riverfront mixed use overlay district shall have a minimum density of twenty-eight (28) dwelling units per acre. 
3.  Housing density is calculated as provided in Section 17.24.060. 
B.  Housing Density Encouraged. Dense residential development is encouraged in the riverfront mixed use overlay district to help support commercial, retail, and craft industrial development, and to enhance the pedestrian orientation of the district. 
1.  Because of different setback and lot coverage standards for commercial development, additional residential density, beyond what is allowed for townhouse, cottage cluster, and multi-family development, may be achieved by projects that include housing over commercial uses, as provided in Sections 17.55.040 and 17.55.090. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.070 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Lot coverage and impervious surfaces. 
    The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be as provided in Table 17.55.040. Lot coverage is calculated as the percentage of a lot or parcel covered by impervious surfaces (e.g., asphalt, concrete, and similar impervious paving). It does not include planted areas, and other areas allowing storm water infiltration, as approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.080 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Industrial site layout and design. 
A.  Development Compatibility. Industrial uses and developments shall be oriented on the site to minimize adverse impacts (e.g., noise, glare, smoke, dust, exhaust, vibration, etc.) and to provide compatibility with adjacent uses to the extent practicable. The following standards shall apply to all industrial development in the riverfront mixed use overlay district: 
1.  Mechanical equipment, lights, emissions, shipping/receiving areas, and other components of an industrial use that are outside enclosed buildings, shall be located away from residential areas, open spaces and other nonindustrial areas to the maximum extent practicable; and 
2.  The city may require a landscape buffer, or other visual or sound barrier (fence, wall, landscaping, or combination thereof), to mitigate adverse impacts that cannot be avoided, as provided in Section 17.55.050(D). 
B.  Pedestrian Accessibility. Where the development consists of more than one building, and contains a total floor area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more of retail, service, office, and/or institutional use(s), the development shall meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The commercial block layout standards in Section 17.55.100 must be met; and 
2.  The commercial setback and design standards in Sections 17.55.040 and 17.55.110 must be met. For the purpose of meeting the build-to line standards in Section 17.55.110, the build-to line is parallel to all abutting street property lines at a distance of ten (10) feet from the street property line. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.090 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Structure height. 
    Building and structure heights shall conform to the standards in Table 17.55.040 and subsections B., C. and D. of this section. 
A.  Building/Structure Height Measurement. Building height for the purposes of this code is measured as the vertical distance above a reference point datum (grade plane) to the highest point (peak) of a roof. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
B.  Exclusions from Maximum Building Height Standards. Chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flag poles, and similar features not for human occupancy are exempt from the maximum building heights, provided that all applicable fire and building codes are met. 
Figure 17.55.090(C) Building Height Bonus for Housing

C.  Height Bonus for Housing. Additional building height may be permitted in mixed use buildings, as provided in Table 17.55.040, when housing is provided above ground-floor commercial uses(s), subject to approval of a conditional use permit. Off-street parking requirements shall be determined based on an analysis of parking demand prepared by the applicant and subject to review and approval by the city approval body. Where a second egress is required for fire safety, residences may have their entrances/egress oriented to any yard; such entrances need not be oriented to the street. 
D.  Structures taller than thirty-five (35) feet are allowed when approved as part of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.100 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Building orientation, block layout, street spacing and Riverwalk access. 
A.  Purpose. This section orients buildings and building entrances close to streets to promote pedestrian-oriented development where walking is encouraged, and to discourage automobile-oriented development. Placing residences and other buildings close to the street also encourages crime prevention, natural surveillance or security, and safety by having more "eyes-on-the-street." This section also encourages developments adjacent to the Coquille Riverwalk to orient open spaces and buildings to the Riverwalk. 
B.  Applicability. This section applies to all projects in the riverfront mixed use overlay district. 
C.  Residential Building Orientation Standards. Residential developments shall have their buildings oriented to a street as generally shown in Figure 17.55.100(C)(1). 
1.  Off-street parking, driveways, and other vehicle areas shall not be placed between buildings and the street(s) to which they are oriented, as per this subsection and Figure 17.55.100(C)(1); except the following areas are allowed where the approval body finds that they will not adversely affect pedestrian safety and convenience: 
a.  Assisted living facilities and similar institutional uses may have one driveway located between the street and the primary building entrance, provided that the building's primary entrance is connected to an adjacent street by a pedestrian walkway and the driveway/parking area is crossed by a clearly defined pedestrian walkway as required by Section 17.60.030. The intent of this exception is to provide for one drop-off/loading zone where necessary to serve building occupants with special needs. 
Figure 17.55.100(C)(1) Residential Building Orientation

b.  Attached single-family housing developments (townhouses) with street-facing garages may have one combined driveway access located between the street and the primary building entrance for every two attached dwelling units, provided the driveway meets the following criteria, as generally shown in Figure 17.55.100(C)(2). 
i.  Where two abutting townhouses have street-facing garages, they shall share one driveway access that does not exceed sixteen (16) feet in width where it crosses the sidewalk and where it intersects the street (excluding driveway apron); 
ii.  All primary building entrances shall be connected to the driveway (and sidewalk) via a pedestrian walkway that is not less than three feet wide; 
iii.  The maximum number of consecutively attached townhouses with garages facing the same street is four (two driveways); and 
iv.  All garage openings and carport openings shall be setback at least twenty (20) feet from the street, and shall be recessed at least six feet behind the front building elevation closest to the subject street. 
2.  Where a site contains multiple buildings and there is insufficient street frontage to which buildings can be oriented, a primary entrance may be oriented to common green, open space, plaza, or courtyard (e.g., cottage cluster). When oriented in this way, the primary entrance(s) and green, plaza, or courtyard shall be connected to the street by a pedestrian walkway meeting the standards in Section 17.60.030. See example in Figure 17.55.100(C)(1), "Site Plan-Acceptable." 
Figure 17.55.100(C)(2) Townhouse Building Orientation

D.  Commercial and Mixed Use Building Orientation Standards. Commercial and mixed use buildings shall have their buildings oriented to a street, as generally shown in Figure 17.55.100(D)(1). This standard is met when all of the following criteria are met: 
Figure 17.55.100(D)(1) Commercial and Mixed Use Building Orientation

1.  Compliance with the setback and build-to line standards in Section 17.55.040, where applicable. The build-to line may be set back to provide pedestrian amenities between a building and its adjoining street. 
2.  Except as provided in subsection D.4. of this section, all buildings shall have at least one primary building entrance (i.e., dwelling entrance, a tenant entrance, lobby entrance, or breezeway/courtyard entrance) facing an adjoining street (i.e., within forty-five (45) degrees of the street property line), or if the building entrance is turned more than forty-five (45) degrees from the street (i.e., front door is on a side elevation), the primary entrance shall not be more than twenty (20) feet from a street sidewalk, except where pedestrian amenities are provided, in which case a walkway shall connect the primary entrance to the sidewalk. 
3.  Off-street parking, trash pick-up, and aboveground utilities (e.g., utility vaults) shall not be placed between building entrances and the street(s) to which they are oriented, but shall be oriented internally to the block and accessed by alleys to the extent practicable. Off-street parking shall be oriented internally to the site to the extent practicable, and shall be divided by landscape areas into bays of not more than twenty-four (24) parking spaces per bay, as generally shown in Figure 17.55.100(D)(1) and Figure 17.55.100(D)(2); incidental breaks in the building wall to accommodate pedestrian and vehicle access into the block are encouraged. 
Figure 17.55.100(D)(2) Commercial and Mixed Use Building Orientation with Internal Parking

4.  Where a development contains multiple buildings and there is insufficient street frontage to which buildings can be oriented, a primary entrance may be oriented to plaza, courtyard, or similar pedestrian space containing pedestrian amenities, subject to site design review. When oriented in this way, the primary entrance(s), plaza, or courtyard shall be connected to the street by a pedestrian walkway meeting the standards in Section 17.60.030. 
E.  Block Layout Standard. Commercial developments containing more than one building, with the sum total of buildings equal to or greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area, shall meet all of the following standards: 
1.  The site shall be configured into blocks that have frontage onto streets, interior parking courts (as generally shown in Figure 17.55.100(D)(2), above), or "shopping streets" (as generally shown in Figure 17.55.100(E), below). All shopping streets shall contain on-street parking (parallel or angled parking), sidewalks, street trees, and pedestrian lighting; and all buildings shall orient their primary entrances to a street, plaza or courtyard. Additionally, buildings placed at a street/block corner shall have a primary entrance within twenty (20) feet of the street/block corner. 
2.  Walkways shall connect the street right-of-way to building entrances and the interior parking bays between buildings, as necessary to ensure reasonably safe, direct, and convenient access to building entrances and off-street parking. 
Figure 17.55.100(E) Shopping Street Example

F.  Block Length and Street Spacing Standard. As generally shown in Figure 17.55.100(F), blocks shall be broken down into lengths of not more than four hundred (400) feet and shall have a perimeter not exceeding one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet. 
1.  Street intersections shall be located a maximum of four hundred (400) feet apart. 
2.  Where applicable, subdivisions and site developments shall be designed to accommodate a loop street alignment that intersects the west side of Mill Avenue in at least two locations (as generally shown in Figure 17.40.100(F)). The extent of the loop road each development is required to construct will be determined by the reviewing authority. 
G.  Orientation and Access to the Coquille Riverwalk. This standard applies to development adjacent to the Coquille Riverwalk and encourages access to and enjoyment of the Riverwalk. 
1.  Off-street parking, blank walls, service areas, loading areas and the like shall not be located adjacent to the Riverwalk. 
2.  Developments adjacent to the Riverwalk are encouraged to provide internal pedestrian connections to the Riverwalk and to orient windows and outdoor seating areas to the Riverwalk. 
3.  Where applicable, subdivisions and site developments shall be designed to provide public pedestrian access to the Riverwalk at a maximum spacing of four hundred (400) feet, as measured along the Riverwalk (as generally shown in Figure 17.55.100(F)). Public pedestrian access shall be provided either through public streets or public pedestrian easements. Pedestrian easements shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. Paved walkways with a minimum width of ten (10) feet shall be provided in pedestrian easements. The extent of pedestrian walkway each development is required to construct will be determined by the reviewing authority. 
Figure 17.55.100(F) Block Length, Street Spacing and Riverwalk Access

(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.110 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Commercial building design standards. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. This section is intended to provide detailed, pedestrian-oriented design that is characteristic of the City of Coquille while affording flexibility to use a variety of architectural building styles. All buildings shall meet the standards of subsections B.-D. of this section, which are applied through design review. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with all criteria under each standard. 
B.  Pedestrian Orientation. The design of all buildings on a site shall support a safe and attractive pedestrian environment. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections B.1.-B.6. of this section are met. Alternatively, the approval body may modify one or more of the criteria and approve an alternate design upon finding that the design contains an equally good or superior way of achieving the above purpose and intent. 
1.  The building orientation standards under Section 17.55.100 shall be met. 
2.  Primary building entrances shall open directly to the outside and, if not abutting a street, shall have walkways connecting them to the street sidewalk; every building shall have at least one primary entrance that does not require passage through a parking lot or garage to gain access. 
3.  Corner buildings (i.e. buildings within twenty (20) feet of a corner as defined by the intersecting curbs) shall have corner entrances, or shall provide at least one entrance within twenty (20) feet of the street corner. 
4.  At least forty (40) percent of the building's street-facing elevation (measured horizontally in linear feet) shall be located at the build-to line or closer to the street. Build-to lines are prescribed by Section 17.55.040. 
5.  Ground floor windows or window displays shall be provided along at least thirty (30) percent of the building's ground floor street-facing elevation. Windows and display boxes used to meet this standard shall be integral to the building design and not mounted to an exterior wall. 
6.  All building entrances and, for buildings with zero front yard setback, at least thirty (30) percent of the building's ground floor street-facing elevations shall incorporate weather protection, such as awnings, canopies, overhangs, or similar features, extending at least five feet over adjacent sidewalks. 
C.  Compatibility. All buildings shall be designed consistent with the architectural context in which they are located. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections C.1.-C.6. of this section are met. Alternatively, the approval body may modify one or more of the criteria and approve an alternate design upon finding that the design contains an equally good or superior way of achieving the above purpose and intent. 
1.  There is continuity in building sizes between new and existing buildings. 
2.  The ground floor and upper floor elevations and architectural detailing, including windows, are compatible with one another. 
3.  Roof elevation is similar to or compatible with buildings in the vicinity (roof pitch, shape, projections). 
4.  There is continuity of building sizes on the site, if more than one building is proposed. 
5.  There is continuity in the rhythm of windows and doors on the proposed building(s). 
6.  The relationship of buildings to public spaces, such as streets, plazas, other areas, and public parking, including on-street parking, is strengthened by the proposed building(s). 
D.  Human Scale. The design of all buildings shall be to a human scale. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections D.1.-D.7. of this section are met. Alternatively, the approval body may modify one or more of the criteria and approve an alternative design upon finding that the design contains an equally good or superior way of achieving the above purpose and intent. Figure 17.55.110(D) provides contrasting examples of building elevations that are consistent/inconsistent with human scale criteria. 
1.  Regularly spaced and similarly shaped windows are provided on all building stories. 
2.  Ground floor retail spaces have tall ceilings (i.e. twelve (12) through sixteen (16) feet) with display windows on the ground floor. 
3.  Display windows are trimmed, recessed, or otherwise defined by wainscoting, sills, water tables, or similar architectural features. 
4.  On multi-story buildings, ground floors are defined and separated from upper stories by appropriate architectural features (e.g., cornices, trim, awnings, canopies, arbors, trellises, overhangs, or other features) that visually identify the transition from ground floor to upper story; such features should be compatible with the surrounding architecture. 
5.  The tops of flat roofs are treated with appropriate detailing (i.e., cornice, pediment, flashing, trim, or other detailing) that is compatible with the surrounding architecture. 
6.  Pitched roofs have eaves, brackets, gables with decorative vents, or other detailing that is consistent with the surrounding architecture. 
7.  Where buildings with greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of enclosed ground floor space are proposed, they shall provide articulated facades on all street-facing elevations. This criterion is met when an elevation contains at least three of the following features for every forty (40) feet of building (horizontal length): transparent windows; primary entrances; weather protection (awnings or canopies extending at least five feet over adjacent walks); building offsets, projections, or changes in elevation or horizontal direction of at least three feet; sheltering roofs or terraces; a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials; screening trees; and/or small scale lighting (e.g., wall-mounted lighting, or up-lighting). Note: Figure 17.55.110(D) is intended to show how a variety of elements are used to meet the articulation standard; it is not to be interpreted as a required architectural style. 
Figure 17.55.110(D) Examples of Large Commercial Design Elements

(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.120 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Special residential use standards. 
    This section provides standards for the allowed residential land uses and building types identified in Table 17.55.030. The standards are intended to control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the riverfront mixed use overlay district. 
A.  Attached Single-Family (Townhouses) and Cottage Clusters. Single-family attached housing with three or more dwellings (lots), and cottage cluster housing shall comply with the standards in subsections A.1. and A.2. of this section, which are intended to control development scale; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic, parking, and design compatibility; and ensure management and maintenance of common areas. 
1.  Alley Access Required for Subdivisions Principally Containing Townhouses, or Cottage Clusters. Subdivisions, or phases of subdivision, proposed to contain three or more consecutively attached single-family dwellings on any block, and cottage cluster developments shall provide vehicle access to all such lots and units from an alley or interior parking court, as described in Section 17.60.020. Alley(s) and parking court(s) shall be created at the time of subdivision approval, and may be contained in private tracts or, if approved by the city, in public right-of-way, in accordance with Section 17.72.020, Transportation standards, and Chapter 17.88, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments. 
a.  As an alternative to the alley access requirements of subsection 17.55.120 A.1., above, townhouse developments may provide vehicle access through street-facing garages, in compliance with subsection 17.55.100 C.1.b. 
2.  Common Areas. Any common areas (e.g., landscaping, private tracts, common driveways, private alleys, building exteriors, and/or similar common areas shall be owned and maintained by a homeowner's association or other legal entity as approved by the city. A copy of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the city prior to building permit approval. 
B.  Private Open Space. Townhouse developments shall provide each dwelling with a street-facing porch, deck, or patio having a minimum depth of six feet and a minimum area of forty-eight (48) square feet. 
Figure 17.55.120(C)(3) Examples of Multifamily Open Space

C.  The following uses and development types shall comply with relevant standards of Section 17.24.110, Residential district-Special use standards: 
1.  Bed and breakfast inns. 
2.  Home occupations. 
3.  Multiple-family housing. 
4.  Short-term vacation rentals. 
5.  Assisted living facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.130 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Pedestrian amenities. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. Pedestrian amenities such as plazas, benches, and other sidewalk furnishings serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting and enjoyment along street frontages and contribute to a walkable neighborhood. The standards in the section apply to all development in the riverfront mixed use overlay district. 
B.  Standards. Developments in the mixed use overlay district shall provide at least one pedestrian amenity, as described below and as generally illustrated in Figure 17.55.130(B). Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a street furnishing zone, building frontage zone, or plaza, or within the pedestrian through zone, as shown in Figure 17.55.130(B), and shall be physically accessible to the public. Use of the public right-of-way requires approval by the road authority. Design standards for pedestrian amenities follow: 
1.  A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the building entrance (minimum sidewalk extension of four feet); 
2.  Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches, garden wall or ledges between the building entrance and sidewalk) with a minimum of sixteen (16) inches in height and thirty (30) inches in width; 
3.  Building canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection (minimum projection of five over a sidewalk, plaza or other pedestrian space); 
4.  Public art that incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, memorial or sculpture with seating). 
Figure 17.55.130(B) Examples of Pedestrian Amenities

(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
17.55.140 - Riverfront mixed use overlay district-Stormwater management. 
A.  Purpose. In order to reduce the impacts of development in the RMU overlay district on the quality of surface water and groundwater, this section establishes requirements for management and treatment of stormwater runoff on private property before it can be discharged from the site, into a watercourse, into a public storm drain system, or into the ground. 
1.  Pollutants of concern include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Suspended solids (sediment). 
b.  Heavy metals (dissolved and particulate, such as lead, copper, zinc, and cadmium). 
c.  Nutrients (such as nitrogen and phosphorus). 
d.  Bacteria and viruses. 
e.  Organics (such as oil, grease, hydrocarbons, pesticides, and fertilizers). 
f.  Floatable debris. 
g.  Increased thermal load (temperature). 
B.  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land use and development applications in the RMU overlay district. Applications also shall comply with Section 17.72.050 storm drainage improvements. 
1.  Exemptions. The reviewing authority may, at its sole discretion, determine that certain development applications are exempt from the requirements of this section. Examples may include: 
a.  An application that will result in the construction or creation of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of new or replaced impervious surface. 
b.  An application for development of a lot or parcel included in an application that previously was determined to comply with this section. 
C.  Requirements. All developments and projects on private property in the RMU overlay district shall include pollution reduction facilities to treat all stormwater runoff from the development site, including pervious as well as impervious surfaces. 
1.  Pollution reduction facilities are defined as any structure or drainage device that is designed, constructed, and maintained to collect and filter surface water runoff during and after a storm event for the purpose of protecting, maintaining, or improving surface and/or groundwater quality. 
2.  Pollution reduction facilities may include but are not limited to the following, which are listed solely as examples; actual facility selection and design shall be based on site characteristics and pollutant removal capabilities of specific systems, as well as stormwater management objectives identified by the reviewing authority: 
a.  Vegetated filter strip (a gently sloping, densely vegetated area used to filter, slow, and infiltrate stormwater). 
b.  Swale (grassy vegetated, or street swale: a long, narrow, trapezoidal or parabolic-shaped channel, planted with a dense grass mix or other suitable vegetation). 
c.  Rain garden (vegetated surface facility that collects runoff from impervious surfaces, allowing the uptake of pollutants through contact with vegetation and filtration through a sand medium). 
d.  Manufactured filtration device (proprietary structure or device). 
e.  Stormwater planter (a facility filled with topsoil and gravel, then planted with vegetation). 
f.  Eco-roof (lightweight, low-maintenance vegetated roof system). 
3.  All pollution reduction facilities shall be sited, designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with criteria and methodologies approved by the reviewing authority. 
4.  District Stormwater Filtration and Retention Facility. The City of Coquille plans to construct an engineered stormwater biofiltration swale and linear retention facility along the river frontage of the riverfront mixed use overlay district. In addition to protecting the Coquille River from increased stormwater discharges, the bioswale/retention basin will allow for individual developments in the RMU overlay district to avoid on-site impoundment by directing runoff to that structure, even if still required to implement approved stormwater treatment methods. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2013) 
Division III. - Community Design Standards 
Chapter 17.56 - DESIGN STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION 

17.56.010 - Design standards-Purpose. 
    The following provisions describe how the community design standards (Division III) are intended to be applied, and the relationship between this division and the supplemental design standards for specific land uses and building types contained in Division II. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.56.020 - Design standards-Applicability. 
    The standards in this division are applied based on whether a project is classified as a major project or a minor project. In addition, each chapter of this division contains "applicability directions." In general, the chapters are applied as follows: 
A.  Major Project. Major projects, including developments that require site design review (Chapter 17.84), land division approval (Chapter 17.88), master planned development (Chapter 17.96), and amendments to the comprehensive plan or zoning map (Chapter 17.104), must conform to the applicable sections of: 
1.  Access and Circulation (Chapter 17.60); 
2.  Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls (Chapter 17.64); 
3.  Parking and Loading (Chapter 17.68); 
4.  Public Facilities (Chapter 17.72); 
5.  Surface Water Management (Chapter 17.76). 
B.  Minor Project. Minor projects are small developments and land use actions that require only land use review or conditional use approval where no site design review is required. The following chapters generally apply; however, individual sections will not apply to some projects. 
1.  Access and Circulation (Chapter 17.60); 
2.  Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls (Chapter 17.64); 
3.  Parking and Loading (Chapter 17.68); 
4.  Surface Water Management (Chapter 17.76). 
C.  Nonconforming Situations. Where an existing, lawfully established structure or development does not comply with the standards of this code, the structure/development is allowed to continue as a legal nonconforming use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120, Nonconforming Uses and Developments. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.60 - ACCESS AND CIRCULATION 

17.60.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that developments provide safe and efficient access and circulation for pedestrians and vehicles. Section 17.60.020 provides standards for vehicular access and circulation. Section 17.60.030 provides standards for pedestrian access and circulation. Standards for streets and other transportation system improvements are provided in Section 17.72.020. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.60.020 - Vehicular access and circulation. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. The intent of this section is to manage access to land uses and on-site circulation, and to preserve the transportation system in terms of safety, capacity, and function. This section applies to all public streets within the City of Coquille, and to all properties that abut these roadways. This section implements the transportation policies of the City of Coquille comprehensive plan. 
B.  Applicability. This chapter applies to all public streets within the city and to all properties that abut these streets. The standards apply when lots are created, consolidated, or modified through a land division, partition, lot line adjustment, lot consolidation, or street vacation; and when properties are subject to land use review or site design review. 
C.  Access Permit Required. Access to a public street (e.g., a new curb cut or driveway approach) requires an access permit. An access permit may be in the form of a letter to the applicant, or it may be attached to a land use decision notice as a condition of approval. In either case, approval of an access permit shall follow the procedures and requirements of the applicable roadway authority, as determined through the review procedures in Division IV. 
D.  Traffic Study Requirements. The city may require a traffic study prepared by a qualified professional to determine access, circulation, and other transportation requirements in conformance with Section 17.80.090, Traffic Impact Analysis. 
E.  Conditions of Approval. The city or other roadway authority, as applicable, may require the closing or consolidation of existing curb cuts or other vehicle access points, recording of reciprocal access easements (i.e., for shared driveways), development of a frontage street, installation of traffic control devices, and/or other mitigation as a condition of granting an access permit, to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street and highway system. 
F.  Corner and Intersection Separation-Backing onto Public Streets. New and modified accesses shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Except as provided under subsection (F)(4) of this section, the distance from a street intersection to a driveway or other street access shall meet the minimum spacing requirements as required by the city engineer, or comply with the requirements of other roadway authorities, as applicable. 
2.  New property access shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet of a street intersection unless no other reasonable access to the property is available. Where no other alternatives exist, the city may allow construction of an access connection at a point less than fifty (50) feet from an intersection, provided the access is as far away from the intersection as possible and sight distance requirements are met. 
3.  The city may impose turning restrictions (i.e., right in/out, right in only, or right out only) where a driveway opens onto a collector or arterial street. 
4.  Access to and from off-street parking areas shall not permit backing onto a public street, except for single-family dwellings. 
5.  The city may reduce required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical due to lot dimensions, existing development, other physical features, or conflicting code requirements, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Joint-use driveways and cross-access easements are provided in accordance with subsection H of this section; 
b.  The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system in accordance with this section; and 
c.  The property owner(s) enter in a written agreement with the city, recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site will be closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the joint-use driveway. 
G.  Site Circulation. New developments shall be required to provide a circulation system that accommodates expected traffic on the site. Pedestrian connections on the site, including connections through large sites, and connections between sites (as applicable) and adjacent sidewalks, must conform to the provisions in Section 17.60.030. 
H.  Joint and Cross-Access-Requirement. The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets should be minimized by the use of shared driveways for adjoining lots where feasible. When necessary for traffic safety and access management purposes, or to access flag lots, the city may require joint access and/or shared driveways in the following situations as follows: 
1.  For shared parking areas; 
2.  For adjacent developments, where access onto an arterial is limited; 
3.  For multi-tenant developments, and developments on multiple lots or parcels. Such joint accesses and shared driveways shall incorporate all of the following: 
a.  A continuous service drive or cross-access corridor that provides for driveway separation consistent with the applicable transportation authority's access management classification system and standards, 
b.  A design speed of ten (10) miles per hour and a maximum width of twenty-two (22) feet, in addition to any parking alongside the driveway; additional driveway width or fire lanes may be approved when necessary to accommodate specific types of service vehicles, loading vehicles, or emergency service provider vehicles, 
c.  Driveway stubs to property lines (for future extension) and other design features to make it easy to see that the abutting properties may be required with future development to connect to the cross-access driveway. 
I.  Joint and Cross-Access-Reduction in Required Parking Allowed. When a shared driveway is provided or required as a condition of approval, the land uses adjacent to the shared driveway may have their minimum parking standards reduced in accordance with the shared parking provisions of Section 17.68.030. 
J.  Joint and Cross-Access-Easement and Use and Maintenance Agreement. Pursuant to this section, property owners shall: 
1.  Record an easement with the deed allowing cross-access to and from other properties served by the joint-use driveways and cross-access or service drive; 
2.  Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights along the roadway for the subject property shall be dedicated to the city and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveway; 
3.  Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners. 
K.  Access Connections and Driveway Design. All driveway connections to a public right-of-way (access) and driveways shall conform to all of the following design standards: 
1.  Driveway Width. Driveways shall meet the following standards: 
a.  One-way driveways (one way in or out) shall have a minimum driveway width of ten (10) feet, and a maximum width of twelve (12) feet, and shall have appropriate signage designating the driveway as a one-way connection. 
b.  For two-way access, each lane shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a maximum width of eleven (11) feet. 
2.  Driveway Approaches. Driveway approaches shall be designed and located to provide exiting vehicles with an unobstructed view of other vehicles and pedestrians, and to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing conflicts with on-site circulation. Construction of driveway accesses along acceleration or deceleration lanes or tapers should be avoided due to the potential for vehicular conflicts. Driveways should be located to allow for safe maneuvering in and around loading areas. See also Chapter 17.68, Parking and Loading. 
3.  Driveway Construction. Driveway aprons (when required) shall be constructed of concrete and shall be installed between the street right-of-way and the private drive, as shown in Figure 17.60.020(K). Driveway aprons shall conform to Americans With Disability Act requirements for sidewalks and walkways, which generally require a continuous unobstructed route of travel that is not less than three feet in width, with a cross slope not exceeding two percent, and providing for landing areas and ramps at intersections. 
Figure 17.60.020(K) Examples of Acceptable Driveway Openings Next to Sidewalks/Walkways 

L.  Fire Access and Turnarounds. When required by applicable fire codes, fire access lanes with turnarounds shall be provided. Except as waived in writing by the fire marshal, a fire equipment access drive shall be provided for any portion of an exterior wall of the first story of a building that is located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from an existing public street or approved fire equipment access drive. The drive shall contain unobstructed adequate aisle width (fourteen (14) through twenty (20) feet) and turnaround area for emergency vehicles. The fire marshal may require that fire lanes be marked as "No Stopping/No Parking." For requirements related to cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets, please refer to Section 17.72.020(N). 
M.  Vertical Clearances. Driveways, private streets, aisles, turnaround areas and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches for their entire length and width. 
N.  Vision Clearance. No visual obstruction (e.g., sign, structure, solid fence, or shrub vegetation) between three feet and eight feet in height shall be placed in "vision clearance areas" on streets, driveways, alleys, or mid-block lanes where no traffic control stop sign or signal is provided, as shown in Figure 17.60.020(N). The minimum vision clearance area may be modified by the city engineer upon finding that more or less sight distance is required (i.e., due to traffic speeds, roadway alignment, etc.). Light standards, utility poles, tree trunks and similar objects may be allowed, subject to approval by the city engineer. 
Figure 17.60.020(N) Vision Clearance Areas

O.  Construction. The following development and maintenance standards shall apply to all driveways and private streets, except that the standards do not apply to driveways serving one single-family detached dwelling: 
1.  Surface Options. Driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds may be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable surfacing, or a durable nonpaving or porous paving material may be used, subject to review and approval by the city engineer, to manage surface water runoff. All paving materials shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer. 
2.  Surface Water Management. All driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds shall have on-site collection of surface waters to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto public rights-of-way and abutting property. Surface water facilities shall be constructed in conformance with Chapter 17.76 and applicable engineering standards. 
3.  Driveway Aprons. When driveway approaches or "aprons" are required to connect driveways to the public right-of-way, they shall be paved with concrete surfacing and conform to the city's engineering design criteria and standard specifications. (See general illustrations in Section 17.60.020(K).) 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.60.030 - Pedestrian access and circulation. 
A.  Site Layout and Design. To provide safe, direct, and convenient pedestrian circulation, all developments, except single-family and duplex dwellings shall provide a continuous pedestrian system within the development site that connects to the public right-of-way, regardless of whether a public sidewalk currently exists. The pedestrian system shall be based on the standards in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this section: 
1.  Continuous Walkway System. The pedestrian walkway system shall extend throughout the development site and connect to all future phases of development, if any, and to existing or planned off-site adjacent trails, public parks, and open space areas to the greatest extent practicable. The developer may also be required to connect or stub walkway(s) to adjacent streets and to private property with a previously reserved public access easement for this purpose, in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.60.020, Vehicular access and circulation, and Section 17.72.020, Transportation standards. 
2.  Safe, Direct and Convenient. Walkways within developments shall provide safe, reasonably direct, and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all adjacent streets, based on the following definitions: 
a.  Reasonably Direct. A route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for likely users. 
b.  Safe and Convenient. Routes that are reasonably free from hazards and provide a reasonably direct route of travel between destinations. 
c.  "Primary entrance" is the main public entrance to the building. In the case where no public entrance exists, street connections shall be provided to the main employee entrance, as applicable. 
3.  Connections Within Development. Connections within developments shall be provided as required in subsections (A)(3)(a) through (c) of this section: 
a.  Walkways shall connect all building entrances to one another to the extent practicable, as generally shown in Figure 17.60.030(A)(1); 
b.  Walkways shall connect all on-site parking areas, storage areas, recreational facilities and common areas, and shall connect off-site adjacent uses to the site to the extent practicable. Topographic or existing development constraints may be cause for not making certain walkway connections, as generally shown in Figure 17.60.030(A)(1); and 
Figure 17.60.030(A)(1) Pedestrian Pathway System (Typical)


c.  Parking areas containing twenty-four (24) or more parking spaces shall be broken up so that parking bays do not exceed twelve (12) contiguous parking spaces without a break. Parking areas may be broken up with landscape islands of not less than four feet in width and six feet in length, handicap-accessible walkways, plazas, large landscape areas (e.g., parking lot or site perimeter landscape buffers, or landscape areas intended to protect significant trees), streets, or driveways with street-like features. Street-like features, for the purpose of this section, means a raised sidewalk that is at least four feet wide for residential projects and at least six feet wide in all other projects, with six-inch raised curbs, accessible curb ramps, street trees in planter strips or tree wells, and pedestrian-oriented lighting. 
B.  Walkway Design and Construction. Walkways, including those provided with accessways through a block, shall conform to all of the standards in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(4) of this section, as generally illustrated in Figure 17.60.030(B): 
1.  Vehicle/Walkway Separation. Except for crosswalks (subsection (B)(2) of this section), where a walkway abuts a driveway or street, it shall be raised six inches and curbed along the edge of the driveway/street. Alternatively, the decision body may approve a walkway abutting a driveway at the same grade as the driveway if the walkway is protected from all vehicle maneuvering areas. An example of such protection is a row of decorative metal or masonry bollards designed to withstand a vehicle's impact, with adequate minimum spacing between them to protect pedestrians. 
2.  Crosswalks. Where a walkway crosses a parking area, driveway, or street ("crosswalk"), it shall be clearly marked with contrasting paving materials (e.g., light-color concrete or pavers inlayed between asphalt), which may be part of a raised/hump crossing area. The reviewing body may approve painted or thermo-plastic striping and similar types of nonpermanent applications may be approved for crosswalks not exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in length. 
3.  Walkway Width and Surface. Walkway and accessway surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, brick/masonry pavers, or other durable surface, as approved by the city engineer, at least four feet wide in residential projects and at least six feet wide in all other projects. Multi-use paths (i.e., for bicycles and pedestrians) shall be concrete or asphalt, at least ten (10) feet wide, or as required by the roadway authority or park district, as applicable. 
4.  Accessible Routes. Walkways shall comply with applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. The ends of all raised walkways, where the walkway intersects a driveway or street shall provide ramps that are ADA accessible, and walkways shall provide direct routes to primary building entrances. 
Figure 17.60.030(B) Pedestrian Walkway Detail (Typical)

(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.64 - LANDSCAPING, STREET TREES, FENCES AND WALLS 

17.64.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote community health, safety, and welfare by protecting natural vegetation and setting development standards for the design, installation, and maintenance of landscaping, street trees, fences, and walls; and for alterations to the same. Together, these elements of the natural and built environment contribute to the visual quality, environmental health, and character of the community. Trees provide climate control through shading during summer months and wind screening during winter. Trees and other plants can also buffer pedestrians from traffic. Walls, fences, trees, and other landscape materials also provide vital screening and buffering between land uses. Landscaped areas help to control surface water drainage and can improve water quality, as compared to paved or built surfaces. Likewise, proper maintenance of landscape features is necessary to protect the public health and safety. The chapter is organized into the following sections: 
A.  Section 17.64.020, Landscape conservation, prevents the indiscriminate removal of significant trees and other vegetation, including vegetation associated with streams, wetlands, and other protected natural resource areas. Landscape conservation helps prevent soil erosion and landslide hazards, while protecting natural resource values (e.g., stream flow and water quality) and community aesthetics. Conservation of native, noninvasive plant and tree species is a high priority in areas subject to natural hazards, such as hillsides and riparian areas. Regulation of tree removal in other areas of the city is intended to balance residential privacy with the desire for views from, and solar access to, individual residences. 
B.  Section 17.64.030, Landscaping, sets standards for and requires landscaping of all development sites that require site design review. This section also requires buffering for parking and vehicle maneuvering areas, and in some instances between different land uses. Section 17.64.030 is to be applied in conjunction with Division II, Land Use Districts. 
C.  Section 17.64.040, Street trees, sets standards for and requires planting of trees where landscape park strips are designated. Street trees add to property values and community livability by providing summer shade along walks, comfort and safety to pedestrians, improved air quality along major streets, and improved community aesthetics. 
D.  Section 17.64.050, Fences and walls, sets standards for new fences and walls, including allowable height and materials, to promote security, personal safety, privacy, and aesthetics. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.64.020 - Landscape conservation. 
A.  Applicability. All development sites containing significant vegetation, as defined by subsection B of this section, shall comply with the standards of this section. The purpose of this section is to incorporate significant native vegetation into the landscapes of development to the greatest extent practicable. The retention of mature, native vegetation within developments is a preferred alternative to removal of vegetation and replanting, particularly on steep slopes and areas prone to landslide or susceptible to soil erosion. Mature landscaping provides summer shade and wind breaks, controls erosion, and allows for water conservation due to larger plants having established root systems. 
B.  Significant Vegetation. "Significant vegetation" means individual trees and shrubs within an open space district, any existing or proposed open space area within a development, geological hazard areas, floodplains, and jurisdictional wetlands, as determined by a natural resource agency with jurisdiction, except that protection shall not be required for plants listed as nonnative, invasive plants by the Oregon State University (OSU) Extension Service, Coos County, or other government agency, where removal of vegetation is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare as determined by the city approval body. 
C.  Mapping and Protection Required. Significant vegetation shall be mapped as required by Chapter 17.84, Land Use Review and Site Design Review. Significant trees shall be mapped individually and identified by species and diameter or caliper at four feet above grade. A "protection" area shall be defined around the edge of all branches (drip line) of each tree. Drip lines may overlap between trees. The city also may require an inventory, survey, or assessment prepared by a qualified professional when necessary to determine construction boundaries, building setbacks, and other protection or mitigation requirements. 
D.  Protection Standards. Significant trees and shrubs identified as meeting the criteria in subsection B of this section, shall be retained to the extent practicable to minimize the risk of erosion, landslide, and storm water runoff. Where protection is impracticable because it would prevent reasonable development of public streets, utilities, or land uses permitted by the applicable land use district, the city may allow removal of significant vegetation to provide for a reasonable building envelope (area exclusive of required yard setbacks), and areas for access and utilities. Where other areas must be disturbed to provide for construction staging areas, the applicant shall be required to restore such areas after construction with landscaping to prevent erosion and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. With the owner's consent, the city may accept a land dedication or become a party to a conservation easement on private property for conservation purposes. 
E.  Construction-Erosion and Sediment Control. An erosion and sediment control plan is required for all new construction. All significant vegetation on a site that is not otherwise designated and approved by the city for removal shall be protected prior to, during, and after construction in accordance with a limit-of-clearing and grading plan approved by the city. The city may limit grading activities and operation of vehicles and heavy equipment in and around significant vegetation areas, streams and other water bodies to prevent erosion, pollution, or landslide hazards. See also Chapter 17.52, Estuarine/Coastal Shorelands (/EC) Resource Overlay. 
F.  Exemptions. The protection standards in subsections D and E of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Dead or Diseased Vegetation. Dead or diseased vegetation may be removed from an area containing significant vegetation, as defined by subsection B of this section, provided the burden is on the property owner to demonstrate to the planning official that said vegetation is in fact diseased or dead before it is removed. 
2.  Hazardous Vegetation and Other Emergencies. Significant vegetation may be removed without land use approval pursuant to Division IV when the vegetation poses an immediate threat to life or safety, or the vegetation must be removed for other reasons of emergency (e.g., fallen over road or power line, blocked drainage way, or similar circumstance), as determined by the city planning official or emergency service provider. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.64.030 - Landscaping. 
A.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all new developments requiring site design review. 
B.  Landscaping Plan Required. A landscape plan is required. All landscape plans shall conform to the requirements in Section 17.84.050(B)(5) (Landscape Plan). 
C.  Landscape Area Standards. The minimum percentage of required landscaping equals: 
1.  Residential District. Ten (10) percent of the site, except not required for single-family and duplex lots. 
2.  Downtown District (C-1). Five percent of the site. 
3.  General Commercial and Commercial Retail Districts (C-2; CR). Ten (10) percent of the site. 
4.  Mixed-Use Commercial District (C-3). Ten (10) percent of the site. 
5.  Industrial District. Ten (10) percent of the site. 
6.  Geologic Hazards Overlay. Twenty-five (25) percent of the site must be open space with existing natural vegetation and/or replanted with suitable noninvasive species. 
D.  Landscape Materials. Permitted landscape materials include trees, shrubs, ground cover plants, nonplant ground covers, and outdoor hardscape features, as described below. "Coverage" is based on the projected canopy cover of all plants upon maturity, i.e., typically three or more years after planting. 
1.  Existing Vegetation. Existing noninvasive vegetation may be used in meeting landscape requirements. When existing mature trees with a trunk diameter greater than ten (10) inches are protected on a development site (e.g., within or adjacent to parking areas), the decision making body may reduce the number of new trees required by a ratio of one-inch caliper of new tree(s) for every one-inch caliper of existing tree(s) protected. This provision does not waive the requirement for landscape areas or "breaks" between parking bays under Sections 17.60.030 and subsection E of this section; it only reduces the number of new trees that may be required where existing mature trees are preserved. 
2.  Plant Selection. A combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, and ground covers shall be used for all planted areas, the selection of which shall be based on local climate, exposure, water availability, and drainage conditions. When new vegetation is planted, soils shall be amended, as necessary, to allow for healthy plant growth. 
3.  "Nonnative, invasive" plants, as per Section 17.64.020(B), shall be removed during site development, to the extent practicable, to prevent their spreading; and the planting of new invasive species is prohibited. 
4.  Hardscape Features. In meeting the landscape area requirements of this chapter, and where soil and drainage conditions allow, areas covered by unenclosed patios, decks, plazas, and similar hardscape features may count toward up to fifty (50) percent of the required landscape area, provided that such surfaces allow for storm water infiltration to the aquifer. Swimming pools, sports courts, and similar active recreation facilities may not be counted toward fulfilling the landscape requirement. 
5.  Ground Cover Standard. All landscaped area, whether or not required, that is not planted with trees and shrubs, shall have ground cover plants that are sized and spaced as follows: a minimum of one plant per twelve (12) inches on center in triangular spacing, or other planting pattern that is designed to achieve at least fifty (50) percent coverage of all landscape surface areas. 
6.  Tree Size. Trees shall have a minimum diameter or caliper four feet above grade of two inches or greater at time of planting. 
7.  Shrub Size. Shrubs shall be planted from five-gallon containers or larger. 
8.  Nonplant Ground Covers. Bark dust, chips, or similar mulch shall be used to cover all landscape surfaces not otherwise planted or covered with hardscape surfaces. Stone, aggregate and similar materials may be used as ground cover, but shall cover no more than fifty (50) percent of the area to be landscaped and shall be limited to footpaths, landscape bed borders, or structures providing erosion control or storm water management. Nonplant ground covers cannot be a substitute for ground cover plants. 
9.  Significant Vegetation. Significant vegetation protected in accordance with Section 17.64.020 may be credited toward meeting the minimum landscape area standards. Credit shall be granted on a per square foot basis. The street tree standards of Section 17.64.040 may be waived by the city when existing mature trees protected within the front yard provide the same or better shading, visual quality, and compatibility with adjacent structures and utilities as would otherwise be provided by standard street trees. 
10.  Storm Water Facilities. Surface storm water treatment facilities (e.g., detention/retention ponds and swales designed for water quality treatment), when required under Section 17.72.040, shall be landscaped with water tolerant, native plants. 
E.  Landscape Design Standards. All yards, parking lots, and required street tree planter strips shall be landscaped to achieve the following criteria: 
1.  Yard Setback Landscaping. Landscaping in yards shall: 
a.  Provide visual screening and privacy within side and rear yards; while leaving front yards and building entrances mostly visible for security purposes and maintaining opportunities for solar access and territorial views; 
b.  Use shrubs and trees as wind breaks; 
c.  Consider the root and canopy growth characteristics of trees and avoid conflicts with utilities; 
d.  Retain natural vegetation where it does not conflict with clear vision requirements and utilities; 
e.  Define pedestrian pathways and open space areas with landscape materials; 
f.  Provide focal points within a development, for example, by preserving large or unique trees or groves, hedges, and flowering plants; 
g.  Use trees to provide summer shading within common open space areas and within front yards when street trees cannot be provided; 
h.  Use a combination of plants for year-long color and interest; 
i.  Use landscaping to screen outdoor storage and mechanical equipment areas, and to enhance graded areas such as berms, swales, and detention/retention ponds. 
Figure 17.64.030(E) General Landscape Areas (Typical)

2.  Parking Areas. A minimum of ten (10) percent of the total surface area of all parking areas, as measured around the perimeter of all parking spaces and maneuvering areas, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of "evenly distributed" shade trees with shrubs and/or ground cover plants that conform to the criteria in subsections (E)(1)(a) through (h) of this section. "Evenly distributed" means that the trees and other plants are distributed around the parking lot perimeter and between parking bays to provide a partial canopy. At a minimum, one tree per twelve (12) parking spaces on average shall be planted to create a partial tree canopy over and around the parking area. All parking areas with more than twenty-four (24) spaces shall include landscape islands with trees to break up the parking area into rows of not more than twelve (12) contiguous parking spaces. All parking area landscapes shall have dimensions of not less than twenty-four (24) square feet of area, or not less than four feet in width by six feet in length, to ensure adequate soil, water, and space for healthy plant growth. (See figures in Section 17.60.030.) 
3.  Buffering and Screening Required. Buffering and screening are required under the following conditions: 
a.  Parking/Maneuvering Area Adjacent to Streets and Drives. Where a parking or maneuvering area is adjacent and parallel to a street or driveway, an evergreen hedge; decorative wall (masonry or similar quality material) with openings; arcade, trellis, or similar partially opaque structure between three and four feet in height shall be established between street and driveway. The required screening shall have breaks, where necessary, to allow pedestrian access to the site. The design of the wall or screening shall also provide breaks or openings for visual surveillance of the site and security. Evergreen hedges used to comply with this standard shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in height at maturity, and shall be of such species, number, and spacing to provide the required screening within one year after planting. Any areas between the wall/hedge and the street/driveway line shall be landscaped with plants or other vegetative ground cover. 
b.  Parking/Maneuvering Area Adjacent to Building. Where a parking or maneuvering area, or driveway, is adjacent to a building, the area shall be separated from the building by a curb and a raised walkway, plaza, or landscaped buffer not less than five feet in width. Raised curbs, bollards, wheel stops, or other design features shall be used to protect pedestrians, landscaping, and buildings from being damaged by vehicles. Where parking areas are located adjacent to residential groundfloor living space, a four-foot wide landscape buffer with a curbed edge may fulfill this requirement. 
c.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment, Outdoor Storage, Service and Delivery Areas, and Other Screening When Required. All mechanical equipment, outdoor storage and manufacturing, and service and delivery areas, shall be screened from view from all public streets and adjacent residential districts. When these or other areas are required to be screened, such screening shall be provided by: 
1.  A decorative wall (i.e., masonry or similar quality material); 
2.  Evergreen hedge; 
3.  Opaque fence complying with Section 17.64.050; or 
4.  A similar feature that provides an opaque barrier. 
    Walls, fences, and hedges shall comply with the vision clearance requirements and provide for pedestrian circulation, in accordance with Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation. (See Section 17.64.050 for standards specific to fences and walls.) 
d.  Flag Lot Screen. In approving a flag lot, as regulated under Chapter 17.88, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments, the city may require a landscape screen and/or fence be installed along property line(s) of the flag lot, for privacy of adjoining residents, in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.88.040. A flag lot screen shall not be required if the abutting property owner(s) indicate in writing that they do not want a screen or fence, however, the owner may install one at his or her discretion. 
F.  Maintenance and Irrigation. All yards and landscape areas, regardless of whether such areas are required by this code, shall be maintained in good health, with sufficient irrigation and care. Irrigation shall be required through site design review for new landscaping; temporary irrigation for a period of two years may be permitted where proposed species are drought tolerant. If the plantings fail to survive, the property owner shall replace them with an equivalent specimen (i.e., evergreen shrub replaces evergreen shrub, deciduous tree replaces deciduous tree, etc.). All plants and nonplant materials, including man-made features, on a site shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise be replaced by the owner upon being notified by the city of such code violation. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.64.040 - Street trees. 
    Street trees shall be planted for all developments that are subject to land division or site design review where landscape park strips exist or are required with the development. Requirements for street tree planting strips are provided in Section 17.72.020, Transportation standards. Planting of street trees shall generally follow construction of curbs and sidewalks, however, the city may defer tree planting until final inspection of completed dwellings to avoid damage to trees during construction. The planting and maintenance of street trees shall conform to the following standards and guidelines and any applicable road authority requirements: 
A.  Growth Characteristics. Trees shall be selected based on climate zone, growth characteristics and site conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions, exposure, and desired color and appearance. The following should guide tree selection by developers and approval by the city: 
1.  Provide a broad canopy where shade is desired, except where limited by overhead utilities or other space limitations; 
2.  Use low-growing trees for spaces under low utility wires; 
3.  Select trees which can be "limbed-up" to comply with vision clearance requirements; 
4.  Use narrow or "columnar" trees where awnings or other building features limit growth, where view protection is desired, or where greater visibility is desired between buildings and the street; 
5.  Use species with similar growth characteristics on the same block for design continuity; 
6.  Avoid using trees that are susceptible to insect or pest damage and trees that produce excessive shoots (suckers), seeds or fruit; 
7.  Select trees that are well adapted to the environment, including soil, wind, sun exposure, temperature tolerance, and exhaust. Drought-resistant trees should be chosen where they suit the specific soil type; 
8.  Select trees for their seasonal color if desired; 
9.  Use deciduous trees for summer shade and winter sun, unless unsuited to the location due to soil, wind, sun exposure, annual precipitation, or exhaust; 
10.  The diameter of the tree trunk at maturity shall not exceed the width and size of the planter strip or tree well. 
B.  Tree Size at Planting. The minimum tree size at planting is two-inch caliper measured four feet above grove for deciduous trees, and six-foot height for evergreen trees. 
C.  Spacing and Location. Street trees shall be planted within existing or proposed planting strips or in sidewalk tree wells on streets without planting strips, except where root system conflicts with utilities are unavoidable, in which case the city may approve trees planted in front yards of lots. Street tree spacing shall be based upon the type of tree(s) selected and the canopy size at maturity and, at a minimum, the planting area shall contain at least sixteen (16) square feet, or typically, four feet by four feet; trees shall be centered in the planter strip between sidewalk and curb. In general, trees should be spaced between thirty (30) feet and sixty (60) feet apart, except where planting a tree would conflict with existing trees, retaining walls, utilities and similar physical barriers. Actual spacing should be based on the trees' growth characteristics and provide for a mostly continuous tree canopy cover over adjacent sidewalks when the trees mature. 
D.  Soil Preparation, Planting and Care. The developer of subdivision or new site development with street frontage improvements shall be responsible for planting street trees, including soil preparation, ground cover material, staking, and temporary irrigation for two years after planting. The developer shall also be responsible for tree care (pruning, watering, fertilization, and replacement as necessary) during the first two years after planting, after which the adjacent property owners shall maintain the trees. 
E.  Assurances. The city shall require developers of subdivisions (four or more lots), including those within master planned developments, to provide a performance and maintenance bond in an amount determined by the city engineer, to ensure the maintenance, care and, if necessary, the replacement of required street trees during the first two years after planting. 
F.  Tree Maintenance. Maintenance of street trees, whether located in a public right-of-way or private property, is the ongoing responsibility of the adjoining property owner. 
G.  Street Tree List. (Reserved) 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.64.050 - Fences and walls. 
A.  General Requirements. All fences and walls shall comply with the height limitations of the respective land use district (Division II) and the standards of this section. The city may require installation of walls and/or fences as a condition of development approval, in accordance with land division approval (e.g., flag lots), approval of a conditional use permit, or site design review approval. When required through one of these types of approvals, no further land use review is required. If not part of a prior land use approval, new fences and walls require land use review (Type I) approval; if greater than six feet in height, a building permit is also required. (See also Section 17.64.030 for screening requirements.) 
B.  Dimensions. 
1.  Except as provided under subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section, the height of fences and walls within a front yard setback shall not exceed four feet as measured from the grade closest to the street right-of-way. 
2.  A retaining wall exceeding four feet in height within a front yard setback, which is necessary for site grading and development, may be approved through a land division or site development review. 
3.  One arbor, gate, or similar garden structures not exceeding eight feet in height and six feet in width is allowed within a front yard, outside required clear vision areas. 
4.  Walls and fences to be built for required buffers shall comply with Section 17.64.030. 
5.  Fences and walls shall comply with the vision clearance standards of Section 17.60.020. 
C.  Maintenance. For safety and for compliance with the purpose of this chapter, walls and fences required as a condition of development approval shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the property owner. 
D.  Materials. 
1.  Permitted fence and wall materials: weather-treated wood; untreated cedar and redwood; metal (e.g., chain link, wrought iron, and similar fences); bricks, stone, masonry block, formed-in-place concrete, or similar masonry; vinyl and composite (e.g., recycled) materials designed for use as fencing; and noninvasive evergreen plants kept to a height of no more than eight feet, except single-trunk trees may exceed eight feet. 
2.  Prohibited fence and wall materials: straw bales, barbed or razor wire; scrap lumber, untreated wood, metal (except chain link), scrap materials, and plant hedges taller than eight feet above grade within a required yard. 
3.  Fences or walls constructed of brick or masonry exceeding four feet in height shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.68 - PARKING AND LOADING 

17.68.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and flexible standards for development of vehicle and bicycle parking. The design of parking areas is critically important to the economic viability of some commercial areas, pedestrian and driver safety, the efficient and safe operation of adjoining streets, and community image and livability. Historically, some communities have required more parking than is necessary for some land uses, paving extensive areas of land that could be put to better use. Because vehicle parking facilities occupy large amounts of land, they must be planned and designed carefully to use the land efficiently, minimize storm water runoff, and maintain the visual character of the community. This chapter recognizes that each development has unique parking needs and provides a flexible approach for determining parking space requirements (i.e., "minimum" and "performance-based" standards). This chapter also provides standards for bicycle parking because many people use bicycles for recreation, commuting, and general transportation. Children as well as adults need safe and adequate spaces to park their bicycles throughout the community. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.68.020 - Applicability. 
    All developments subject to site design review (Chapter 17.84), including development of parking facilities, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.68.030 - Automobile parking standards. 
A.  Vehicle Parking-Minimum Standards by Use. The number of required off-street vehicle parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the standards in Table 17.68.030(A), or alternatively, through a separate parking demand analysis prepared by the applicant and subject to a Type II land use review (or Type III review if the request is part of an application that is already subject to Type III review). Where a use is not specifically listed in this table, parking requirements are determined by finding that a use is similar to one of those listed in terms of parking needs, or by estimating parking needs individually using the demand analysis option described above. Parking that counts toward the minimum requirement is parking in garages, carports, parking lots, bays along driveways, city-approved shared parking, and designated on-street parking when approved by the city. 
    There is no minimum number of off-street parking required in the C-1 (downtown) district; however, new development and changes in use in the downtown may be subject to a downtown parking district fee. If adopted by city council under separate ordinance, the fee shall be calculated using the minimum parking ratios in Table 17.68.030(A) below. 
Table 17.68.030(A) Minimum Required Parking by Use 
Use Categories 

(Examples of uses are in Chapter 17.12; definitions are in Chapter 17.08) Minimum Parking per Land Use (Additional parking may be provided, up to 150% of the minimum, without a separate parking needs analysis) 
(fractions rounded down to the closest whole number) Residential Categories Household Living Accessory Dwelling None Single-Family Dwelling, including attached and detached dwellings and manufactured homes 2 spaces, except attached dwellings shall conform to the parking requirements for multifamily uses Duplex 4 spaces per duplex building (2 spaces per dwelling) Multifamily 1 space per studio or 1-bedroom unit 1.5 spaces/unit per 2-bedroom unit 2 spaces/unit per 3-bedroom or larger unit Group Living, such as nursing or convalescent homes, rest homes, assisted living, congregate care, and similar special needs housing 0.5 space per 4 bedrooms Commercial Categories Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATM's, similar uses/facilities), per Section 17.28.100 No requirement. See Section 17.28.100 for queuing area requirements. Bed and Breakfast Inn 2 spaces per use; additional parking may be required by the City through the Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17.92) Educational Services, not a school (e.g., tutoring or similar services) 2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area Entertainment, Major Event per CU review (Chapter 17.92) Offices 2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area Outdoor Recreation, Commercial per CU review (Chapter 17.92) Parking Lot (when not an accessory use) per CU review (Chapter 17.92) Quick Vehicle Servicing or Vehicle Repair (see also Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through Uses, per Section 17.28.100) 2 spaces, or per CU review (Chapter 17.92) Retail Sales and Service (see also Drive-Up Uses) Retail: 2.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft., except bulk retail (e.g., auto, boat, trailers, nurseries, lumber and construction materials, furniture, appliances, and similar sales) 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. Restaurants and Bars: 5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area Health Clubs, Gyms, Continuous Entertainment (e.g., bowling alleys): 3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. Lodging (hotels, motels, inns) (see also Bed and Breakfast Inns): 0.75 per rentable room; for associated uses, such as restaurants, entertainment uses, and bars, see above Theaters and Cinemas: 1 per 6 seats Self-Service Storage No standard; subject to CU review where CU applies Industrial Categories Industrial Service (See also Drive-Up Uses) 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area Manufacturing and Production 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area; or as required by CU (Chapter 17.92) Warehouse and Freight Movement 0.5 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area; or as required by CU (Chapter 17.92) Waste-Related per CU review (Chapter 17.92) Wholesale Sales  - Fully enclosed 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.  - Not enclosed per CU review (Chapter 17.92) Institutional Categories Basic Utilities Parking based on applicant's projected parking demand, subject to City approval Community Service Parking based on applicant's projected parking demand, subject to City approval Day Care, adult or child day care; does not include Family Day Care (16 or fewer children) under ORS 657A.250 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area; or as required by CU (Chapter 17.92) Parks and Open Space Parking based on applicant's projected parking demand, subject to City approval Religious Institutions and Houses of Worship 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of main assembly area; or as required by CU (Chapter 17.92) Schools Parking based on applicant's projected parking demand, subject to City approval Other Categories Accessory Uses (with a permitted use) Parking based on applicant's projected parking demand, subject to City approval Agriculture-Animals Parking based on applicant's projected parking demand, subject to City approval Agriculture-Nurseries and similar horticulture See Retail Sales and Wholesale, as applicable Radio Frequency Transmission Facilities None Rail Lines and Utility Corridors Parking based on applicant's projected parking demand, subject to City approval Temporary Uses (limited to "P" and "CU" uses), per Section 17.112.010 As determined per Section 17.112.010, subject to City approval Transportation Facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction None  
B.  Vehicle Parking-Minimum Accessible Parking. 
1.  Accessible (ADA) parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the standards in Table 17.68.030(B); parking spaces used to meet the standards in Table 17.68.030(B) shall be counted toward meeting applicable off-street parking requirements; 
2.  Such parking shall be located in close proximity to building entrances and shall be designed to permit occupants of vehicles to reach the entrance on an unobstructed path or walkway; 
3.  Accessible spaces shall be grouped in pairs where possible; 
4.  Where covered parking is provided, covered accessible spaces shall be provided in the same ratio as covered nonaccessible spaces; 
5.  Required accessible parking spaces shall be identified with signs and pavement markings identifying them as reserved for persons with disabilities; signs shall be posted directly in front of the parking space at a height of no less than forty-two (42) inches and no more than seventy-two (72) inches above pavement level. Van spaces shall be specifically identified as such. 
Table 17.68.030(B) Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces 
Source: ADA Standards for Accessible Design 4.1.2(5) 
Total Number of Parking Spaces Provided (per lot) Total Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces (with 60? access aisle, or 96? aisle for vans 1 ) Van Accessible Parking Spaces with min. 96? wide access aisle Accessible Parking Spaces with min. 60? wide access aisle 1 to 25 Column A 1 1 0 26 to 50 2 1 1 51 to 75 3 1 2 76 to 100 4 1 3 101 to 150 5 1 4 151 to 200 6 1 5 201 to 300 7 1 6 301 to 400 8 1 7 401 to 500 9 2 7 >500 2% of total parking provided in each lot 1/8 of Column A 2 7/8 of Column A 3  
1 Vans and cars may share access aisles. 
2 One out of every eight accessible spaces. 
3 Seven out of every eight accessible parking spaces. 
C.  On-Street Parking. On-street parking shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Dimensions. The following constitutes one on-street parking space: 
a.  Parallel parking, each twenty-two (22) feet of uninterrupted curb; 
b.  Diagonal parking, each with twelve (12) feet of curb; 
c.  Ninety (90) degree (perpendicular) parking, each with twelve (12) feet of curb. 
2.  Location. Parking may be counted toward the minimum standards in Table 17.68.030(A) when it is on the block face abutting the subject land use. An on-street parking space must not obstruct a required clear vision area and it must not violate any law or street standard. 
3.  Public Use Required for Credit. On-street parking spaces counted toward meeting the parking requirements of a specific use may not be used exclusively by that use, but shall be available for general public use at all times. Signs or other actions that limit general public use of on-street spaces are prohibited. 
D.  Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g., uses primarily of a daytime versus nighttime nature; weekday uses versus weekend uses), and provided that the right of joint use is evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, contract, or similar written instrument establishing the joint use. The city may approve owner requests for shared parking through land use review. 
E.  Off-Site Parking. Except for single-family dwellings, the vehicle parking spaces required by this chapter may be located on another parcel of land, provided the parcel is within three hundred (300) feet of the use it serves and the city has approved the off-site parking through land use review. The distance from the parking area to the use shall be measured from the nearest parking space to a building entrance, following a sidewalk or other pedestrian route. The right to use the off-site parking must be evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, easement, or similar written instrument. 
F.  General Parking Standards. 
1.  Location. Parking is allowed only on streets, within garages, carports, and other structures, or on driveways or parking lots that have been developed in conformance with this code. Division II, Land Use Districts, prescribes parking location for some land uses (e.g., the requirement that parking for some multiple-family and commercial developments be located to side or rear of buildings), and Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation, provides design standards for driveways. Street parking spaces shall not include space in a vehicle travel lane (including emergency or fire access lanes), public right-of-way, pedestrian accessway, landscape, or other undesignated area. 
2.  Mixed Uses. If more than one type of land use occupies a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street automobile parking shall be the sum of the requirements for all uses, unless it can be shown that the peak parking demands are actually less (i.e., the uses operate on different days or at different times of the day). The city may reduce the total parking required accordingly through land use review. 
4.  Availability of Facilities. Owners of off-street parking facilities may post a sign indicating that all parking on the site is available only for residents, customers, and/or employees. Signs shall conform to the standards of Chapter 17.72. 
5.  Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting to provide at least two footcandles of illumination over parking spaces and walkways. Light standards shall be directed downward only and shielded to prevent lighting spillover into any adjacent residential district or use. 
6.  Screening of Parking Areas. Parking spaces shall be located or screened so that headlights do not shine onto adjacent residential uses, per Section 17.64.030(E). 
G.  Parking Stall Design and Minimum Dimensions. All off-street parking spaces shall be improved to conform to city standards for surfacing, storm water management, and striping. Standard parking spaces shall conform to the following standards and the dimensions in Figures 17.68.030(F)(1) through (2), and Table 17.68.030(F). 
1.  Parking area dimensions and layout shall conform to the dimensions in Figures 17.68.030(F)(1) and (2), and Table 17.68.030(F) below; 
2.  Additional parking dimensions shall be provided in accordance to Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards for required ADA parking spaces (van-accessible parking spaces). Parking structure vertical clearance, van-accessible parking spaces, should refer to federal ADA guidelines. See Figure 17.68.030(F)(2). 
Figure 17.68.030(F)(1) Parking Area Layout

Figure 17.68.030(F)(2) Disabled Person Parking Requirements

Table 17.68.030(F) Parking Area Layout 
Parking Angle < ° Curb Length Stall Depth Aisle Width Bay Width Stripe Length Single 
D1 Double 
D2 One 
Way 
A1 Two 
Way 
A2 One 
Way 
B1 Two 
Way 
B2 Standard Space 
(See Figure 17.68.030(F)(2) for ADA space requirements) 90° 8'-6? 18' 36' 23' 23' 59' 59' 18' 60° 10' 20' 40' 17' 18' 57' 58' 23' 45° 12' 18'-6? 37' 13' 18' 50' 55' 26'-6? 30° 17' 16'-6? 33' 12' 18' 45' 51' 32'-8? 0° 22' 8'-6? 17' 12' 18' 29' 35' 8'-6?  
    Important cross-references: 
    See also Division II, Land Use Districts, standards, for parking location requirements for some multifamily and commercial land uses; Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation, for driveway standards; Chapter 17.64, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.68.040 - Bicycle parking standards. 
    All uses that are subject to site design review shall provide bicycle parking, in conformance with the standards in Table 17.68.040, and subsections A through G of this section. 
A.  Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces. Uses shall provide bicycle parking spaces, as designated in Table 17.68.040. 
Table 17.68.040 
Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces 
Use Specific Uses Required # of Spaces 
(near building entry) Residential Categories Household Living Multifamily 2, or 1 per 20 units Commercial Categories Retail Sales and Service 2 Office 2 Institutional Categories Community Service 2 Parks (active recreation areas only) 8, or per CU review Schools Grades 2-5 1 per classroom, or per CU review Grades 6-12 4 per school, or per CU review Religious Institutions and Places of Worship 2  
B.  Exemptions. This section does not apply to single-family and two-family housing (attached, detached, or manufactured housing), home occupations, agriculture and livestock uses. 
C.  Location and Design. Bicycle parking should be no farther from the main building entrance than the distance to the closest vehicle space, or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less. Covered bicycle parking should be incorporated whenever possible into building design. When allowed within a public right-of-way, bicycle parking should be coordinated with the design of street furniture, as applicable. 
D.  Visibility and Security. Bicycle parking for customers and visitors of a use shall be visible from street sidewalks or building entrances, so that it provides sufficient security from theft and damage. 
E.  Lighting. For security, bicycle parking shall be at least as well lit as vehicle parking. 
F.  Reserved Areas. Areas set aside for bicycle parking shall be clearly marked and reserved for bicycle parking only. 
G.  Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians. Parking areas shall be located so as to not conflict with vision clearance standards (Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.68.050 - Loading areas. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section of the code is to provide standards: (1) for a minimum number of off-street loading spaces that will ensure adequate loading areas for large uses and developments; and (2) to ensure that the appearance of loading areas is consistent with that of parking areas. 
B.  Applicability. This section applies to residential projects with fifty (50) or more dwelling units, and nonresidential and mixed-use buildings with twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more total floor area. 
C.  Number of Loading Spaces. 
1.  Residential Buildings. Buildings where all of the floor area is in residential use shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Fewer than fifty (50) dwelling units on a site that abuts a local street: no loading spaces are required. 
b.  All other buildings: one space. 
2.  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Buildings. Buildings where any floor area is in nonresidential uses shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet total floor area: no loading spaces required. 
b.  Twenty thousand (20,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of total floor area: one loading space. 
c.  More than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of total floor area: two loading spaces. 
D.  Size of Spaces. Required loading spaces shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet long and ten (10) feet wide, and shall have a height clearance of at least thirteen (13) feet. 
E.  Placement, Setbacks and Landscaping. Loading areas shall conform to the setback and perimeter landscaping standards in Divisions II and III. Where parking areas are prohibited between a building and the street, loading areas are also prohibited. The decision body may approve a loading area adjacent to or within the street right-of-way through site design review or conditional use permit review, as applicable, where it finds that loading and unloading operations are short in duration (i.e., less than one hour), do not obstruct traffic during peak traffic hours, and do not interfere with emergency response services. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.72 - PUBLIC FACILITIES 

17.72.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide planning and general design standards for public and private transportation facilities and utilities. Streets serve both transportation and infrastructure needs and are the most common public spaces, touching virtually every parcel of land. Therefore, one of the primary purposes of this chapter is to provide standards for functional, attractive and safe streets that can accommodate underground utilities and traffic from planned growth and provide a range of transportation options, including options for driving, walking, and bicycling. This chapter implements the policies of the City of Coquille comprehensive plan. 
B.  When Standards Apply. Unless otherwise provided, the standards of this chapter apply when a land use application is filed for a major project under Section 17.56.020. All public improvements within the city shall occur in accordance with the standards and procedures of this chapter. 
C.  Engineering Design Criteria, Standard Specifications and Details. All public improvements are subject to compliance with engineering criteria and requirements, as determined by the city engineer. The design criteria, standard construction specifications and details maintained by the city engineer, or any other road authority with jurisdiction, are a part of this code. The city's specifications, standards, and details are incorporated into this code by reference. 
D.  Conditions of Development Approval. No development may occur unless required public improvements are in place or guaranteed, in conformance with the provisions of this code. Improvements required as a condition of development approval, when not voluntarily accepted by the applicant, shall be roughly proportional to the impact of the development on public facilities. Findings in the development approval shall indicate how the required improvements are directly related and roughly proportional to the impact. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.72.020 - Transportation standards. 
A.  Development Standards. The following standards shall be met for all major projects, as provided under Section 17.56.020: 
1.  All new lots created, consolidated, or modified through a land division, including replats, shall have frontage on, or approved access to, a public street meeting city standards. 
2.  Streets within or adjacent to a development shall be improved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Development of new streets, including sidewalks, curbs, gutters, bicycle lanes, vehicle travel lanes, traffic control devices, and park strips, and additional right-of-way or street width or improvements planned as a portion of an existing street, shall be improved in accordance with this chapter; and all public streets shall be dedicated to the applicable road authority upon the city engineer's acceptance of said improvements. 
4.  All new streets, and driveways connecting to streets, shall be paved; driveways and driveway aprons shall be improved as required under Section 17.68.030 and subject to approval by the city engineer. 
B.  Guarantee. The city may accept a future improvement guarantee (e.g., owner agrees not to object to the formation of a local improvement district in the future) in lieu of street improvements if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  A partial improvement may create a potential safety hazard to motorists or pedestrians; 
2.  Due to the developed condition of adjacent properties, it is unlikely that street improvements would be extended in the foreseeable future and the improvement associated with the project under review does not, by itself, provide increased street safety or capacity, or improved pedestrian circulation; 
3.  The improvement would be in conflict with an adopted capital improvement plan; or 
4.  The improvement is associated with an approved land partition and the proposed land partition does not create any new streets. 
C.  Creation of Rights-of-Way for Streets and Related Purposes. Streets shall be created through the approval and recording of a final subdivision or partition plat; except the city may approve the creation of a street by acceptance of a deed, provided that the street is deemed in the public interest by the city council for the purpose of implementing the Coquille comprehensive plan, and the deeded right-of-way and improvements conform to the standards of this code. 
D.  Creation of Access Easements. The city may approve an access easement connecting to a public street only when the easement is necessary to provide for access and circulation in conformance with Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation. Access easements shall be created and maintained in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code Section 10.207. 
E.  Street Location, Width and Grade. Except as noted below, the location, width and grade of all streets shall conform to an approved street plan or subdivision plat, and be subject to review and approval by the city engineer. Street location, width, and grade shall be determined in relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. Where the location of a street is not shown on an adopted city street plan, the location of streets in a development shall provide for the reasonable continuation and connection of existing streets to adjacent developable properties, conforming to the street standards of this chapter. 
F.  Minimum Rights-of-Way and Street Sections. Street rights-of-way and improvements shall be the widths in Table 17.72.020(F). Variances to street design standards are subject to review and approval by the city engineer. Where a range of width is indicated, the width shall be the narrower in the range unless unique and specific conditions exists as determined by the city engineer based upon the following factors: 
1.  Transportation policies of comprehensive plan and development code; 
2.  Anticipated traffic generation; 
3.  On-street parking needs; 
4.  Sidewalk and bikeway requirements, including the extension of and connection to existing sidewalks; 
5.  Requirements for placement of utilities; 
6.  Street lighting; 
7.  Minimize drainage, slope, and sensitive lands impacts; 
8.  Street tree location, as provided in Chapter 17.64; 
9.  Protection of significant vegetation, as provided in Chapter 17.64; 
10.  Safety, comfort, and convenience of motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians; 
11.  Placement of street furnishings (e.g., benches, lighting, bus shelters, etc.), as applicable; 
12.  Access needs for emergency vehicles and for emergency evacuation; and 
13.  Transition between different street widths (i.e., existing streets and new streets). 
Table 17.72.020(F) Street Standards 
Street Type Right-of-Way Width Curb-to-Curb Paved Width Within Curb-to-Curb Area Curb Park Strip or Furnishing Zone Sidewalks Vehicle Travel Lanes Center Turn Lane Bike Lanes On-Street Parking Local 
Residential Option A 38'-44' 22' Queuing Lane None None 8' (one side) Yes 4'-6' 4'-5' Option B 38'-44' 28'-30' Queuing Lane None None 8' (both sides) Yes 4'-6' 4'-5' Option C Hillside development standards subject to engineering evaluation under Chapter 17.44. Alley A-1 16'-20' 16'-20' 8'-10'/ 8'-10' None None None No None Collector Option A 60'-70' 30'-32' 10'-11'/ 10'-11' None 5'/5/ 8' (one/ both sides) Yes 8'-12' 5'-6' Option B 80' 44'-46' 10'-11'/ 10'-11' 14' (or median) 5'/5' 8' (one/ both sides) Yes 4'-8' 5'-6' Arterial Per requirements as specified by the city engineer or of other roadway authority, as applicable. Where this table provides more than one option, the street shall be designed as required by the city based on the surrounding street network and projected traffic volumes.  
G.  Subdivision Street Connectivity. All subdivisions, including those within master planned developments, shall conform to all the following access and circulation design standards: 
1.  Connectivity to Abutting Lands. The street system of proposed subdivisions shall be designed to connect with existing, proposed, and planned streets outside of the subdivision as provided in this section. Wherever a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided to allow access to future abutting subdivisions and to logically extend the street system into the surrounding area. All street stubs shall be provided with a temporary turnaround unless specifically exempted by the fire marshal, and the restoration and extension of the street shall be the responsibility of any future developer of the abutting land. 
2.  When Abutting an Arterial Street. Property access to abutting arterials shall be minimized. Where such access is necessary, shared driveways may be required in conformance with Section 17.60.020. If vehicle access off a secondary street is possible, then the road authority may prohibit access to the arterial. 
3.  Continuation of Streets. Planned streets shall connect with surrounding streets to permit the convenient movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods and to facilitate emergency access and evacuation. Connections shall be designed to meet or exceed the standards in subsection (G)(4) of this section, and to avoid or minimize through traffic on local streets. Appropriate design and traffic control and traffic calming measures, as provided in subsection H of this section, are the preferred means of discouraging through traffic. 
4.  Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks. In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the city, all subdivisions and site developments of more than two acres requiring the extension of public streets shall be served by a connecting network of public streets and/or accessways, in accordance with the following standards (minimum and maximum distances between two streets or a street and its nearest accessway: 
a.  Residential districts, except projects within the geologic hazards overlay: minimum of one hundred (100) foot block length and maximum of six hundred (600) foot length; maximum one thousand four hundred (1,400) foot block perimeter measured from the right-of-way edge; 
b.  Downtown (C-1): conform to existing platted blocks; 
c.  General commercial, commercial retail and mixed-use commercial (C-2, CR, and C-3) districts: minimum of one hundred (100) foot length and maximum of six hundred (600) foot length; maximum one thousand four hundred (1,400) foot perimeter; 
d.  Not applicable to the industrial districts or projects within the geologic hazards overlay. 
5.  Accessway Standards. Where a street connection in conformance with the maximum block length standards in subsection (G)(4) of this section is impracticable, an accessway shall be provided at or near the middle of a block in lieu of the street connection, as generally shown in Figure 17.72.020(G). The city may also require developers to provide an accessway where the creation of a cul-de-sac or dead-end street is unavoidable and the accessway would connect the ends of the street to another street or public accessway. Such accessways shall conform to all of the following standards, which may be modified by the decision body without a variance when the modification affords greater convenience or comfort for, and does not compromise the safety of, pedestrians or bicyclists: 
a.  Accessways shall be no less than ten (10) feet wide and contain a minimum six-foot wide paved walkway surface within a right-of-way or easement allowing public access; where emergency vehicle access is required, the accessway shall be no less than twenty (20) feet wide and contain an all-weather driving surface with the required weight-bearing capacity; 
b.  If the streets within the subdivision or neighborhood are illuminated, all accessways in the subdivision shall be lighted. Accessway lighting shall provide at least two footcandles of illumination of the walkway surface; 
c.  A right-of-way or public access easement provided in accordance with subsection (G)(5)(b) of this section that is less than ten (10) feet wide may be allowed on steep slopes where the decision body finds that stairs, ramps, or switch-back paths are required; 
d.  All public walkways shall conform to applicable ADA requirements (exception allowed for hillsides); and 
e.  The city may require landscaping as part of the required accessway improvement to buffer pedestrians from adjacent vehicles, or to screen the accessway for the privacy of adjoining residents. 
H.  Traffic Signals and Traffic Calming Features. 
1.  Traffic signals shall be required with development when traffic signal warrants are met, in conformance with the Federal Highway Administration approved guidelines, including, but not limited to: Highway Capacity Manual and Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The location of traffic signals shall be noted on approved street plans. Where a proposed street intersection will result in an immediate need for a traffic signal, a signal meeting approved specifications shall be installed in conformance with the road authority's requirements. The developer's cost and the timing of improvements shall be included as a condition of development approval. 
2.  When an intersection meets or is projected to meet traffic signal warrants, the city may accept alternative mitigation, such as a traffic roundabout, in lieu of a traffic signal, if approved by the city engineer and applicable road authority. 
3.  The city may require the installation of traffic calming features such as traffic circles, curb extensions, reduced street width (parking on one side), medians with pedestrian crossing refuges, and/or special paving surfaces to slow traffic in neighborhoods or commercial areas with high pedestrian traffic. 
I.  Future Street Plan and Extension of Streets. 
1.  Where a subdivision is proposed adjacent to other developable land, a future street plan shall be filed by the applicant in conjunction with an application for a subdivision in order to facilitate orderly development of the street system. The plan shall show the pattern of existing and proposed future streets from the boundaries of the proposed land division and shall include other divisible parcels within six hundred (600) feet surrounding and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. The street plan is not binding; rather it is intended to show potential future street extensions with future development and ensure that the proposed development does not preclude future street connections to adjacent development land. 
2.  Streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the parcel or tract to be developed when the city determines that the extension is necessary to give street access to, or permit a satisfactory future division of, adjoining land. The point where the streets temporarily end shall conform to the following: 
a.  These extended streets or street stubs to adjoining properties are not considered to be cul-de-sacs since they are intended to continue as through streets when the adjoining property is developed. 
b.  A barricade (e.g., fence, bollards, boulders or similar vehicle barrier) shall be constructed at the end of the street by the subdivider and shall not be removed until authorized by the city or other applicable agency with jurisdiction over the street. The cost of the barricade shall be included in the street construction cost. 
c.  Temporary street ends shall provide turnarounds constructed to Uniform Fire Code standards for streets over one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. See also Section 17.60.020. 
J.  Street Alignment, Radii and Connections. 
1.  The creation of new streets making "T" intersections at collectors and arterials shall provide for intersection spacing of not less than three hundred (300) feet, as measured from the centerlines of the offset streets. 
2.  Spacing between local street intersections shall have a minimum separation of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, except where the city engineer approves closer spacing due to topographic constraints or as necessary to provide a traffic calming feature, such as an open space, roundabout, or similar amenity. This standard applies to four-way and three-way (offset) intersections. 
3.  All local and collector streets that stub into a development site shall be extended within the site to provide through circulation unless prevented by environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other standards in this code. This exception applies when it is not possible to redesign or reconfigure the street pattern to provide required extensions. Land is considered topographically constrained if it falls within the geological hazards overlay or it contains a stream or other natural drainageway. In the case of environmental or topographical constraints, the mere presence of a constraint is not sufficient to show that a street connection is not possible. The applicant must show why the environmental or topographic constraint precludes some reasonable street connection. 
4.  Proposed streets or street extensions shall be located to allow continuity in street alignments and to facilitate future development of vacant or redevelopable lands. 
5.  In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the city, the design of subdivisions and alignment of new streets shall conform to block length standards in Section 17.60.020. 
K.  Sidewalks, Planter Strips, Bicycle Lanes. As provided under Section 17.72.010(D), the city may require the improvement and/or extension of sidewalks, planter strips, and bicycle lanes with new major projects, in conformance with the standards in Table 17.72.020, as required by the city engineer, or applicable provisions of city's comprehensive plan, or the requirements of any other applicable roadway authority. Maintenance of sidewalks and planter strips in the right-of-way is the continuing obligation of the adjacent property owner. 
L.  Intersection Angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at an angle as near to a right angle as practicable, except where the city engineer approves closer spacing due to topographic constraints or as necessary to provide a traffic calming feature, such as an open space, roundabout, or similar amenity. 
M.  Existing Rights-of-Way. Whenever existing rights-of-way adjacent to a proposed development are less than standard width, additional rights-of-way shall be provided at the time of subdivision or development, subject to the provision of this section. 
N.  Cul-de-Sacs. Streets shall be planned to continue to and through abutting properties, consistent with the connectivity standards in subsection G of this section. A cul-de-sac street shall only be used when environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other standards in this code preclude street extension and through circulation. For example, the city engineer may approve a cul-de-sac where a street extension would otherwise exceed allowable street grades or negatively impact a natural drainageway or jurisdictional wetland. When cul-de-sacs are allowed, all of the following shall be met: 
1.  The cul-de-sac shall not exceed a length of six hundred (600) feet; the length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline of the roadway from the near side of the intersecting street to the farthest point of the cul-de-sac; 
2.  The cul-de-sac shall terminate with a circular or hammer-head turnaround meeting the Uniform Fire Code. Circular turnarounds shall have a radius of no less than forty (40) feet, and not more than a radius of forty-five (45) feet (i.e., from center to edge of pavement); except that turnarounds shall be larger when they contain a landscaped island or parking bay at their center. When an island or parking bay is provided, there shall be a fire apparatus lane of twenty (20) feet in width; and 
3.  The cul-de-sac shall provide, or not preclude the opportunity to later install, a pedestrian and bicycle accessway connection between it an adjacent streets accessways, parks, or other right-of-way. Such accessways shall conform to Section 17.60.030. 
O.  Grades and Curves. Except as approved by the city engineer, grades shall not exceed ten (10) percent on arterials, twelve (12) percent on collector streets, or twelve (12) percent on any other street. The city engineer may approve steeper grades for short street segments, provided the street grade does not exceed fifteen (15) percent for a distance greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet, and: 
1.  Centerline curve radii shall not be less than seven hundred (700) feet on arterials, five hundred (500) feet on major collectors, three hundred fifty (350) feet on minor collectors, or one hundred (100) feet on other streets; and 
2.  Streets intersecting with a minor collector or greater functional classification street, or streets intended to be posted with a stop sign or signalization, shall provide a landing averaging five percent or less. Landings are that portion of the street within twenty (20) feet of the edge of the intersecting street at full improvement. 
P.  Curbs, Curb Cuts, Ramps and Driveway Approaches. Concrete curbs, curb cuts, wheelchair ramps, bicycle ramps, and driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with standards specified in Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation. 
Q.  Streets Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way. When a transportation improvement is proposed within three hundred (300) feet of a public railroad crossing, or a modification is proposed to an existing public crossing, the Oregon Department of Transportation and the rail service provider shall be notified and given an opportunity to comment, in conformance with the provisions of Division IV. Private crossing improvements are subject to review and licensing by the rail service provider. 
R.  Development Adjoining Arterial Streets. Where a development adjoins or is crossed by an existing or proposed arterial street, the development design shall separate residential access from through traffic and minimize traffic conflicts. (See also the access requirements under Section 17.60.020.) The development design shall include one or more of the following: 
1.  A parallel access street (frontage road) along the arterial with a landscape median with raised curbs of not less than ten (10) feet in width separating the two streets; 
2.  Deep lots (one hundred twenty (120) feet or greater) abutting the arterial or major collector to provide adequate arterial buffering with access taken from the subordinate street; 
3.  Screen planting within a nonaccess reservation (e.g., public easement or tract) of not less than five feet in width at the rear or side property line along the arterial; or 
4.  Other treatment approved by the city engineer that is consistent with the purpose of this chapter. 
S.  Alleys, Public or Private. Alleys shall conform to the standards in Table 17.72.020. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided. The corners of necessary alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than twelve (12) feet and allow access to utilities, as applicable. 
T.  Private Streets and Gated Streets. Private streets, including gated drives serving more than two dwellings (i.e., where a gate limits access to a development from a public street), are not permitted. 
U.  Street Names. No new street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets in Coquille or vicinity. Street names, signs, and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the surrounding area, except as requested by emergency service providers. 
V.  Survey Monuments. Upon completion of a street improvement and prior to acceptance by the city, it shall be the responsibility of the developer's registered professional land surveyor to provide certification to the city that all boundary and interior monuments have been reestablished and protected. 
W.  Street Signs. The city, county, or state with jurisdiction shall install all signs for traffic control and street names. The cost of signs required for new development shall be the responsibility of the developer. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections. Stop signs and other signs may be required. 
X.  Mail Boxes. Mail box locations shall be as approved by the United States Postal Service. 
Y.  Street Light Standards. Street lights shall be installed in accordance with city standards. At a minimum, street lights shall be installed at street intersections; additional street lights or lighting of pedestrian accessways may be required by the city to provide for public safety and welfare. 
Z.  Street Cross-Sections. The final lift of asphalt or concrete pavement shall be placed on all new constructed public roadways prior to final city acceptance of the roadway unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. The final lift shall also be placed no later than one year from the commencement of initial construction of the development. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.72.030 - Public use areas. 
A.  Dedication of Public Use Areas. 
1.  Where a proposed open space, park, playground, or other public use shown in a plan adopted by the city is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the city may require the public dedication or reservation of this area on the final plat for the subdivision, provided that the impact of the development on the city park system is roughly proportionate to the dedication or reservation being made. 
2.  The city may purchase or accept voluntary dedication or reservation of areas within the subdivision that are suitable for the development of parks and other public uses; however, the city is under no obligation to accept such areas offered for dedication or sale. 
3.  Alternatively, the city may impose conditions of approval providing for reservation and ongoing ownership, improvement and maintenance of open space areas (e.g., through master planned development approvals under Chapter 17.96), including payment of property taxes for said property, by a private entity such as a homeowner's association. 
B.  System Development Charge Credit. Dedication of land to the city for public use areas, voluntary or otherwise, shall be eligible as a credit toward any required system development charge for parks. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.72.040 - Sanitary sewer and water service improvements. 
A.  Sewers and Water Mains Required. Sanitary sewers and water mains shall be installed to serve each new development and to connect developments to existing mains in accordance with the city's sanitary sewer master plan, water system master plan, and the applicable engineering requirements. When streets are required to be stubbed to the edge of the subdivision, sewer and water system improvements shall also be stubbed with the streets, except as may be waived by the city engineer when alternate alignment(s) are provided. 
B.  Sewer and Water Plan Approval. Development permits for sewer and water improvements shall not be issued until the city engineer has approved all sanitary sewer and water plans in conformance with city standards. 
C.  Oversizing. The city may require as a condition of development approval that sewer, water, and/or storm drainage systems serving new development be sized to accommodate future development within the area as projected by the applicable water, sewer, and/or storm drainage master plan, provided that the city may grant the developer credit toward any required system development charge for the same, or the city may authorize other cost-recovery or cost-sharing methods, in conformance with Section 17.72.010(D). 
D.  Inadequate Facilities. Development permits may be restricted or rationed by the city where a deficiency exists in the existing water or sewer system that cannot be rectified by the development and which if not rectified will result in a threat to public health or safety, surcharging of existing mains, or violations of state or federal standards pertaining to operation of domestic water and sewerage treatment systems. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.72.050 - Storm drainage improvements. 
A.  General Provisions. A development permit may be granted only when adequate provisions for storm water and flood water runoff have been assured (i.e., through plans and/or bonding approved by the city). 
B.  Accommodation of Upstream Drainage. Culverts and other drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing and potential future runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer. 
C.  Effect on Downstream Drainage. The rate of storm water runoff leaving a development site during and after development (post-development) shall not exceed the rate of storm water runoff leaving the site before development (pre-development). 
D.  Storm Drainage Analysis and Mitigation Required. The city engineer may require an applicant for development to provide a storm drainage analysis prepared by a qualified professional engineer registered in the state of Oregon to examine pre- and post-development storm water runoff conditions and any required mitigation, consistent with the purpose and intent of this title. Such analysis, at a minimum, shall quantify pre- and post-development runoff volumes and rates and propose mitigation based on storm water management best practices, as specified by the city engineer. Such mitigation shall ensure that post-development runoff rates do not exceed pre-development rates and necessary facilities are provided to protect public health, safety, and welfare. If upon reviewing the applicant's storm drainage analysis, the city engineer determines that the storm water runoff resulting from the development will overload any existing and/or proposed drainage facility, the city shall withhold approval of the development until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential adverse impacts. 
D.  Oversizing. The city may require as a condition of development approval that any public storm drainage system serving new development be sized to accommodate future development upstream, provided that the city may grant the developer credit toward any required system development charge for the same, or the city may authorize other cost-recovery or cost-sharing methods, in conformance with Section 17.72.010(D). 
E.  Existing Watercourse. Where a proposed development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width as will be adequate for conveyance and maintenance to protect the public health and safety. See also Coquille's floodplain ordinance (Ordinance No. 1226, March 16, 1987; amended by Ordinance No. 1351A, November 1, 1993). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.72.060 - Utilities. 
A.  Underground Utilities. 
1.  Generally. All new utility lines, including, but not limited to, those required for electric, communication, lighting, and cable television services and related facilities shall be placed underground, except for surface-mounted transformers, surface-mounted connection boxes and meter cabinets which may be placed above ground, temporary utility service facilities during construction, and high capacity electric lines operating at fifty thousand (50,000) volts or above. The city may require screening and buffering of aboveground facilities to protect the public health, safety or welfare through site development review. 
2.  Subdivisions and Master Planned Developments. The following additional standards apply to all new subdivisions, including those within master planned developments, in order to facilitate underground placement of utilities: 
a.  The developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving utility to provide the underground services. Care shall be taken to ensure that all aboveground equipment does not obstruct vision clearance areas for vehicular traffic (Chapter 17.60); 
b.  The city reserves the right to approve the location of all surface-mounted facilities; 
c.  All underground utilities, including sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets by the developer, shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets; and 
d.  Stubs for service connections shall be long enough to avoid disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made. 
B.  Exception to Undergrounding Requirement. An exception to the undergrounding requirement may be granted where existing physical constraints, such as steep topography, natural resource constraints (e.g., geologic conditions, rivers and streams), or existing development conditions make underground placement impractical. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.72.070 - Easements. 
A.  Provision. The developer or applicant shall make arrangements with the city, the applicable district, and each utility franchise for the provision and dedication of utility easements necessary to provide full services to the development. The city's standard width for public main line utility easements shall be determined by the city engineer. 
B.  Recordation. As determined by the city engineer, all easements for sewers, storm drainage and water quality facilities, water mains, electric lines, or other public utilities shall be recorded with the final plat. See Chapter 17.84, Land Use Review and Site Design Review, and Chapter 17.88, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.72.080 - Construction plan approval and assurances. 
A.  Plan Approval and Permit. No public improvements, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, streets, sidewalks, curbs, lighting, parks, or other requirements shall be undertaken except after the plans have been approved by the city, permit fee paid, and permit issued. The permit fee is required to defray the cost and expenses incurred by the city for construction and other services in connection with the improvement. The permit fee shall be set by city council. 
B.  Performance Guarantee. The city may require the developer or subdivider to provide bonding or other performance guarantees to ensure completion of required public improvements. See Section 17.84.040, Site design review-Application review procedure, and Section 17.88.110, Performance guarantee. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.72.090 - Installation. 
A.  Conformance Required. Improvements installed by the developer either as a requirement of these regulations or at his or her own option, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, approved construction plans, and to improvement standards and specifications adopted by the city. 
B.  Adopted Installation Standards. The City of Coquille may adopt design standards, criteria and specifications for public improvements as well as private utility installation within the public right-of-way; until such standards are adopted, project designs shall conform to the recommendations of the city engineer. 
C.  Commencement. Work in a public right-of-way shall not begin until all applicable agency permits have been approved and issued. 
D.  Resumption. If work is discontinued for more than one month, it shall not be resumed until the city is notified in writing. 
E.  City Inspection. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the city. The city may require minor changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arising during construction warrant such changes in the public interest. Modifications to the approved design requested by the developer may be subject to review under Chapter 17.100, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. Any monuments that are disturbed before all improvements are completed by the subdivider shall be replaced prior to final acceptance of the improvements. 
F.  Engineer's Certification and As-Built Plans. A registered civil engineer shall provide written certification in a form required by the city that all improvements, workmanship, and materials are in accord with current and standard engineering and construction practices, conform to approved plans and conditions of approval, and are of high grade, prior to city acceptance of the public improvements, or any portion thereof, for operation and maintenance. The developer's engineer shall also provide two set(s) of "as-built" plans, in conformance with the city engineer's specifications, for permanent filing with the city. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.78 - NUMBERING OF HOUSES AND OTHER BUILDINGS 

17.78.010 - Required-Signs. 
    That all the dwelling and business houses and places of business within the corporate limits of the City of Coquille shall be numbered as hereinafter provided, and the streets shall be designated by suitable signs at the crossings of each street, unless, in the discretion of the street committee, such crossing, not being used or improved, such signs shall not be placed until the said crossings shall be improved or, used. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.78.020 - Numbering designated. 
    The numbering of all houses and places of business on streets running north and south shall commence at the street originally named First Street in the plat of the town [City] of Coquille and thereafter changed to Front Street and the extensions thereof east and west, numbering north and south therefrom. All numbering on streets running east and west shall commence on the street originally named Taylor Street in Elliott Addition to the City of Coquille and originally named B Street on the plat of the town of Coquille and the extension thereof north to Tenth Street and a line running north from the center of the intersection of said street at Tenth. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.78.030 - Numbering to be done under the direction of the city engineer. 
    The numbering herein provided for shall be done under the direction of the city engineer of the City of Coquille and the letters and figures of all numbers shall be not less than two and one-half inches in height and of suitable width, and shall be furnished upon request by the City of Coquille at the office of the city engineer, at the rate of five dollars per set which shall include supervision for installation thereof. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.78.040 - City blocks-Numbering designated. 
    The numbering shall be done by providing one hundred (100) numbers to the block. The number to be given a building shall be determined by the city engineer by the following formula: the number equals 100 times D; in which formula L equals the length of the block, 100 equals a constant (the number of numbers per block) and D equals to the distance from the block corner to the front door of the building. For numbering purposes in any area or place where a distance in excess of four hundred fifty (450) exits between existing parallel streets, each three hundred (300) feet from the last street shall be considered a block; such distance shall be measured west from the north and south running streets and north from east and west running streets. On streets running north and south, odd numbers shall be designated on the west side and even numbers on the east side; and on streets running east and west, odd numbers shall be designated on the south side and even numbers on the north side. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.78.050 - New construction. 
    It shall be the obligation of each and every owner or agent having control of any dwelling or other building within the City of Coquille, to obtain from the city engineer, the proper number designation or designations for such building and to obtain and install the proper number thereon within forty-five (45) days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; and it shall be the obligation of the owner or agent applying for a building permit for the construction of new building, to obtain the number designation for such building at the time of obtaining the building permit therefor and to install the proper number thereon within five days from the completion or occupancy of such new building, whichever shall be first. All such numbers shall be placed on the building at a location satisfactory to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
17.78.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this title shall, upon conviction before the city recorder, be fined in the sum of not more than ten dollars ($10.00). Each week of continued violation of this title shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. 
(Ord. 1438 (part), 2003) 
Division IV. - Administration of Land Use and Development 
Chapter 17.80 - TYPES OF REVIEW PROCEDURES 

17.80.010 - Purpose and applicability of review procedures. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish standard decision making procedures that will enable the city, the applicant, and the public to reasonably review applications and participate in the local decision making process in a timely and effective way. Table 17.80.010 provides a key for determining the review procedure and the decision making body for particular approvals. 
B.  Applicability of Review Procedures. All land use and development permit applications and approvals, except building permits, shall be decided by using the procedures contained in this chapter. The procedure "type" assigned to each application governs the decision making process for that permit or approval. There are four types of permit/approval procedures as described in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(4) of this section. Table 17.80.010 lists the city's land use and development approvals and their required review procedure(s). 
1.  Type I Procedure (Administrative). Type I decisions are made by the city planning official, or someone he or she officially designates, without public notice and without a public hearing. The Type I procedure is used when there are clear and objective approval criteria, and applying city standards and criteria requires no use of discretion. 
2.  Type II Procedure (Administrative). Type II decisions are made by the city planning official with public notice and an opportunity for appeal. The appeal of a Type II decision is heard by the planning commission. 
3.  Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial). Type III decisions are made by the planning commission after a public hearing, with appeals reviewed by the city council. 
4.  Type IV Procedure (Legislative). Type IV procedures apply to legislative matters. Legislative matters involve the creation, revision, or large-scale implementation of public policy (e.g., adoption of land use regulations, zone changes, and comprehensive plan amendments). Type IV matters are considered initially by the planning commission with final decisions made by the city council. 
Table 17.80.010 Summary of Approvals by Type of Review Procedure 
Approvals 1 Review 
Procedures Applicable Regulations Access Permit (public street) Type I Chapters 17.60, 17.84, 17.88; Engineering Design Standards Code Interpretation Type II Chapter 17.108 Code Text Amendment Type IV Chapter 17.104 Comprehensive Plan Amendment Type IV Chapter 17.104 and Comprehensive Plan Conditional Use Permit Type III Chapter 17.92 Home Occupation Permit Type I Type I Chapter 17.112; see also Section 17.24.110 Home Occupation Permit Type III Type III Chapter 17.112; see also Section 17.24.110 Master Planned Development Type III Chapter 17.96 Modification to Approval Type II/III 
(minor or major) Chapter 17.100 Land Use District Map Change Quasi-Judicial (does not require a plan amendment) Type III Chapter 17.104 Legislative (plan amendment) Type IV Chapter 17.104 Property Line Adjustments and Lot Consolidations Type I Chapter 17.88 Legal Lot Determination Type I Chapter 17.124 Nonconforming Use or Development Confirmation Type I Chapter 17.120 Partition or Replat of 2-3 lots Type II Chapter 17.88 Land Use/Site Design Review Type I/II Chapter 17.84 Subdivision or Replat of >3 lots Chapter 17.88 Preliminary Plat Type III Final Plat Type I Temporary Use Permit (includes Temporary Medical Hardship Dwelling) Type II/III Chapter 17.112, Chapter 17.24 Variance Class A Type II Chapter 17.116 Class B Type III Chapter 17.116  
1 The applicant may be required to obtain approvals from other agencies, such as a road authority or natural resource regulatory agency, for some types of approvals. The city's failure to notify the applicant of any requirement or procedure of another agency shall not invalidate a permit or action taken by the city under this code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.80.020 - Type I procedure (administrative). 
A.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Forms. Type I applications shall be made on forms provided by the city planning official. 
2.  Application Requirements. Type I applications shall: 
a.  Include the information requested on the application form; 
b.  Address the criteria in sufficient detail for review and action; and 
c.  Be filed with the required fee. 
B.  Administrative Decision Requirements. The city planning official's decision shall be based on the applicable approval criteria, including applicable requirements of any road authority. Based on the criteria and the facts contained in the application, the city planning official shall approve or deny the requested permit or action. A written record of the decision (e.g., letter or permit stamped as approved) shall be provided to the applicant and kept on file at City Hall. 
C.  Final Decision. A Type I decision is the final decision of the city. It cannot be appealed to city officials. If the decision is contested by the applicant or other aggrieved party, it is not appealable as a land use decision but may be referred to the city council as a separate code interpretation request, as provided under Chapter 17.108; in which case all required forms and fees shall be filed in accordance with Chapter 17.108. 
D.  Effective Date. A Type I decision is final on the date it is made. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.80.030 - Type II procedure (administrative). 
A.  Pre-application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for Type II reviews. Pre-application conference requirements and procedures are in Section 17.80.060. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Forms. Type II applications shall be made on forms provided by the city planning official. 
2.  Submittal Information. The application shall: 
a.  Include the information requested on the application form; 
b.  Be filed with one copy of a narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision making. Note: additional information may be required under the specific application requirements for each approval, e.g., Chapters 17.84 (Land Use Review and Site Design Review), 17.88 (Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments), 17.100 (Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval), 17.108 (Code Interpretations), and 17.112 (Miscellaneous Permits); and 
c.  Be accompanied by the required fee. 
C.  Notice of Application for Type II Administrative Decision. 
1.  Before making a Type II administrative decision, the city planning official shall mail notice to: 
a.  All owners of record of real property within a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of the subject site; 
b.  Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice; and 
c.  Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city. The city may notify other affected agencies. The city shall notify the road authority, and rail authority and owner, when there is a proposed development abutting or affecting their transportation facility and allow the agency to review, comment on, and suggest conditions of approval for the application. The failure of another agency to respond with written comments on a pending application shall not invalidate an action or permit approval made by the city under this code. 
2.  The purpose of the notice is to give nearby property owners and other interested people the opportunity to submit written comments about the application before the Type II decision is made. The goal of this notice is to invite people to participate early in the decision making process. 
3.  Notice of a pending Type II administrative decision shall: 
a.  Provide a fourteen (14) day period for submitting written comments before a decision is made on the permit; 
b.  List the relevant approval criteria by name and number of code sections. This information may be summarized by code chapter, provided the notice has sufficient detail to help the public identify and locate applicable code criteria; 
c.  State the place, date and time the comments are due, and the person to whom the comments should be addressed; 
d.  Include the name and telephone number of a contact person regarding the administrative decision; 
e.  Describe proposal and identify the specific permits or approvals requested; 
f.  Describe the street address or other easily understandable reference to the location of the site; 
g.  State that if any person fails to address the relevant approval criteria with enough detail, they may not be able to appeal to the land use board of appeals or circuit court on that issue. Only comments on the relevant approval criteria are considered relevant evidence; 
h.  State that all evidence relied upon by the city planning official to make this decision is in the public record, available for public review. Copies of this evidence can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the city; 
i.  State that after the comment period closes, the city planning official shall issue a Type II administrative decision, and that the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to anyone else who submitted written comments or who is otherwise legally entitled to notice; 
j.  Contain the following notice: "Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The City of Coquille Development Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser." 
D.  Administrative Decision Requirements. The city planning official shall make a Type II written decision addressing all of the relevant approval criteria and standards. Based upon the criteria and standards, and the facts contained within the record, the city planning official shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested permit or action. Alternatively, the city planning official, and/or the applicant, may refer the application to the planning commission for review in a public hearing, in which case the public shall be notified of the hearing and the review shall proceed following the Type III procedures in Section 17.80.040. 
E.  Notice of Decision. 
1.  Within five days after the city planning official signs the Type II decision, a notice of decision shall be sent by mail to: 
a.  The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the site that is the subject of the application; 
b.  Any person who submits a written request to receive notice, or provides comments during the application review period; 
c.  Any city-recognized neighborhood group or association whose boundaries include the site; and 
d.  Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city, and other agencies that were notified or provided comments during the application review period. 
2.  The city planning official shall cause an affidavit of mailing the notice to be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall show the date the notice was mailed and shall demonstrate that the notice was mailed to the parties above and was mailed within the time required by law. 
3.  The Type II notice of decision shall contain: 
a.  A description of the applicant's proposal and the city's decision on the proposal (i.e., may be a summary); 
b.  The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area, where applicable; 
c.  A statement of where the city's decision can be obtained; 
d.  The date the decision shall become final, unless appealed; 
e.  A statement that all persons entitled to notice may appeal the decision; and 
f.  A statement briefly explaining how to file an appeal, the deadline for filing an appeal, and where to obtain further information concerning the appeal process. 
F.  Final Decision and Effective Date. A Type II administrative decision is final for purposes of appeal, when it is mailed by the city. A Type II administrative decision is effective on the day after the appeal period expires. The appeal period runs fourteen (14) days from the date the decision is mailed. Upon appeal, the decision becomes effective when the city takes final action on the appeal. 
G.  Appeal. A Type II administrative decision may be appealed to the planning commission as follows: 
1.  Who may Appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal a Type II administrative decision: 
a.  The applicant or owner of the subject property; 
b.  Any person who was entitled to written notice of the Type II decision; 
c.  Any other person who participated in the proceeding by submitting written comments on the application to the city by the specified deadline. 
2.  Appeal Filing Procedure. 
a.  Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in subsection (G)(1) of this section, may appeal a Type II administrative decision by filing a notice of appeal according to the following procedures. 
b.  Time for Filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city planning official within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice of decision was mailed. 
c.  Content of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain: 
i.  An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision; 
ii.  A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal; 
iii.  A statement explaining the specific issues being raised on appeal; 
iv.  If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period; 
v.  Filing fee. 
3.  Scope of Appeal. The appeal of a Type II administrative decision by a person with standing shall be a hearing de novo before the planning commission. The appeal shall not be limited to the application materials, evidence and other documentation, and specific issues raised in the Type II administrative review, but may include other relevant evidence and arguments. The planning commission may allow additional evidence, testimony or argument concerning any relevant standard, criterion, condition, or issue. 
4.  Appeal Procedures. Type III notice, hearing procedures and decision process shall also be used for all Type II administrative appeals, as provided in Section 17.80.040(C) through (E). 
5.  Further Appeal to City Council. The decision of the planning commission regarding an appeal of a Type II administrative decision is the final decision of the city unless appealed to city council. An appeal to city council shall follow the same notification and hearing procedures as for the planning commission hearing. The decision of the city council on an appeal is final and effective on the date it is mailed by the city. The city council's decision may be appealed to the state land use board of appeals pursuant to ORS 197.805-197.860. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.80.040 - Type III procedure (quasi-judicial). 
A.  Pre-application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for all Type III applications. The requirements and procedures for a pre-application conference are described in Section 17.80.060(C). 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Forms. Type III applications shall be made on forms provided by the city planning official; if a Type II application is referred to a Type III hearing, either voluntarily by the applicant or staff, or upon appeal, no new application is required. 
2.  Submittal Information. When a Type III application is required, it shall: 
a.  Include the information requested on the application form; 
b.  Be filed with one copy of a narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision making. Note: additional information may be required under the specific application requirements for each approval, e.g., Chapters 17.84 (Land Use Review and Site Design Review), 17.88 (Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments), 17.100 (Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval), 17.108 (Code Interpretations), and 17.112 (Miscellaneous Permits); 
c.  Be accompanied by the required fee; and 
d.  Be accompanied by a list of property owners of record within the required notification area (by tax map and lot number) and mailing labels for the same. 
C.  Notice of Hearing. 
1.  Mailed Notice. The city shall mail the notice of the Type III action. The records of the Coos County assessor's office are the official records for determining ownership. Notice of a Type III application hearing or Type II appeal hearing shall be given by the city planning official in the following manner: 
a.  At least twenty (20) days before the hearing date, notice shall be mailed to: 
i.  The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the property that is the subject of the application; 
ii.  All property owners of record within one hundred (100) feet of the site; 
iii.  Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city. The city may notify other affected agencies. The city shall notify the road authority, and rail authority and owner, when there is a proposed development abutting or affecting their transportation facility and allow the agency to review, comment on, and suggest conditions of approval for the application; 
iv.  Owners of airports in the vicinity shall be notified of a proposed zone change in accordance with ORS 227.175; 
v.  Any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the city council and whose boundaries include the subject property; 
vi.  Any person who submits a written request to receive notice; 
vii.  For appeals, the appellant and all persons who provided testimony in the original decision; and 
viii.  For a land use district change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175. 
b.  The city planning official shall have an affidavit of notice be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall state the date that the notice was mailed to the persons who must receive notice. 
c.  At least fourteen (14) business days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The newspaper's affidavit of publication of the notice shall be made part of the administrative record. 
2.  Content of Notice. Notice of appeal of a Type II administrative decision or notice of a Type III hearing to be mailed and published per subsection (C)(1) of this section shall contain the following information: 
a.  The nature of the application and the proposed land use or uses that could be authorized for the property; 
b.  The applicable criteria and standards from the development code(s) that apply to the application; 
c.  The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property; 
d.  The date, time, and location of the public hearing; 
e.  A statement that the failure to raise an issue in person, or by letter at the hearing, or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that an appeal based on that issue cannot be filed with the state land use board of appeals; 
f.  The name of a city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information on the application may be obtained; 
g.  A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or for the applicant, and the applicable criteria and standards can be reviewed at Coquille City Hall at no cost and that copies shall be provided at a reasonable cost; 
h.  A statement that a copy of the city's staff report and recommendation to the hearings body shall be available for review at no cost at least seven days before the hearing, and that a copy shall be provided on request at a reasonable cost; 
i.  A general explanation of the requirements to submit testimony, and the procedure for conducting public hearings; and 
j.  The following notice: "Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The City of Coquille Development Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser." 
D.  Conduct of the Public Hearing. 
1.  At the commencement of the hearing, the hearings body shall state to those in attendance: 
a.  The applicable approval criteria and standards that apply to the application or appeal; 
b.  A statement that testimony and evidence shall concern the approval criteria described in the staff report, or other criteria in the comprehensive plan or land use regulations that the person testifying believes to apply to the decision; 
c.  A statement that failure to raise an issue with sufficient detail to give the hearings body and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that no appeal may be made to the state land use board of appeals on that issue; 
d.  Before the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any participant may ask the planning commission for an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing. The hearings body shall grant the request by scheduling a date to finish the hearing (a "continuance") per subsection (D)(2) of this section, or by leaving the record open for additional written evidence or testimony per subsection (D)(3) of this section. 
2.  If the planning commission grants a continuance, the completion of the hearing shall be continued to a date, time, and place at least seven days after the date of the first evidentiary hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at the second hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the second hearing, any person may request, before the conclusion of the second hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days, so that they can submit additional written evidence or testimony in response to the new written evidence. 
3.  If the planning commission leaves the record open for additional written evidence or testimony, the record shall be left open for at least seven days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the city in writing for an opportunity to respond to new evidence submitted during the period that the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the planning commission shall reopen the record. 
a.  When the planning commission reopens the record to admit new evidence or testimony, any person may raise new issues that relate to that new evidence or testimony; 
b.  An extension of the hearing or record granted pursuant to subsection D of this section is subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178 ("one hundred twenty (120) day rule"), unless the continuance or extension is requested or agreed to by the applicant; 
c.  If requested by the applicant, the city shall allow the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons to submit final written arguments in support of the application, unless the applicant expressly waives this right. The applicant's final submittal shall be part of the record but shall not include any new evidence; 
d.  The record shall contain all testimony and evidence that is submitted to the city and that the hearings body has not rejected; 
e.  In making its decision, the hearings body may take notice of facts not in the hearing record (e.g., local, state, or federal regulations; previous city decisions; case law; staff reports). The review authority must announce its intention to take notice of such facts in its deliberations, and allow persons who previously participated in the hearing to request the hearing record be reopened, if necessary, to present evidence concerning the noticed facts; 
f.  The review authority shall retain custody of the record until the city issues a final decision. 
4.  Participants in the appeal of a Type II administrative decision or participants in a Type III hearing are entitled to an impartial review authority as free from potential conflicts of interest and pre-hearing ex parte contacts as reasonably possible. (See subsection (D)(5) of this section.) However, the public has a countervailing right of free access to public officials. Therefore: 
a.  At the beginning of the public hearing, hearings body members shall disclose the substance of any pre-hearing ex parte contacts (as defined in subsection (D)(5) of this section) concerning the application or appeal. He or she shall state whether the contact has impaired their impartiality or their ability to vote on the matter and shall participate or abstain accordingly; 
b.  A member of the hearings body shall not participate in any proceeding in which they, or any of the following, has a direct or substantial financial interest: their spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, partner, any business in which they are then serving or have served within the previous two years, or any business with which they are negotiating for or have an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the hearing where the action is being taken; 
c.  Disqualification of a member of the hearings body due to contacts or conflict may be ordered by a majority of the members present and voting. The person who is the subject of the motion may not vote on the motion to disqualify; 
d.  If a member of the hearings body abstains or is disqualified, the city shall provide a substitute in a timely manner subject to the impartiality rules in subsections (D)(4) through (D)(5). In this case, a member of the city council appointed by a majority vote of the city council may substitute for a member of the planning commission; 
e.  If all members of the planning commission abstain or are disqualified, the city council shall be the hearing body. If all members of the city council abstain or are disqualified, a quorum of those members present who declare their reasons for abstention or disqualification shall be requalified to make a decision; 
f.  Any member of the public may raise conflict of interest issues prior to or during the hearing, to which the member of the hearings body shall reply in accordance with this section. 
5.  Ex Parte Communications. 
a.  Members of the hearings body shall not: 
i.  Communicate directly or indirectly with any applicant, appellant, other party to the proceedings, or representative of a party about any issue involved in a hearing without giving notice per subsection C of this section; 
ii.  Take official notice of any communication, report, or other materials outside the record prepared by the proponents or opponents in connection with the particular case, unless all participants are given the opportunity to respond to the noticed materials. 
b.  No decision or action of the hearings body shall be invalid due to ex parte contacts or bias resulting from ex parte contacts, if the person receiving contact: 
i.  Places in the record the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications concerning the decision or action; and 
ii.  Makes a public announcement of the content of the communication and of all participants' right to dispute the substance of the communication made. This announcement shall be made at the first hearing following the communication during which action shall be considered or taken on the subject of the communication. 
c.  A communication between city staff and the hearings body is not considered an ex parte contact. 
6.  Presenting and Receiving Evidence. 
a.  The hearings body may set reasonable time limits for oral presentations and may limit or exclude cumulative, repetitious, irrelevant or personally derogatory testimony or evidence. 
b.  No oral testimony shall be accepted after the close of the public hearing. Written testimony may be received after the close of the public hearing, only as provided in subsection D of this section. 
c.  Members of the hearings body may visit the property and the surrounding area, and may use information obtained during the site visit to support their decision, if the information relied upon is disclosed at the beginning of the hearing and an opportunity is provided to dispute the evidence. 
E.  The Decision Process. 
1.  Basis for Decision. Decisions on Type III applications, and any action taken on an appeal of a Type II administrative decision, shall be based on standards and criteria in this code. The decision on such application or appeal shall relate to the applicable code standards and criteria. 
2.  Findings and Conclusions. Approval or denial shall be based upon the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision. The written decision shall explain the relevant criteria and standards, state the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and justify the decision according to the criteria, standards, and facts. 
3.  Form of Decision. The decision making body shall issue a final written order containing the findings and conclusions stated in subsection (E)(2) of this section, which either approves, denies, or approves with specific conditions. The decision making body may also issue appropriate intermediate rulings when more than one permit or decision is required. 
4.  Decision Making Time Limits. A final order for any Type III decision or action on a Type II administrative appeal shall be signed by the chairperson of the decision making body and filed by the city planning official within ten (10) business days after the decision or action is made. 
5.  Notice of Decision. Written notice of a Type III decision, or action on an appeal of Type II administrative appeal, shall be mailed to the applicant and to all participants of record within ten (10) business days after the decision is made. Failure of any person to receive mailed notice shall not invalidate the decision or action, provided that a good faith attempt was made to mail the notice. 
6.  Final Decision and Effective Date. The Type III decision, or action on a Type II administrative appeal, is final for purposes of appeal on the date it is mailed by the city. The decision is effective on the day after the appeal period for the same expires. If an appeal is filed, the decision becomes effective on the day after the appeal is decided by the city council. 
G.  Appeal. Appeals of Type III decisions are heard by city council as follows: 
1.  Who may Appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal a Type III administrative decision: 
a.  The applicant or owner of the subject property; 
b.  Any other person who participated in the proceeding by submitting oral or written comments. 
2.  Appeal Filing Procedure. 
a.  Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in subsection (G)(1) of this section may appeal a Type III decision by filing a notice of appeal according to the following procedures. 
b.  Time for Filing. A notice of appeal of a Type III decision, or action made on a Type II administrative appeal, shall be filed with the city planning official within ten (10) business days after the notice of decision is mailed. 
c.  Content of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain: 
i.  An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision; 
ii.  A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal; 
iii.  A statement explaining the specific issues being raised on appeal; 
iv.  If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period; 
v.  Filing fee. 
3.  Scope of Appeal. The appeal of a Type III decision, or further appeal of a Type II administrative appeal decision, made by the planning commission shall be a hearing de novo before the city council. The appeal shall not be limited to the application materials, evidence and other documentation, and specific issues raised in the planning commission proceedings. The city council may allow additional evidence, testimony or argument concerning any relevant standard, criterion, condition, or issue raised in the notice of appeal. 
4.  Appeal Procedures. Type III notice, hearing procedures and decision process shall also be used for Type III appeals, as provided in subsections C through E of this section. 
5.  Further Appeal to LUBA. The decision of the city council regarding an appeal of a Type III decision is the final decision of the city. The decision of the city council on an appeal is final and effective on the date it is mailed by the city. The city council's decision may be appealed to the state land use board of appeals pursuant to ORS 197.805-197.860. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.80.050 - Type IV procedure (legislative). 
A.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for all Type IV applications initiated by a party other than the City of Coquille. The requirements and procedures for a pre-application conference are described in Section 17.80.060(C). 
B.  Timing of Requests. The city may establish a schedule for when it will accept legislative code amendment or plan amendment requests. The city council may initiate its own legislative proposals at any time. Legislative requests are not subject to the one hundred twenty (120) day review period under ORS 227.178. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Forms. Type IV applications shall be made on forms provided by the city planning official. 
2.  Submittal Information. The application shall contain: 
a.  The information requested on the application form; 
b.  A map and/or plan addressing the appropriate criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision (as applicable); 
c.  The required fee; and 
d.  One copy of a letter or narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant approval criteria and standards. 
D.  Notice of Hearing. 
1.  Required Hearings. A minimum of two hearings, one before the planning commission and one before the city council, are required for all Type IV applications. 
2.  Notification Requirements. Notice of public hearings for the request shall be given by the city planning official in the following manner: 
a.  At least twenty (20) days, but not more than forty (40) days, before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to amend the comprehensive plan or any element thereof, or to adopt an ordinance for any land use district change, a notice shall be prepared in conformance with ORS 227.175 and mailed to: 
i.  Each owner whose property would be rezoned in order to implement the ordinance (including owners of property subject to a comprehensive plan amendment shall be notified if a zone change would be required to implement the proposed comprehensive plan amendment); 
ii.  Any affected governmental agency; 
iii.  Any person who requests notice in writing; 
iv.  For a zone change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175; 
v.  Owners of airports shall be notified of a proposed zone change in accordance with ORS 227.175. 
b.  At least ten (10) days before the scheduled planning commission public hearing date, and fourteen (14) days before the city council hearing date, public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
c.  The city planning official shall: 
i.  For each mailing of notice, file an affidavit of mailing in the record as provided by subsection (D)(2)(a) of this section; and 
ii.  For each published notice, file in the record the affidavit of publication in a newspaper that is required in subsection (D)(2)(b) of this section. 
d.  The Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) shall be notified in writing of proposed comprehensive plan and development code amendments at least forty-five (45) days before the first public hearing at which public testimony or new evidence will be received. The notice to DLCD shall include a DLCD certificate of mailing. 
e.  Notifications for annexation shall follow the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Content of Notices. The mailed and published notices shall include the following information: 
a.  The number and title of the file containing the application, and the address and telephone number of the city planning official's office where additional information about the application can be obtained; 
b.  The proposed site location; 
c.  A description of the proposed site and the proposal in enough detail for people to determine what change is proposed, and the place where all relevant materials and information may be obtained or reviewed; 
d.  The time(s), place(s), and date(s) of the public hearing(s); a statement that public oral or written testimony is invited; and a statement that the hearing will be held under this title and rules of procedure adopted by the council and available at City Hall (See subsection E of this section); and 
e.  Each mailed notice required by this subsection shall contain the following statement: "Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The City of Coquille Development Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser." 
4.  Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate the action, providing: 
a.  Personal notice is deemed given where the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service; 
b.  Published notice is deemed given on the date it is published. 
E.  Hearing Process and Procedure. 
1.  Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the city council: 
a.  The presiding officer of the planning commission and of the city council shall have the authority to: 
i.  Regulate the course, sequence, and decorum of the hearing; 
ii.  Direct procedural requirements or similar matters; and 
iii.  Impose reasonable time limits for oral presentations. 
b.  No person shall address the commission or the council without: 
i.  Receiving recognition from the presiding officer; and 
ii.  Stating their full name and address. 
c.  Disruptive conduct such as applause, cheering, or display of signs shall be cause for expulsion of a person or persons from the hearing, termination or continuation of the hearing, or other appropriate action determined by the presiding officer. 
2.  Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedures adopted by the council, the presiding officer of the commission and of the council shall conduct the hearing as follows: 
a.  The presiding officer shall begin the hearing with a statement of the nature of the matter before the body, a general summary of the procedures, a summary of the standards for decision making, and whether the decision which will be made is a recommendation to the city council or the final decision of the council; 
b.  The city planning official's report and other applicable staff reports shall be presented; 
c.  The public shall be invited to testify; 
d.  The public hearing may be continued to allow additional testimony or it may be closed; and 
e.  The body's deliberation may include questions to the staff, comments from the staff, and inquiries directed to any person present. 
F.  Continuation of the Public Hearing. The planning commission or the city council may continue any hearing, and no additional notice of hearing shall be required if the matter is continued to a specified place, date, and time. 
G.  Decision Making Criteria. The recommendation by the planning commission and the decision by the city council shall be based on the following factors: 
1.  Approval of the request is consistent with the statewide planning goals; 
2.  Approval of the request is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
3.  The property and affected area is presently provided with adequate public facilities and services, including transportation, sewer and water systems, to support the use, or such facilities and services are provided for in adopted city plans and can be provided concurrently with the development of the property. 
H.  Approval Process and Authority. 
1.  The planning commission shall: 
a.  After notice and a public hearing, vote on and prepare a recommendation to the city council to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative; and 
b.  Within fourteen (14) business days of determining a recommendation, the presiding officer shall sign the written recommendation, and it shall be filed with the city planning official. 
2.  Any member of the planning commission who votes in opposition to the planning commission's majority recommendation may file a written statement of opposition with the city planning official before the council public hearing on the proposal. The city planning official shall send a copy to each council member and place a copy in the record. 
3.  If the planning commission fails to adopt a recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative proposal within sixty (60) days of its first public hearing on the proposed change, the city planning official shall: 
a.  Report the failure together with the proposed change to the city council; and 
b.  Provide notice and put the matter on the city council's agenda for the city council to hold a public hearing make a decision. No further action shall be taken by the commission. 
4.  The city council shall: 
a.  Approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny, or adopt an alternative to an application for legislative change, or remand the application to the planning commission for rehearing and reconsideration on all or part of the application; 
b.  Consider the recommendation of the planning commission; however, the city council is not bound by the commission's recommendation; and 
c.  Act by ordinance, which shall be signed by the mayor after the council's adoption of the ordinance. 
I.  Vote Required for a Legislative Change. 
1.  A vote by a majority of the qualified voting members of the planning commission present is required for a recommendation for approval, approval with modifications, approval with conditions, denial or adoption of an alternative. 
2.  A vote by a majority of the qualified members of the city council present is required to decide any motion made on the proposal. 
J.  Notice of Decision. Notice of a Type IV decision shall be mailed to the applicant, all participants of record, and the Department of Land Conservation and Development, within five business days after the city council decision is filed with the city planning official. The city shall also provide notice to all persons as required by other applicable laws. 
K.  Final Decision and Effective Date. A Type IV decision, if approved, shall take effect and shall become final as specified in the enacting ordinance, or if not approved, upon mailing of the notice of decision to the applicant. 
L.  Record of the Public Hearing. 
1.  A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by stenographic, mechanical, or electronic means. It is not necessary to transcribe an electronic record verbatim, but the meeting minutes shall be filed in hardcopy form with the city recorder. The minutes and other evidence presented as a part of the hearing shall be part of the record. 
2.  All exhibits received and displayed shall be marked to provide identification and shall be part of the record. 
3.  The official record shall include: 
a.  All materials considered by the hearings body; 
b.  All materials submitted by the city planning official to the hearings body regarding the application; 
c.  The verbatim record made by the stenographic, mechanical, or electronic means; the minutes of the hearing; and other documents considered; 
d.  The final ordinance; 
e.  All correspondence; and 
f.  A copy of the notices that were given as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.80.060 - General provisions-One hundred twenty day rule, time computation, pre-application conferences, acceptance and review, planning official's duties, amended applications, resubmittal, appeals. 
A.  One Hundred Twenty Day (120) Rule. The city shall take final action on Types I, II, and III permit applications that are subject to this chapter, including resolution of all appeals, within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the application is deemed as complete, unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. Any exceptions to this rule shall conform to the provisions of ORS 227.178. (The one hundred twenty (120) day rule does not apply to Type IV legislative decisions-plan and code amendments-under ORS 227.178.) 
B.  Time Computation. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday or legal holiday, including Sunday, in which event, the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday or legal holiday. 
C.  Pre-Application Conferences. 
1.  Participants. When a pre-application conference is required, the applicant shall meet with the city planning official and other city or agency representatives as appropriate. 
2.  Information Provided. At such conference, the city planning official shall: 
a.  Cite the comprehensive plan policies and map designations applicable to the proposal; 
b.  Cite the ordinance provisions, including substantive and procedural requirements applicable to the proposal; 
c.  Provide available technical data and assistance that will aid the applicant; 
d.  Identify other governmental policies and regulations that relate to the application; and 
e.  Reasonably identify other opportunities or constraints concerning the application. 
3.  Disclaimer. Failure of the city planning official or his or her designee to provide any of the information required by this subsection shall not constitute a waiver of any of the standards, criteria or requirements for the application. 
4.  Changes in the Law. Due to possible changes in federal, state, regional, and local law, the applicant is responsible for ensuring that the application complies with all applicable laws on the day the application is deemed complete. 
D.  Acceptance and Review of Applications. 
1.  Initiation of Applications. 
a.  Applications for approval under this chapter may be initiated by: 
i.  Order of city council; 
ii.  Resolution of the planning commission; 
iii.  The city planning official; 
iv.  A record owner of property (person(s) whose name is on the most recently recorded deed), or contract purchaser with written permission from the record owner. 
b.  Any person authorized to submit an application for approval may be represented by an agent authorized in writing to make the application on their behalf. 
2.  Consolidation of Proceedings. When an applicant applies for more than one type of land use or development permit (e.g., Types II and III) for the same one or more parcels of land, the proceedings shall be consolidated for review and decision. 
a.  If more than one approval authority would be required to decide on the applications if submitted separately, then the decision shall be made by the approval authority having original jurisdiction over one of the applications in the following order of preference: the council, the commission, or the city planning official. 
b.  When proceedings are consolidated: 
i.  The notice shall identify each application to be decided; 
ii.  The decision on a plan map amendment shall precede the decision on a proposed land use district change and other decisions on a proposed development. Similarly, the decision on a zone map amendment shall precede the decision on a proposed development and other actions; and 
iii.  Separate findings and decisions shall be made on each application. 
3.  Check for Acceptance and Completeness. In reviewing an application for completeness, the following procedure shall be used: 
a.  Acceptance. When an application is received by the city, the city planning official shall immediately determine whether the following essential items are present. If the following items are not present, the application shall not be accepted and shall be immediately returned to the applicant: 
i.  The required form; 
ii.  The required fee; 
iii.  The signature of the applicant on the required form and signed written authorization of the property owner of record if the applicant is not the owner. 
b.  Completeness. 
i.  Review and Notification. After the application is accepted, the city planning official shall review the application for completeness. If the application is incomplete, the city planning official shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly what information is missing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application and allow the applicant one hundred eighty (180) days to submit the missing information, or fourteen (14) days to submit a refusal statement. 
ii.  Application Deemed Complete for Review. In accordance with the application submittal requirements of this chapter, the application shall be deemed complete upon the receipt by the city planning official of all required information. The applicant shall have the option of withdrawing the application, or refusing to submit information requested by the city planning official in subsection (D)(3)(b)(i) of this section. For the refusal to be valid, the refusal shall be made in writing and received by the city planning official no later than fourteen (14) days after the date on the city planning official's letter of incompleteness. If the applicant refuses in writing to submit the missing information, the application shall be deemed complete on 31st day after the city planning official first accepted the application. 
iii.  Standards and Criteria that Apply to the Application. Approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and criteria that were applicable at the time it was first accepted. 
iv.  Coordinated Review. The city shall also submit the application for review and comment to the city engineer, road authority, and other applicable county, state, and federal review agencies. 
4.  Changes or Additions to the Application During the Review Period. Once an application is deemed complete: 
a.  All documents and other evidence relied upon by the applicant shall be submitted to the city planning official at least seven days before the notice of action or hearing is mailed, if possible. Documents or other evidence submitted after that date shall be received by city planning official, and transmitted to the hearings body, but may be too late to include with the staff report and evaluation. 
b.  When documents or other evidence are submitted by the applicant during the review period but after the application is deemed complete, the assigned review person or body shall determine whether or not the new documents or other evidence submitted by the applicant significantly change the application. 
c.  If the assigned reviewer determines that the new documents or other evidence significantly change the application, the reviewer shall include a written determination that a significant change in the application has occurred as part of the decision. In the alternate, the reviewer may inform the applicant either in writing, or orally at a public hearing, that such changes may constitute a significant change (see subsection (D)(4)(d) of this section), and allow the applicant to withdraw the new materials submitted, in order to avoid a determination of significant change. 
d.  If the applicant's new materials are determined to constitute a significant change in an application that was previously deemed complete, the city shall take one of the following actions, at the choice of the applicant: 
i.  Continue to process the existing application and allow the applicant to submit a new second application with the proposed significant changes. Both the old and the new applications will proceed, but each will be deemed complete on different dates and may therefore be subject to different criteria and standards and different decision dates; 
ii.  Suspend the existing application and allow the applicant to submit a new application with the proposed significant changes. Before the existing application can be suspended, the applicant must consent in writing to waive the one hundred twenty (120) day rule (subsection A of this section) on the existing application. If the applicant does not consent, the city shall not select this option; 
iii.  Reject the new documents or other evidence that has been determined to constitute a significant change, and continue to process the existing application without considering the materials that would constitute a significant change. The city will complete its decision making process without considering the new evidence. 
e.  If a new application is submitted by the applicant, that application shall be subject to a separate check for acceptance and completeness and will be subject to the standards and criteria in effect at the time the new application is accepted. 
E.  City Planning Official's Duties. The city planning official shall: 
1.  Prepare application forms based on the criteria and standards in applicable state law, the city's comprehensive plan, and implementing ordinance provisions; 
2.  Accept all development applications that comply with this section; 
3.  Prepare a staff report that summarizes the application(s) and applicable decision criteria, and provides findings of conformance and/or nonconformance with the criteria. The staff report may also provide a recommended decision of: approval; denial; or approval with specific conditions that ensure conformance with the approval criteria; 
4.  Prepare a notice of the proposal decision: 
a.  In the case of an application subject to a Type I or II review process, the city planning official shall make the staff report and all case-file materials available at the time that the notice of the decision is issued, 
b.  In the case of an application subject to a hearing (Type III or IV), the city planning official shall make the staff report available to the public at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing date, and make the case-file materials available when notice of the hearing is mailed, as provided by Sections 17.80.030(C) (Type II), 17.80.040(C) (Type III), or 17.80.050(D) (Type IV); 
5.  Administer the hearings process; 
6.  File notice of the final decision in the city's records and mail a copy of the notice of the final decision to the applicant; all persons who provided comments or testimony; persons who requested copies of the notice; and any other persons entitled to notice by law; 
7.  Maintain and preserve the file for each application for the time period required by law. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice given; the affidavits of notice; the application and all supporting information; the staff report; the final decision, including the findings, conclusions and conditions, if any; all correspondence; minutes of any meeting at which the application was considered; and any other exhibit, information or documentation which was considered by the decision maker(s) on the application; and 
8.  Administer the appeals and review process. 
F.  Amended Decision Process. 
1.  The purpose of an amended decision process is to allow the city planning official to correct typographical errors, rectify inadvertent omissions and/or make other minor changes that do not materially alter the decision. 
2.  The city planning official may issue an amended decision after the notice of final decision has been issued but before the appeal period has expired. If such a decision is amended, the decision shall be issued within fourteen (14) business days after the original decision would have become final, but in no event beyond the one hundred twenty (120) day period required by state law. A new appeal period, as specified for Type II or Type III actions, as applicable, shall begin on the day the amended decision is issued. 
3.  Notice of an amended decision shall be given using the same mailing and distribution list as for the original decision notice. 
4.  Modifications to approved plans or conditions of approval requested by the applicant shall follow the procedures in Chapter 17.100. All other changes to decisions that are not modifications under Chapter 17.100 follow the appeal process. 
G.  Resubmittal of Application Following Denial. An application that has been denied, or an application that was denied and on appeal or review has not been reversed by a higher authority, including the land use board of appeals, the land conservation and development commission or the courts, may not be resubmitted as the same or a substantially similar proposal for the same land for a period of at least twelve (12) months from the date the final city action is made denying the application, unless there is substantial change in the facts or a change in city policy that would change the outcome, as determined by the city planning official. 
H.  Appeal Process. An appeal by a person with standing shall be a hearing de novo and following the Type III procedure under Section 17.80.040. The appeal shall not be limited to the application materials, evidence and other documentation, and specific issues raised in the proceeding below. The planning commission or city council may allow additional evidence, testimony, or argument concerning any standard, criterion, condition, or issue relevant to the original application. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.80.070 - Special procedures. 
A.  Expedited Land Divisions. An expedited land division ("ELD") shall be defined and may be used as provided under ORS 197.360 through 197.380. 
1.  Selection. An applicant who wishes to use an ELD procedure for a partition, subdivision or planned development instead of the regular procedure type assigned to it, must request the use of the ELD in writing at the time the application is filed, or forfeit his or her right to use it. 
2.  Review Procedure. All applications for expedited land divisions shall comply with ORS 197.360 through 197.380 and the City of Coquille comprehensive plan; ORS 197.360 through ORS 197.380 details the criteria, application and notice requirements, and action and appeal procedures for expedited land divisions. 
3.  Appeal Procedure. An appeal of an ELD shall follow the procedures in ORS 197.375. Where the city has not otherwise appointed a hearings officer (referee) for such appeals, and the city attorney is a contractor (not a city employee), the city attorney shall serve as the referee for ELD appeals. 
B.  (Reserved) 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.80.080 - Neighborhood meetings. 
    Applicants are encouraged to meet with adjacent property owners and neighborhood representatives prior to submitting their application to the city in order to solicit input and exchange information about the proposed development. The planning official, at his or her discretion may require an applicant for a Type III or Type IV application to offer to meet with adjacent property owners prior to submitting an application, or prior the city's acceptance of an application as complete, in order to solicit public input that may be pertinent to the application. Adjacent property owners include those within a minimum one hundred (100) feet from subject property. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.80.090 - Traffic impact analysis. 
    The purpose of this section of the code is to assist in determining which road authorities participate in land use decisions, and to implement Section 660-012-0045(2)(e) of the State Transportation Planning Rule that requires the city to adopt a process to apply conditions to development proposals in order to minimize impacts and protect transportation facilities. This chapter establishes the standards for when a proposal must be reviewed for potential traffic impacts; when a traffic impact analysis must be submitted with a development application in order to determine whether conditions are needed to minimize impacts to and protect transportation facilities; what must be in a traffic impact analysis; and who is qualified to prepare the analysis. 
A.  When a Traffic Impact Analysis is Required. The city or other road authority with jurisdiction may require a traffic impact analysis (TIA) as part of an application for development, a change in use, or a change in access. The current version of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual shall be used as a source for estimating development-generated traffic. A TIA shall be required when a land use application involves one or more of the following actions: 
1.  A change in zoning or a plan amendment designation; 
2.  Any proposed development or land use action that a road authority states may have operational or safety concerns along its facility(ies); 
3.  An increase in site traffic volume generation by three hundred (300) average daily trips (ADT) or more; 
4.  An increase in peak hour traffic volume of a particular turning movement to and from an arterial street, including state highways, by twenty (20) percent or more; 
5.  An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding the twenty thousand (20,000) pound gross vehicle weights by ten (10) vehicles or more per day; 
6.  The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering or leaving the property are restricted, or such vehicles queue or hesitate on the state highway, creating a safety hazard; or 
7.  A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems, such as back up onto a street or greater potential for traffic accidents. 
B.  Traffic Impact Analysis Preparation. A traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer in accordance with the requirements of the road authority. If the road authority is the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), the applicant shall consult ODOT's regional development review planner and OAR 734-051-180. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.84 - LAND USE REVIEW AND SITE DESIGN REVIEW 

17.84.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Provide rules, regulations and standards for efficient and effective administration of land use and site development review; 
B.  Carry out the development pattern and plan of the city and its comprehensive plan policies; 
C.  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare; 
D.  Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewage, fire protection, pollution control, surface water management, and protection against natural hazards; 
E.  Encourage the conservation of energy resources; and 
F.  Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, mixed uses, transportation options, and detailed, human-scaled design. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.84.020 - Applicability. 
    Land use review or site design review shall be required for all new developments and modifications of existing developments described below. Regular maintenance, repair and replacement of materials (e.g., roof, siding, awnings, etc.), parking resurfacing and similar maintenance and repair shall be exempt from review. 
A.  Land Use Review. Land use review is a review conducted by the city planning official without a public hearing (Type I or II). (See Chapter 17.80 for review procedure.) It is for changes in land use and developments that do not require a conditional use permit or site design review approval. Land use review ensures compliance with the basic land use and development standards of the land use district, such as lot area, building setbacks and orientation, lot coverage, maximum building height, and other provisions of Division II. Land use review is required for all of the types of land uses and development listed below. Land uses and developments exceeding the thresholds below require site design review. 
1.  Change in occupancy from one type of land use to a different land use; 
2.  Single-family detached dwelling (including manufactured home on its own lot); 
3.  A single duplex, or up to two single-family attached (town home) units not requiring a land division, and accessory parking on the same lot; 
4.  Nonresidential building additions up to five hundred (500) square feet, or twenty (20) percent of an existing structure, whichever is greater; 
5.  Minor modifications to development approvals as defined by Chapter 17.100; 
6.  Any proposed development that has a valid conditional use permit. Major modifications to a development with a conditional use permit shall require review and approval in accordance with Chapter 17.92, Conditional Use Permits; 
7.  Home occupations requiring a permit under Chapter 17.112; 
8.  Temporary uses requiring a permit under Chapter 17.112; 
9.  Accessory structures and accessory parking; 
10.  Development and land uses that are part of a previously approved site design review or conditional use permit application, provided modifications to such plans may be subject to Chapter 17.100; 
11.  Public improvements required by a condition of approval (e.g., transportation facilities and improvements, parks, trails, and similar improvements, as determined by the city planning official). 
B.  Site Design Review. Site design review is a discretionary review conducted by the planning commission with a public hearing (Type II review). (See Chapter 17.80 for review procedure.) It applies to all development in the city, except those specifically listed under subsection A of this section (applications subject to development review). Site design review ensures compliance with the land use and development standards in Division II (e.g., lot area, building setbacks and orientation, lot coverage, maximum building height), and the design standards and public improvement requirements in Division III. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.84.030 - Land use review procedure and approval criteria. 
    When land use review is required, it shall be conducted prior to issuance of building permits, occupancy permit, business license, or public improvement permits, as determined by the city planning official. The city shall conduct land use reviews using either a Type I or Type II procedure, as described in Sections 17.80.020 and 17.80.030. A Type I procedure shall be used when the planning official finds that the applicable standards are clear and objective and do not require the exercise of discretion. A Type II procedure shall be used when the decision is discretionary in nature. The city planning official shall be responsible for determining the required review procedure. An application for land use review shall be approved only upon meeting all of the following criteria: 
A.  The proposed land use or development is permitted by the underlying land use district (Division II); 
B.  The land use, building/yard setback, lot area, lot dimension, density, lot coverage, building height and other applicable standards of the underlying land use district and any applicable overlay district(s) are met (Division II); and 
C.  When development is proposed, the applicable sections of Division III, Community Design Standards, apply. 
    Note: land use reviews do not address a project's compliance with applicable building, fire and life safety regulations. Subsequent review by city officials may be required to determine compliance with applicable regulations. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.84.040 - Site design review-Application review procedure. 
    Where site design review is required, it shall be conducted using a Type III procedure, consistent with Section 17.80.040, and using the application requirements and approval criteria contained in Sections 17.84.050 through 17.84.060 below. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.84.050 - Site design review-Application submission requirements. 
    All of the following information is required for site design review application submittal: 
A.  General Submission Requirements. An application for site design review shall contain all of the information required for a Type III review under Section 17.80.040, and provide: 
1.  Public Facilities and Services Impact Study. The impact study shall quantify and assess the effect of the development on public facilities and services. The city shall advise as to the scope of the study during the required pre-application conference (Section 17.80.060(C)). The study shall address, at a minimum, the transportation system, including required improvements for vehicles and pedestrians, the drainage system, the parks system, the water system, and the sewer system. For each public facility system and type of impact, the study shall propose improvements necessary to meet city standards. 
2.  Traffic impact analysis, if required by the city or other road authority. Traffic impact analysis shall conform to the standards and procedures in Section 17.80.090. 
3.  In situations where this code requires the dedication of real property to the city, the city shall either: (a) include in the written decision evidence that shows that the required property dedication is directly related to and roughly proportional to the projected impacts of the development on public facilities and services, or (b) not require the dedication as a condition of approval. 
B.  Site Design Review Information. In addition to the general submission requirements for a Type III review (Section 17.80.040) an applicant for site design review shall provide the following additional information, as deemed applicable by the city planning official. The planning official may deem applicable any information that he or she needs to review the request and prepare a complete staff report and recommendation to the approval body: 
1.  Site Analysis Map. At a minimum, the site analysis map shall contain the following: 
a.  The applicant's entire property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the location of the development in the city, and the relationship between the proposed development site and adjacent property and development. The property boundaries, dimensions and gross area shall be identified; 
b.  Topographic contour lines at two-foot intervals for slopes, except where the city engineer determines that larger intervals will be adequate for steeper slopes; 
c.  Identification of slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent; 
d.  The location and width of all public and private streets, drives, sidewalks, pathways, rights-of-way, and easements on the site and adjoining the site; 
e.  Potential natural hazard areas, including any areas identified as subject to a flood hazard as identified on FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps or as otherwise determined through site specific survey, areas subject to high water table, and areas designated by the city, county, or state as having a potential for geologic hazards, including areas subject to Chapter 17.40, Geologic Hazard Overlay; 
f.  Resource areas, including marsh and wetland areas, streams, and wildlife habitat identified by the city or any natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection; 
g.  Site features, including existing structures, pavement, large rock outcroppings, areas having unique views, and drainage ways, canals and ditches; 
h.  Locally or federally designated historic and cultural resources on the site and adjacent parcels or lots; 
i.  The location, size and species of trees and other vegetation having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade; 
j.  North arrow, scale, names and addresses of all persons listed as owners of the subject property on the most recently recorded deed; 
k.  Name and address of project designer, engineer, surveyor, and/or planner, if applicable. 
2.  Proposed Site Plan. The site plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  The proposed development site, including boundaries, dimensions, and gross area; 
b.  Features identified on the existing site analysis maps that are proposed to remain on the site; 
c.  Features identified on the existing site map, if any, which are proposed to be removed or modified by the development; 
d.  The location and dimensions of all proposed public and private streets, drives, rights-of-way, and easements; 
e.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, utilities, pavement and other improvements on the site. Setback dimensions for all existing and proposed buildings shall be provided on the site plan; 
f.  The location and dimensions of entrances and exits to the site for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access; 
g.  The location and dimensions of all parking and vehicle circulation areas (show striping for parking stalls and wheel stops); 
h.  Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas, including sidewalks, internal pathways, pathway connections to adjacent properties, and any bicycle lanes or trails; 
i.  Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading and delivery; 
j.  Outdoor recreation spaces, common areas, plazas, outdoor seating, street furniture, and similar improvements; 
k.  Location, type, and height of outdoor lighting; 
l.  Location of mail boxes, if known; 
m.  Name and address of project designer, if applicable; 
n.  Locations of bus stops and other public or private transportation facilities; 
o.  Locations, sizes, and types of signs. 
3.  Architectural Drawings. Architectural drawings showing one or all of the following shall be required for new commercial, commercial/residential, industrial and multifamily buildings, and major remodels of the same: 
a.  Building elevations (as determined by the city planning official) with building height and width dimensions; 
b.  Building materials, colors and type; 
c.  The name of the architect or designer. 
4.  Preliminary Grading Plan. A preliminary grading plan prepared by a registered engineer shall be required for development sites one-half acre or larger. The preliminary grading plan shall show the location and extent to which grading will take place, indicating general changes to contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed. Surface water detention and treatment plans may also be required, in accordance with Section 17.72.050. 
5.  Landscape Plan. Where a landscape plan is required, it shall show the following: 
a.  The location and height of existing and proposed fences, buffering or screening materials; 
b.  The location of existing and proposed terraces, retaining walls, decks, patios, shelters, and play areas; 
c.  The location, size, and species of the existing and proposed plant materials (at time of planting); 
d.  Existing and proposed building and pavement outlines; 
e.  Specifications for soil at time of planting, irrigation if plantings are not drought-tolerant (may be automatic or other approved method of irrigation) and anticipated planting schedule; 
f.  Other information as deemed appropriate by the city planning official. An arborist's report may be required for sites with mature trees that are protected under Chapter 17.64, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls, of this code. 
6.  Deed Restrictions. Copies of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants, including those for access control. 
7.  Narrative. Letter or narrative report documenting compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in Section 17.84.060, Site design review approval criteria. 
8.  Traffic impact analysis, when required, shall be prepared in accordance with the road authority's requirements. See Section 17.80.090, and Section 17.72.020 for relevant standards. 
9.  Other information determined by the city planning official. The city may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features or project impacts (e.g., traffic, noise, environmental features, natural hazards, etc.), in conformance with this code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.84.060 - Site design review approval criteria. 
    The review authority shall make written findings with respect to all of the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application: 
A.  The application is complete, as determined in accordance with Chapter 17.80, Types of Review Procedures and Section 17.84.050 above. 
B.  The application complies with all of the applicable provisions of the underlying land use district (Division II), including: building and yard setbacks, lot area and dimensions, density and floor area, lot coverage, building height, building orientation, architecture, and other special standards as may be required for certain land uses. 
C.  The applicant shall be required to upgrade any existing development that does not comply with the applicable land use district standards, in conformance with Chapter 17.120, Nonconforming Uses and Developments. 
D.  The application complies with all of the design standards in Division III: 
1.  Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation; 
2.  Chapter 17.64, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls; 
3.  Chapter 17.68, Parking and Loading, for automobiles and bicycles; 
4.  Chapter 17.72, Public Facilities; 
5.  Chapter 17.76, Surface Water Management. 
E.  Existing conditions of approval required as part of a prior land use decision, including Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments (Chapter 17.88), Conditional Use Permits (Chapter 17.92), Master Planned Developments (Chapter 17.96) or other approval, shall be met. 
    Note: compliance with sign permit requirements and other city codes and requirements, though not applicable land use criteria, may be required prior to issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.84.070 - Bonding and assurances. 
A.  Performance Bonds for Public Improvements. On all projects where public improvements are required, the city shall require a bond in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of estimated improvement costs, or other adequate assurances, as a condition of site development approval in order to guarantee the public improvements. 
B.  Release of Performance Bonds. The bond or assurance shall be released when the city planning official finds the completed project conforms to the site development approval, including all conditions of approval. 
C.  Completion of Landscape Installation. Landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of occupancy permits, unless security equal to the cost of the landscaping as determined by the city planning official or a qualified landscape architect is filed with the city planning official assuring such installation within six months after occupancy. If the installation of the landscaping is not completed within the six-month period, the security may be used by the city to complete the installation. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.84.080 - Development in accordance with permit approval-Modifications-Permit expiration. 
    Development shall not commence until the applicant has received all of the appropriate land use and development approvals (i.e., site design review approval) and building permits. Construction of public improvements shall not commence until the city has approved all required public improvement plans (e.g., utilities, streets, public land dedication, etc.). The city may require the applicant to enter into a development agreement (e.g., for phased developments and developments with required off-site public improvements), and may require bonding or other assurances for improvements, in accordance with this section. Development review and site design review approvals shall be subject to all of the following standards and limitations: 
A.  Modifications to Approved Plans and Developments. Minor modifications of an approved plan or existing development, as defined in Chapter 17.100, shall be processed as a Type I procedure and require only land use review. Major modifications, as defined in Chapter 17.100, shall be processed as a Type II or Type III procedure and shall require site design review. For information on Types I, II and III procedures, please refer to Chapter 17.80. For modifications approval criteria, please refer to Chapter 17.100. 
B.  Approval Period. Development review and site design review approvals shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval. The approval shall lapse if: 
1.  A public improvement plan or building permit application for the project has not been submitted within one year of approval; or 
2.  Construction on the site is in violation of the approved plan. 
C.  Extension. The planning commission shall, upon written request by the applicant, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided that: 
1.  No changes are made on the original approved site design review plan; 
2.  The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the one-year extension period; 
3.  There have been no changes to the applicable code provisions on which the approval was based. If there have been changes to the applicable code provisions and the expired plan does not comply with those changes, then the extension shall not be granted; in this case, a new site design review shall be required; and 
4.  The applicant demonstrates that failure to obtain building permits and substantially begin construction within one year of site design approval was beyond the applicant's control. 
D.  Phased Development. Phasing of development may be approved with the site design review application, subject to the following standards and procedures: 
1.  A phasing plan shall be submitted with the site design review application. 
2.  The planning commission shall approve a time schedule for developing a site in phases, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than two years without reapplying for site design review. 
3.  Approval of a phased site design review proposal requires satisfaction of all of the following criteria: 
a.  The public facilities required to serve each phase are constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase; 
b.  The development and occupancy of any phase dependent on the use of temporary public facilities shall require city council approval. Temporary facilities shall be approved only upon city receipt of bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required public improvements, in accordance with Section 17.88.100. A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard, subject to review by the city engineer; 
c.  The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other property owners to construct public facilities that were required as part of the approved development proposal; and 
d.  An application for phasing may be approved after site design review approval as a modification to the approved plan, in accordance with the procedures for minor modifications (Chapter 17.100). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.88 - LAND DIVISIONS AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS 

17.88.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Provide rules, regulations and standards governing the approval of subdivisions, partitions and lot line adjustments, as defined below and in Chapter 17.08: 
1.  "Subdivisions" are the creation of four or more lots from one parent lot, parcel or tract, within one calendar year, 
2.  "Partitions" are the creation of three or fewer lots within one calendar year, 
3.  "Lot line adjustments" are modifications to lot lines or parcel boundaries that do not result in the creation of new lots (includes consolidation of lots); 
B.  Carry out the city's development pattern, as envisioned by the comprehensive plan; 
C.  Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, and transportation options; 
D.  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare through orderly and efficient urbanization; 
E.  Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewage, fire protection, pollution control, surface water management, and protection against natural hazards; and 
G.  Encourage the conservation of energy resources. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.020 - General requirements. 
A.  Subdivision and Partition Approval Through Two-Step Process. Applications for subdivision or partition approval shall be processed by means of a preliminary plat evaluation and a final plat evaluation, according to the following two steps: 
1.  The preliminary plat must be approved before the final plat can be submitted for approval consideration; and 
2.  The final plat must include all conditions of approval of the preliminary plat. 
B.  Compliance with ORS Chapter 92. All subdivision and partition proposals shall conform to state regulations in Oregon Revised Statute (ORS) Chapter 92, Subdivisions and Partitions. 
C.  Future Redivision Plan. When subdividing or partitioning tracts into large lots (i.e., greater than two times or two hundred (200) percent the minimum lot size allowed by the underlying land use district), the city shall require that the lots be of such size, shape, and orientation as to facilitate future redivision in accordance with the requirements of the land use district and this code. A redivision plan shall be submitted for large lots identifying: 
1.  Potential future lot division(s), consistent with the density and lot size standards of Division II; 
2.  Potential street right-of-way alignments to serve future development of the property and connect to adjacent properties, including existing or planned rights-of-way; 
3.  A disclaimer that the plan is a conceptual plan intended to show potential future development. It shall not be binding on the city or property owners, except as may be required through conditions of land division approval. For example, dedication and improvement of rights-of-way within the future plan area may be required to provide needed secondary access and circulation. 
D.  Lot Size Averaging. Single-family residential lot size may be averaged to allow lots less than the minimum lot size in residential districts, as provided by Section 17.24.060, flexible lot size option, or through approval of a master planned development under Chapter 17.96. 
E.  Temporary Sales Office. A temporary sales office in conjunction with a subdivision may be approved as set forth in Section 17.112.010, Temporary use permits, and subject to the requirements for mobile homes and recreational vehicles in Chapter 17.36, as applicable. 
F.  Minimize Flood Damage. All subdivisions and partitions shall be designed based on the need to minimize the risk of flood damage. No new building lots shall be created entirely within a floodway. All new lots shall be buildable without requiring development within the floodway and, where possible, allow building outside of the flood fringe. Development in a one hundred (100) year floodplain shall comply with the National Flood Insurance Program, state building code requirements, including elevating structures above the base flood elevation, and the City of Coquille floodplain ordinance. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining floodplain development permit from the NFIP and local jurisdiction. 
G.  Determination of Base Flood Elevation. Where a development site consists of five or more acres or fifty (50) or more lots, and is located in or near areas prone to inundation for which the base flood elevation has not been mapped, the applicant shall have the base flood elevation it shall be prepared by a qualified professional as part of the land division application. 
H.  Need for Adequate Utilities. All lots created through land division shall have adequate public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems. These systems shall be located and constructed to prevent or minimize flood damage, and to avoid impairment of the system and contamination from them during flooding. 
I.  Need for Adequate Drainage. All subdivision and partition proposals shall have adequate surface water drainage facilities that reduce exposure to flood damage and improve water quality. Water quality or quantity control improvements may be required. 
J.  Floodplain, Park and Open Space Dedications. Where land filling and/or development is allowed within or adjacent to regulatory floodplain and the comprehensive plan designates the subject floodplain for park, open space, or trail use, the city may require the dedication of sufficient open land area for a greenway and/or trail adjoining or within the floodplain for transportation, storm drainage/water quality, or park purposes in the public interest. When practicable, this area shall include portions at a suitable elevation for the construction of a multi-use pathway in accordance with the city's adopted trails plan or pedestrian and bikeway plans, as applicable. The city shall evaluate individual development proposals and determine whether the dedication of land is justified based on the development's impact to the park and/or trail system, or storm water management requirements, consistent with Sections 17.72.030 and 17.72.050, and assist in obtaining any floodplain permit that may be required. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.030 - Pre-planning for large sites. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require pre-planning of large sites (i.e., in conjunction with annexation or master planned development approval, or prior to subdivision approval) and ensure the development of fully integrated, mixed-use pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods. The intent is to minimize traffic congestion, suburban sprawl, infrastructure costs, and environmental degradation, particularly as new development takes place on large parcels of land. 
B.  Applicability. This section applies to parcels, and development sites with more than one parcel in residential district(s), comprising forty (40) acres or more site area. 
C.  Area Plan Required. Prior to annexation and land division approval, a specific area plan shall be prepared for all sites meeting the criteria in subsection D of this section. 
D.  Land Use and Design Standards. The specific area plan required under subsection C of this section shall be consistent with the following design criteria: 
1.  All neighborhoods have identifiable centers and outer boundaries; 
2.  Edge lots are readily accessible to neighborhood commercial uses, if any, and recreational uses by walking and bicycling (a distance not greater than one-quarter mile); 
3.  Uses and housing types are mixed and in close proximity to one another; 
4.  Streets are connected and blocks are walkable in scale (e.g., two hundred (200) through six hundred (600) feet in length, with an average perimeter no greater than one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet), except where topography, existing development, or other physical features require longer blocks; 
5.  Civic buildings, monuments and/or open spaces (e.g., parks, squares, greenbelts, natural areas, etc.), and scenic viewing points are given prominent sites throughout the neighborhood; 
6.  Overall, the master plan achieves a housing density that is consistent with the comprehensive plan and development code; and 
7.  Land needed for public use (e.g., schools, parks, fire stations, and other facilities) shall be designated on the master plan, in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
E.  Implementation. Upon approval of a plan under the provisions of Section 17.88.030, the processing of development proposals shall follow the land division procedures in this chapter, and the land use review and/or site design review procedures in Chapter 17.84, as applicable. Any modifications to the approved master plan shall be subject to the standards and procedures in Chapter 17.100, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.040 - Flexible lot size-Flag lots-Lots accessed by mid-block lanes. 
A.  Flexible Lot Size. To allow creativity and flexibility in subdivision design and to address physical constraints, such as topography, existing development, significant trees and other natural and built features, the approval body may grant a ten (10) percent modification to the lot area and/or lot dimension (width/depth) standards in Section 17.24.040, provided that the overall density of the subdivision does not exceed the allowable density of the district and the approval body finds that granting the modification allows for a greater variety of housing types or it improves development compatibility with natural features or adjacent land uses. The approval body may require that standard size lots be placed at the perimeter of the development where the abutting lots are standard size or larger; except that this provision shall not apply where the abutting lots are larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
B.  Mid-Block Lanes. Lots may be developed without frontage onto a public street when lot access is provided by mid-block lanes, as shown below. Mid-block lanes or shared driveways, as illustrated in Figure 17.88.040(B), may be required when practicable to provide connectivity between infill developments. Mid-block lanes with access easements for adjoining properties may be allowed as an alternative to requiring through streets where block lengths do not necessitate a through street. The lanes shall meet the standards for alleys, per Section 17.72.020, and the standards under subsections C through F of this section. 
Figure 17.88.040(B) Mid-Block

C.  Flag Lots. Flag lots may be created only when a through street or mid-block lanes cannot be extended to serve abutting uses or future development. A flag lot driveway ("flag pole") may serve no more than two dwelling units, including accessory dwellings and dwellings on individual lots, unless Uniform Fire Code (UFC) standards are met for more units. When UFC standards are met, the maximum number of dwellings shall be four. A drive serving more than one lot shall have a reciprocal access and maintenance easement recorded for all lots. No fence, structure or other obstacle shall be placed within the drive area. The fire marshal may require an emergency turnaround. Fire sprinklers may also be required for buildings that cannot be fully served by fire hydrants (i.e., due to distance from hydrant or insufficient fire flow). 
D.  Driveway and Lane Width. The minimum width of all shared drives and lanes shall be twelve (12) feet; the maximum width is twenty (20) feet, except as required by the Uniform Fire Code. 
E.  Easement and Improvement of Drive Lane. The property owner shall record a twenty (20) foot easement benefiting all properties that are to receive vehicle access. The drive lane shall be improved with an all weather surface approved by the city. Dedication or recording, as applicable, shall be so indicated on the face of the subdivision or partition plat. 
F.  Maximum Drive Lane Length. The maximum drive lane length is subject to requirements of the Uniform Fire Code, but shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet for a shared side drive, and four hundred (400) feet for a shared rear lane. 
G.  Future Street Plans. Building placement and alignment of shared drives shall be designed so that future street connections can be made as surrounding properties develop (i.e., as shown in the Figure 17.88.040(B)). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.050 - Preliminary plat approval process. 
A.  Review of Preliminary Plat. Review of a preliminary plat with two or three lots (partition), or a replat involving two or three lots, shall be processed using a Type II procedure, under Section 17.80.030. Preliminary plats involving four or more lots (subdivision), or a replat involving four or more lots, shall be processed using a Type III procedure under Section 17.80.040. All preliminary plats shall be reviewed using approval criteria in Section 17.88.070. An application for subdivision may be reviewed concurrently with an application for a master planned development under Chapter 17.96. 
B.  Review of Final Plat. Review of a final plat for a subdivision or partition shall be processed using a Type I procedure under Section 17.80.020, using the approval criteria in Section 17.88.090, except where the planning official requires that a Type II or Type III procedure is required due to changes the applicant proposes to the preliminary plat. 
C.  Preliminary Plat Approval Period. Preliminary plat approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of approval. The preliminary plat shall lapse if a final plat has not been submitted within the two-year period. The planning commission may approve phased projects, including master planned developments, with overall time tables of more than two years between preliminary and final plat approvals. 
D.  Modifications and Extensions. The applicant may request changes to the approved preliminary plat or conditions of approval following the procedures and criteria provided in Chapter 17.100, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. The city planning official shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant one written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided that: 
1.  Any changes to the preliminary plat follow the procedures in Chapter 17.100; 
2.  The applicant has submitted written intent to file a final plat within the one-year extension period; 
3.  An extension of time will not prevent the lawful development of abutting properties; 
4.  There have been no changes to the applicable code provisions on which the approval was based. If such changes have occurred, a new preliminary plat application shall be required; and 
5.  The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan. 
E.  Phased Development. 
1.  The city may approve a time schedule for developing a subdivision in phases, but in no case shall the actual construction time period (i.e., for required public improvements, utilities, streets) for any partition or subdivision phase be more than two years without reapplying for a preliminary plat; 
2.  The criteria for approving a phased land division proposal are: 
a.  Public facilities shall be constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase, 
b.  The development and occupancy of any phase dependent on the use of temporary public facilities shall require city council approval. Temporary facilities shall be approved only upon city receipt of bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required permanent public improvements, in accordance with Section 17.88.110. A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard; 
c.  The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or a third party (e.g., owners of lots) to construct public facilities that were required as part of the approved development proposal; and 
d.  The proposed time schedule for phased development approval shall be reviewed concurrently with the preliminary plat application, and the decision may be appealed in the same manner as the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.060 - Preliminary plat submission requirements. 
A.  General Submission Requirements. For all partitions (three or fewer parcels), the application shall contain all of the information required for a Type II procedure under Section 17.80.030, except as may be waived by the planning official. For all subdivisions (four or more lots), the application shall contain all of the information required for a Type III procedure under Section 17.80.040, and the information in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(3) of this section: 
1.  Public Facilities and Services Impact Study. The impact study shall quantify and assess the effect of the development on public facilities and services. The city shall advise as to the scope of the study during the required pre-application conference (Section 17.80.060(C)). The study shall address, at a minimum, the transportation system, including pedestrian ways and bikeways, the drainage system, the parks system, the water system, and the sewer system. For each public facility system and type of impact, the study shall propose improvements necessary to meet city standards and to minimize the impact of the development on the public at large, public facilities systems, and affected private property users; 
2.  Traffic impact analysis, if required by the road authority. Traffic impact studies shall conform to the standards and procedures in Section 17.80.090; and 
3.  In situations where this code requires the dedication of real property to the city, the city shall either: (a) include in the written decision evidence that shows that the required property dedication is directly related to and roughly proportional to the projected impacts of the development on public facilities and services; or (b) delete the dedication as a condition of approval. 
B.  Preliminary Plat Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection A of this section, the preliminary plat application shall consist of drawings and supplementary written material (i.e., on forms and/or in a written narrative) adequate to provide the following information: 
1.  General Information. 
a.  Name of subdivision (not required for partitions). This name must not duplicate the name of another subdivision in Coos County (please check with county surveyor); 
b.  Date, north arrow, and scale of drawing; 
c.  Location of the development sufficient to define its location in the city, boundaries, and a legal description of the site; 
d.  A title block, including the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners of the subject property and, as applicable, the designer, and engineer and surveyor if any, and the date of the survey if submitted; and 
e.  Identification of the drawing as a "preliminary plat." 
2.  Site Analysis. 
a.  Streets: location, name, present width of all streets, alleys and rights-of-way on and abutting the site; 
b.  Easements: width, location and purpose of all existing easements of record on and abutting the site; 
c.  Utilities: location and identity of all utilities on and abutting the site. If water mains and sewers are not on or abutting the site, indicate the direction and distance to the nearest one and show how utilities will be brought to standards; 
d.  Ground elevations shown by contour lines at two-foot vertical interval, except where the city engineer determines that larger intervals are adequate; i.e., for steep slopes. Such ground elevations shall be related to some established benchmark or other datum approved by the county surveyor; this requirement may be waived for partitions when grades, on average, are less than six percent; 
e.  The location and elevation of the closest benchmark(s) within or adjacent to the site (i.e., for surveying purposes); 
f.  Potential natural hazard areas, including any areas identified as subject to a flood hazard as identified on FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps or as otherwise determined through site specific survey, areas subject to high water table, and areas designated by the city, county, or state as having a potential for geologic hazards, including areas subject to Chapter 17.40, Geologic Hazard Overlay; 
g.  Sensitive lands, including wetland areas, streams, wildlife habitat, and other areas identified by the city or natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection; 
h.  Site features, including existing structures, pavement, large rock outcroppings, areas having unique views, and drainage ways, canals and ditches; 
i.  Designated historic and cultural resources on the site and adjacent parcels or lots; 
j.  The location, size and species of trees having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade in conformance with Chapter 17.64; 
k.  North arrow and scale; 
l.  Name and address of project designer, if applicable; and 
m.  Other information, as deemed appropriate by the city planning official. The city may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features and code requirements. 
3.  Proposed Improvements. 
a.  Public and private streets, tracts, driveways, open space and park land; location, names, right-of-way dimensions, approximate radius of street curves; and approximate finished street centerline grades. All streets and tracts that are being held for private use and all reservations and restrictions relating to such private tracts shall be identified; 
b.  Easements: location, width and purpose of all proposed easements; 
c.  Lots and private tracts (e.g., private open space, common area, or street): approximate dimensions, area calculation (e.g., in square feet), and identification numbers for all proposed lots and tracts; 
d.  Proposed uses of the property, including all areas proposed to be dedicated to the public or reserved as open space for the purpose of surface water management, recreation, or other use; potential location of future buildings; 
e.  Proposed improvements, as required by Division III (Community Design Standards), and timing of improvements (e.g., in the case of streets, sidewalks, street trees, utilities, etc.); 
f.  Preliminary location of development showing those future buildings can meet siting and dimensional standards of the district; 
g.  The proposed source of domestic water; 
h.  The proposed method of sewage disposal; 
i.  Proposed method of surface water drainage and treatment if required; 
j.  The approximate location and identity of other utilities, including the locations of street lighting fixtures; 
k.  Proposed railroad crossing or modifications to an existing crossing, if any, and evidence of contact with the affected railroad and the Oregon Department of Transportation Rail Division regarding proposed railroad crossing(s); 
l.  Changes to navigable streams, or other watercourses. Status of public access to these areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat, as applicable; 
m.  Identification of the base flood elevation for development of more than two lots or one-half acre, whichever is less. Written evidence of initiation of a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodplain map amendment shall be required when development is proposed to modify a designated one hundred (100) year floodplain. FEMA approval of the amendment shall be a condition of city land use approval. See also City of Coquille floodplain ordinance (Ordinance No. 1226, March 16, 1987; as amended by Ordinance No. 1351A, November 1, 1993); 
n.  Evidence of contact with from the road authority for any development requiring access to its facility(ies); and 
o.  Evidence of written notice to the applicable natural resource regulatory agency(ies) for any development within or adjacent to jurisdictional wetlands, rivers, streams or other regulated water bodies. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.070 - Approval criteria-Preliminary plat. 
A.  General Approval Criteria. The city may approve, approve with conditions or deny a preliminary plat based on the following approval criteria: 
1.  The proposed preliminary plat complies with the applicable development code sections and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. At a minimum, the provisions of this division, and the applicable chapters and sections of Division II (Land Use Districts) and Division III (Community Design Standards) shall apply. Where a variance is necessary to receive preliminary plat approval, the application shall also comply with the relevant sections of Division V; 
2.  The proposed plat name is not already recorded for another subdivision, and satisfies the provisions of ORS Chapter 92; 
3.  The proposed streets, roads, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, pathways, utilities, and surface water management facilities are laid out so as to conform or transition to the plats of subdivisions and maps of major partitions already approved for adjoining property as to width, general direction and in all other respects. All proposed public improvements and dedications are identified on the preliminary plat; 
4.  All proposed private common areas and improvements (e.g., homeowner's association property) are identified on the preliminary plat; 
5.  Evidence that any required state and federal permits have been obtained, or shall be obtained before approval of the final plat; 
6.  Evidence that improvements or conditions required by the city, road authority, Coos County, special districts, utilities, and/or other service providers, as applicable to the project, have been or can be met; and 
7.  If any part of the site is located within an overlay zone, or previously approved master planned development, it shall conform to the applicable regulations and/or conditions. 
C.  Layout and Design of Streets, Blocks and Lots. All proposed blocks (i.e., one or more lots bound by public streets), lots and parcels conform to the specific requirements below: 
1.  All lots shall comply with the lot area, setback, and dimensional requirements of the applicable land use district (Division II), and the standards of Section 17.72.020(G), Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks. 
2.  Setbacks shall be as required by the applicable land use district (Division II). 
3.  Each lot shall conform to the standards of Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation. 
4.  Landscape or other screening may be required to maintain privacy for abutting uses. See Division II, Land Use Districts, and Chapter 17.64, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. 
5.  In conformance with the Uniform Fire Code, a twenty (20) foot width fire apparatus access drive shall be provided to serve all portions of a building that are located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public right-of-way or approved access drive. See Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation. 
6.  Where a common drive is to be provided to serve more than one lot, a reciprocal easement which will ensure access and maintenance rights shall be recorded with the approved subdivision or partition plat. 
7.  All applicable engineering design standards for streets, utilities, surface water management, and easements shall be met. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. The city may attach such conditions as are necessary to carry out provisions of this code, and other applicable ordinances and regulations, and may require reserve strips be granted to the city for the purpose of controlling access to adjoining undeveloped properties. See Chapter 17.72 (Public Facilities). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.080 - Variances authorized. 
    Variances to the standards of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.116, Variances. Applications for variances shall be submitted at the same time an application for land division or lot line adjustment is submitted, and the applications shall be reviewed together. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.090 - Final plat submission requirements and approval criteria. 
A.  Submission Requirements. Final plats require review and approved by the city prior to recording with Coos County. The applicant shall submit the final plat within two years of the approval of the preliminary plat as provided by Section 17.88.050. Specific information about the format and size of the plat, number of copies and other detailed information can be obtained from the city planning official. 
B.  Approval Process and Criteria. By means of a Type II procedure, the city planning official and city engineer, or the planning commission, shall review the final plat and shall approve or deny it based on findings regarding compliance with the following criteria: 
1.  The final plat is consistent in design (e.g., number, area, dimensions of lots, easements, tracts, right-of-way) with the approved preliminary plat, and all conditions of approval have been satisfied; 
2.  All public improvements required by the preliminary plat have been installed and approved by the city engineer or appropriate service provider (e.g., road authority). Alternatively, the developer has provided a performance guarantee in accordance with Section 17.88.110; 
3.  The streets and roads for public use are dedicated without reservation or restriction other than reversionary rights upon vacation of any such street or road and easements for public utilities; 
4.  The streets and roads held for private uses have been approved by the city as conforming to the preliminary plat; 
5.  The plat and deed contain a dedication to the public of all public improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, public pathways and trails, access reserve strips, parks, sewage disposal storm drainage and water supply systems; 
6.  The applicant has provided copies of all recorded homeowner's association covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs); deed restrictions; private easements and agreements (e.g., for access, common areas, parking, etc.); and other recorded documents pertaining to common improvements recorded and referenced on the plat; 
7.  The plat complies with the applicable sections of this code (i.e., there have been no changes in land use or development resulting in a code violation since preliminary plat approval); 
8.  Certification by the city or service district, as applicable, that water and sanitary sewer service is available to every lot depicted on the plat; or bond, contract or other assurance has been provided by the subdivider/partitioner to the city that such services will be installed in accordance with Chapter 17.72, Public Facilities, and the bond requirements of Section 17.88.110. The amount of the bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider/partitioner shall be determined by a registered professional engineer, subject to review and approval by the city; 
9.  The plat contains an affidavit by the surveyor who surveyed the land, represented on the plat to the effect the land was correctly surveyed and marked with proper monuments as provided by ORS Chapter 92, indicating the initial point of the survey, and giving the dimensions and kind of such monument and its reference to some corner approved by the Coos County surveyor for purposes of identifying its location. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.100 - Public improvements required. 
    Before city approval is certified on the final plat, all required public improvements shall be installed, inspected, and approved. Alternatively, the subdivider/partitioner shall provide a performance guarantee, in accordance with Section 17.88.110. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.110 - Performance guarantee. 
A.  Performance Guarantee Required. When a performance guarantee is required under Section 17.88.100, the subdivider/partitioner shall file an assurance of performance with the city supported by one of the following: 
1.  An irrevocable letter of credit executed by a financial institution authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon; 
2.  A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon which remains in force until the surety company is notified by the city in writing that it may be terminated; or 
3.  Cash. 
B.  Determination of Sum. The assurance of performance shall be for a sum determined by the city as required to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental expenses, plus reasonable inflationary costs. 
C.  Itemized Improvement Estimate. The developer shall furnish to the city an itemized improvement estimate, certified by a registered civil engineer, to assist the city in calculating the amount of the performance assurance. 
D.  Agreement. A written agreement between the city and developer shall be recorded with the final plat. The agreement shall not be valid until it is signed and dated by both the applicant and city planning official. The agreement shall contain, at a minimum, all of the following: 
1.  The period within which all required improvements and repairs shall be completed; 
2.  A provision that if work is not completed within the period specified, the city may complete the work and recover the full cost and expenses from the applicant; 
3.  The improvement fees and deposits that are required; 
4.  (Optional) A provision for the construction of the improvements in stages and for the extension of time under specific conditions therein stated in the contract. 
E.  When Subdivider Fails to Perform. In the event the developer fails to carry out all provisions of the agreement and the city has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the city shall call on the bond, cash deposit or letter of credit for reimbursement. 
F.  Termination of Performance Guarantee. The developer shall not cause termination of nor allow expiration of the guarantee without having first secured written authorization from the city. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.120 - Filing and recording. 
A.  Filing Plat with County. Within sixty (60) days of the city approval of the final plat, the applicant shall submit the final plat to Coos County for signatures of county officials as required by ORS Chapter 92. 
B.  Proof of Recording. Upon final recording with the county, the applicant shall submit to the city a mylar copy and five paper copies of all sheets of the recorded final plat. This shall occur prior to the issuance of building permits for the newly created lots. 
C.  Prerequisites to Recording the Plat. 
1.  No plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem taxes and all special assessments, fees, or other charges required by law to be placed on the tax roll have been paid in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92; 
2.  No plat shall be recorded until it is approved by the county surveyor in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.130 - Replatting and vacation of plats. 
A.  Replatting and Vacations. Any plat or portion thereof may be replatted or vacated upon receiving an application signed by all of the owners as appearing on the deed. 
B.  Procedure. All applications for a replat or vacation shall be processed in accordance with the procedures and standards for a subdivision or partition (i.e., the same process used to create the plat shall be used to replat or vacate the plat). The same appeal rights provided through the subdivision and partition process shall be afforded to the plat vacation process. (See Chapter 17.80, Types of Review Procedures.) The road authority(ies) shall be notified of all applications for replats and street vacations. All street vacations shall also conform to the ORS Chapter 271. 
C.  Basis for Denial. A replat or vacation application may be denied if it abridges or destroys any public right in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys; or if it fails to meet any applicable criteria. 
D.  Recording of Vacations. All approved plat vacations shall be recorded in accordance with Section 17.88.120 and the following procedures: 
1.  Once recorded, a replat or vacation shall operate to eliminate the force and effect of the plat prior to vacation; and 
2.  Vacations shall also divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications described on the plat. 
E.  After Sale of Lots. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated only in the manner herein, and provided that all of the owners of lots within the platted area consent in writing to the plat vacation. 
F.  Street Requirement. Except as prohibited by law (e.g., ORS 92.837, Manufactured Home Park), in approving a right-of-way vacation or replat, the city may require dedication of accessways, paths or trails as a condition of the vacation of any public easement or right-of-way, in order to establish or maintain a safe, convenient and direct pedestrian and bicycle circulation system. Such requirements shall be coordinated with the applicable road authority. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.88.140 - Property line adjustments. 
    A property line adjustment is the modification of lot boundaries, when no lot is created or removed. The application submission and approval process is as follows: 
A.  Submission Requirements. All applications for property line adjustment shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall include information required for a Type I application, as governed by Section 17.80.020. The application shall include a preliminary lot line map drawn to scale identifying all existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions; footprints and dimensions of existing structures (including accessory structures); location and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject lots; location of sensitive lands (e.g., flood hazard, geological hazard, airport approach areas) existing fences and walls; and any other information deemed necessary by the city planning official for ensuring compliance with city codes. 
B.  Approval Process. 
1.  Decision Making Process. Property line adjustments shall be reviewed by means of a Type I procedure, as governed by Section 17.80.020, using approval criteria contained in subsection C of this section. The road authority(ies) shall be notified of lot line adjustments that may affect property access or traffic volumes or operations on their facilities. 
2.  Time Limit on Approval. The property line adjustment approval shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval, during which time it must be recorded. 
3.  Lapsing of Approval. The property line adjustment approval shall lapse if: 
a.  The property line adjustment is not recorded within the time limit in subsection (B)(2) of this section; 
b.  The property line adjustment has been improperly recorded with Coos County without the satisfactory completion of all conditions attached to the approval; or 
c.  The final recording is a departure from the approved plan. 
C.  Approval Criteria. The city planning official shall approve or deny a request for a property line adjustment in writing based on all of the following criteria: 
1.  Parcel Creation. No additional parcel or lot is created or removed by the lot line adjustment. 
2.  Lot Standards. All lots and parcels conform to the applicable lot standards of the land use district (Division II), including lot area, dimensions, setbacks, and coverage, and no resulting lot is wholly comprised of a flood hazard area or jurisdictional wetland. 
3.  Access and Road Authority Standards. All lots and parcels conform to the standards or requirements of Chapter 17.60, Access and Circulation, and all applicable road authority requirements are met. If a lot is nonconforming to any city or road authority standard, it shall not be made even less conforming by the property line adjustment. 
D.  Recording Property Line Adjustments. 
1.  Recording. Upon the city's approval of the proposed property line adjustment, the applicant shall record the property line adjustment with Coos County within sixty (60) days of approval (or the decision expires), and submit a copy of the recorded survey map to the city, to be filed with the approved application. 
2.  Time Limit. The applicant shall submit a copy of the recorded property line adjustment survey map to the city within fifteen (15) days of recording and prior to the issuance of any building permits on the reconfigured lots. 
E.  Extension. The city shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year provided that: 
1.  No changes are made to the original property line adjustment as approved by the city; 
2.  The applicant can show intent of recording the approved plan within the one-year extension period; 
3.  There have been no changes in the applicable code or plan provisions on which the approval was based. In the case where the property line adjustment conflicts with a code change, the extension shall be denied; and 
4.  The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.92 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 

17.92.010 - Conditional use permits-Purpose. 
    There are certain uses, which, due to the nature of their impacts on surrounding land uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and analysis. These are identified as "Conditional Uses" in Division II, Land Use Districts. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures under which a conditional use may be permitted, enlarged or altered if the site is appropriate and if other appropriate conditions of approval can be met. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.92.020 - Conditional use permits-Approvals process. 
A.  Initial Application. An application for a new conditional use shall be processed as a Type III procedure (Section 17.80.040). The application shall meet submission requirements in Section 17.92.030, and the approval criteria contained in Section 17.92.040. 
B.  Modification of Approved or Existing Conditional Use. Modifications to approved or existing conditional uses shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.100, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.92.030 - Conditional use permits-Application submission requirements. 
    In addition to the submission requirements required in Chapter 17.80, an application for conditional use approval must include the following information (subsections A through H of this section), as applicable. For a description of each item, please refer to Section 17.84.050, Site design review-Application submission requirements: 
A.  Existing site conditions; 
B.  Site plan; 
C.  Preliminary grading plan; 
D.  A landscape plan; 
E.  Architectural drawings of all structures; 
F.  Drawings of all proposed signs; 
G.  A copy of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants; 
H.  Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with all applicable approval criteria in Section 17.92.040. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.92.040 - Conditional use permits-Criteria, standards and conditions of approval. 
    The city shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional use or to enlarge or alter a conditional use based on findings of fact with respect to each of the standards and criteria in the following. 
A.  Use Criteria. 
1.  The site size, dimensions, location, topography and access are adequate for the needs of the proposed use, considering the proposed building mass, parking, traffic, noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, visibility, safety, and aesthetic considerations; 
2.  The negative impacts of the proposed use on adjacent properties and on the public can be mitigated through application of other code standards, or other reasonable conditions of approval; and 
3.  All required public facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposal. 
B.  Site Design Standards. The site design review approval criteria (Section 17.84.060) shall be met. The planning official may waive the application requirements for site design review upon determining that the conditional use permit application provides sufficient information to evaluate the proposal. 
C.  Conditions of Approval. The city may impose conditions that are found necessary to ensure that the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity, and that the negative impact of the proposed use on the surrounding uses and public facilities is minimized. These conditions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Limiting the hours, days, place and/or manner of operation; 
2.  Requiring site or architectural design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor and/or dust; 
3.  Requiring larger setback areas, lot area, and/or lot depth or width; 
4.  Limiting the building or structure height, size or lot coverage, and/or location on the site; 
5.  Designating the size, number, location and/or design of vehicle access points or parking areas; 
6.  Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and street(s), sidewalks, curbs, planting strips, pathways, or trails to be improved; 
7.  Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, water quality facilities, and/or improvement of parking and loading areas; 
8.  Limiting the number, size, location, height and/or lighting of signs; 
9.  Limiting or setting standards for the location, design, and/or intensity of outdoor lighting; 
10.  Requiring berms, screening or landscaping and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance; 
11.  Requiring and designating the size, height, location and/or materials for fences; 
12.  Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, drainage areas, historic resources, cultural resources, and/or sensitive lands; 
13.  Requiring the dedication of sufficient land to the public, and/or construction of pedestrian/bicycle pathways in accordance with the adopted plans, or requiring the recording of a local improvement district nonremonstrance agreement for the same. Dedication of land and construction shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 17.60, and Section 17.60.030 in particular; 
14.  Establish a time table for periodic review and renewal, or expiration, of the conditional use to ensure compliance with conditions of approval; such review may be subject to approval by the planning official or planning commission through a Type II administrative review or Type III quasi-judicial process at the discretion of the decision making body. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.92.050 - Conditional use permits-Additional development standards. 
A.  Concurrent Variance Application(s). A conditional use permit shall not grant variances to regulations otherwise prescribed by the development code. Variance application(s) may be filed in conjunction with the conditional use application, and both applications may be reviewed concurrently and heard at the same public hearing. 
B.  Additional Development Standards. Development standards for specific uses are contained in Division II, Land Use Districts. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.96 - MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

17.96.010 - Master planned development-Purpose. 
    The purposes of this section are to: 
A.  Implement the comprehensive plan and applicable land use district(s) by providing a means for master planning large development sites; 
B.  Encourage innovative planning that results in projects that benefit the community (i.e., through compatible mixed use development, improved protection of open spaces, transportation options and consistent application of standards in phased developments); 
C.  Encourage developments that recognize the relationship between buildings, their use, open space, and transportation options, providing varied opportunities for innovative and diversified employment environments; 
D.  Facilitate the efficient use of land; 
E.  Promote an economic arrangement of land use, buildings, circulation systems, open space, and utilities; 
F.  Preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape features and amenities that may not otherwise be protected through conventional development; 
G.  Encourage energy conservation and improved air and water quality; and 
H.  Assist the city in planning infrastructure improvements. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.020 - Master planned development-Applicability. 
    The master planned development designation is an overlay zone that may be applied over any of the city's land use districts. An applicant may elect to develop a project as a master planned development in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, or the city may require a development be processed as such when a project cannot otherwise meet the applicable development code requirements due to existing topography or natural features. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.030 - Master planned development-Review and approvals process. 
A.  Review Steps. There are three required steps to planned development approval, which may be reviewed individually or combined into one package for concurrent review: 
1.  The approval of a planned development overlay zone and concept plan; 
2.  The approval of a detailed development plan; and 
3.  The approval of a preliminary subdivision plat(s) and/or site design review application(s). 
B.  Approval Process. 
1.  The master planned development (PD) overlay zone and concept plan shall be reviewed together using the Type III procedure in Section 17.80.040, the submission requirements in Section 17.96.080, and the approval criteria in Section 17.96.060. 
2.  The detailed development plan shall be reviewed using the Type III procedure in Section 17.80.040, to ensure substantial compliance with the approved concept plan. 
3.  Preliminary subdivision plats and site design review applications for approved planned developments shall be reviewed using a Type II procedure, as governed by Section 17.84.040. 
4.  Subsections (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section may be combined in any manner, so long as the decision making sequence follows that in subsection A of this section. Notification and hearings may be combined. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.040 - Master planned development-Modification of district standards (Division II) and design standards (Division III). 
    The planning commission may approve modifications or adjustments to the standards in Division II and/or Division III through the master plan approval without the need for variances upon finding that all of the following criteria are met: 
A.  Comprehensive Plan. The modification or adjustment is consistent with the policies of the comprehensive plan, and equally or better meets the intent of the development code section(s) to be modified, as compared to a project that strictly conforms to code standards. 
B.  Public Benefit. The modification or adjustment results in an overall net benefit to the public, such as a greater variety of housing, greater affordability in housing, more open space or more usable open space, greater protection of natural features, greater protection of scenic views or vistas, greater potential for use of renewal energy such as solar or wind, avoidance of natural hazards (e.g., geological hazards, streams, or other drainage ways), superior architecture, and/or improved transportation planning in new development. 
C.  Public improvement standards and engineering design criteria shall not be modified without variance to such standards approved by the city engineer. The city may grant such variances concurrently with the master planned development. 
D.  Residential densities shall not exceed the density allowed under the applicable land use district in Division II. Where the land use district prescribes a minimum lot size as the basis of allowable density, the total number of dwelling units shall not exceed the net site area (site area minus required street rights-of-way) divided by the minimum lot size standard of the district. 
E.  Industrial and commercial uses, if not otherwise allowed in a residential district, shall not be allowed in a residential district master plan. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.050 - Master planned development-Overlay zone and concept plan submission. 
A.  General Submission Requirements. The applicant shall submit an application containing all of the general information required for a Type III procedure, as governed by Section 17.80.040. In addition, the applicant shall submit the following: 
1.  A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant; 
2.  A development schedule indicating the approximate dates when construction of the planned development and its various phases are expected to be initiated and completed; 
3.  A statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to the future selling or leasing of all or portions of the planned development; 
4.  Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in Section 17.96.060; 
5.  Special studies prepared by qualified professionals may be required by the city planning official, planning commission or city council to determine potential traffic, geologic, noise, environmental, natural resource and other impacts, and required mitigation. 
B.  Additional Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection A of this section, the concept plan, data, and narrative shall include the following exhibits and information: 
1.  Existing conditions map, as defined in Section 17.84.050, Site design review-Application submission requirements; 
2.  Conceptual site plan (e.g., general land use, building envelopes, circulation, open space, utility connections, and other information necessary to convey the concept plan); 
3.  Grading concept (for hillside or sloping properties, or where extensive grading is anticipated); 
4.  Landscape concept (e.g., shows retention of existing vegetation and general planting areas); 
5.  Architectural concept (e.g., information sufficient to describe architectural styles, building heights, and general materials); 
6.  Sign concept plan (e.g., locations, general size, style and materials of signs); 
7.  Copy of all existing covenants and restrictions, and general description of proposed restrictions or covenants (e.g., for common areas, access, parking, etc.). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.060 - Master planned development-Overlay zone and concept plan approval criteria. 
    The city shall make findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied when approving or approving with conditions, the overlay zone and concept plan. The city shall make findings that not all of the criteria are satisfied when denying an application: 
A.  Comprehensive Plan. The master plan conforms to the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Land Division Chapter. All of the requirements for land divisions, including requirements for pre-planning large sites under Section 17.88.030, are met, except as may be modified under Section 17.96.040 (Chapter 17.88). 
C.  Divisions II and III Standards. All of the land use, development, and design standards contained in Divisions II and III are met, except as may be modified under Section 17.96.040. 
D.  Open Space. Master plans shall contain a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent open space. Public open space shall be integral to the master plan. Plans shall emphasize public gathering places such as plazas, neighborhood parks, trails, and other publicly accessible spaces that integrate land use and transportation and contribute toward a sense of place. Where public or common private open space is designated, the following standards apply: 
1.  The open space area shall be shown on the final plan and recorded with the final plat or separate instrument, per Section 17.72.030(A); and 
2.  The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods: 
a.  By dedication to the city as publicly owned and maintained open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the city must be acceptable to the city planning official with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition (i.e., the applicant may be required to provide a level one environmental assessment), and budgetary and maintenance abilities, 
b.  By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, home association or other legal entity, with the city retaining the development rights to the property. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions (e.g., maintenance, property tax payment, etc.) suitable to the city. 
E.  Adjustments and Modifications to Standards. Where adjustment(s) or modification(s) to standards are requested, such adjustment(s) or modification(s) must be found to conform to the criteria in Section 17.96.040. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.070 - Master planned development-Administrative procedures. 
A.  Land Use District Map Designation. After a planned development overlay zone has been approved, the land use district map shall be amended in accordance with Chapter 17.104, to indicate the approved planned development designation for the subject development site. The approval of the planned development overlay zone shall not expire. 
B.  Time Limit on Filing of Detailed Development Plan. Within three years after the date of approval of the concept plan, the applicant or his or her successor shall prepare and file with the city a detailed development plan or final plat, in conformance with Sections 17.96.080 through 17.96.090. Where a detailed development plan or final plat is not filed within three years, the concept plan shall become void. 
C.  Extension. The city shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year provided that: 
1.  No changes have been made on the original conceptual development plan as approved; 
2.  The applicant can show intent of applying for detailed development plan review within the one-year extension period; 
3.  There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based; and 
4.  The extension request is made before expiration of the original approval period. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.080 - Master planned development-Detailed development plan submission requirements. 
    The contents of the detailed development plan shall be determined based on the conditions of approval for the concept plan. At a minimum, the detailed development plan shall identify the final proposed location of all lots, tracts, parcels, open space, rights-of-way, building envelopes and other features, prior to approval of a development permit. The detailed development plan may combine land division, development review, site design review, and/or other applications for concurrent review and approval. The detailed development plan shall be reviewed using a Type III procedure. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.090 - Master planned development-Detailed development plan approval criteria. 
    The city shall approve the detailed development plan upon finding that the final plan conforms to the concept plan and required conditions of approval. If the detailed plan request combines other land use and development applications, as provided in this section, those applications shall additionally be subject to the applicable approval criteria in Division IV. Minor changes to the approved concept plan may be approved with the detailed plan, when the approval body finds that the modification(s) is/are consistent with the criteria in subsections A through H of this section. Changes exceeding those below must be reviewed as major modifications under Chapter 17.100. 
A.  Increased residential densities (overall or reallocated between development phases) by no more than ten (10) percent over that which is approved, provided such increase conforms to the comprehensive plan and underlying land use district; 
B.  Increase in lot coverage or impervious surface (overall or reallocated between development phases) by no more than ten (10) percent over that which is approved; 
C.  Reduction in open space or landscaping by no more than ten (10) percent over that which is approved; 
D.  Increase in overall automobile parking spaces by ten (10) percent over that which is approved; 
E.  Land Use. No change in land use shall be permitted without a major modification to the master planned development (concept plan) approval; 
F.  Proposals to add or increase lot coverage within environmentally sensitive areas (sensitive lands) or areas subject to a potential hazard shall require a major modification to the concept plan; 
G.  Major changes in the location or configuration of proposed lots, blocks, buildings, streets, parking lots, utility easements, landscaping or other site improvements shall require a major modification pursuant to Chapter 17.100. "Major" in this subsection means by more than twenty (20) percent for setbacks, or more than twenty (20) feet in the alignment or placement of the features listed herein; and 
H.  Other substantial modifications not allowed as minor modifications in subsections A through G of this section shall require approval of a major modification, in conformance with Chapter 17.100. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.96.100 - Master planned development-Land use review, site design review, final plat and building permit approvals. 
A.  Land Use and Site Design Reviews. For projects requiring land use or site design review, all such approvals must be final and appeal periods expired before the city issues building permits. Chapter 17.84 applies to site design review. 
B.  Land Divisions. For projects requiring a land division, the preliminary land division plats must be final and appeal periods expired before a final plat is approved and building permits issued. Chapter 17.88 applies to land divisions. 
C.  Streamlined Review Option. Applications for preliminary land division plats, land use reviews, and site design review applications that are part of a previously approved master planned development may be reviewed using a Type II procedure, rather than the conventional Type III procedure. This shall be the applicant's option, provided the planning official may refer any Type II application to the planning commission for its review as he or she deems it in the public interest. The variation from the standard procedures of Chapter 17.84, Land Use Review and Site Design Review, and Chapter 17.88, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments, is intended to streamline review of projects that have received master planned development approvals, since those projects have previously been subject to public review and hearings. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.100 - MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED PLANS AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL 

17.100.010 - Modifications-Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide an efficient process for modifying land use decisions and approved development plans, in recognition of the cost and complexity of land development and the need to conserve city resources. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.100.020 - Modifications-Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies to all development applications approved through the provisions of Division IV, including: 
1.  Land use review approvals; 
2.  Site design review approvals; 
3.  Subdivisions, partitions, and property line adjustments; 
4.  Conditional use permits; 
5.  Master planned developments; and 
6.  Conditions of approval on any of the above permit types. 
B.  This chapter does not apply to comprehensive plan amendments, land use district changes, text amendments, annexations, temporary use permits, or other permits not listed in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.100.030 - Major modifications. 
A.  Major Modification Defined. The city planning official shall determine that a major modification(s) is required if one or more of the changes listed below are proposed: 
1.  A change in land use; 
2.  An increase in density by more than ten (10) percent, provided the resulting density does not exceed that allowed by the land use district; 
3.  A change in setbacks or lot coverage by more than ten (10) percent, provided the resulting setback or lot coverage does not exceed that allowed by the land use district; 
4.  A change in the type and/or location of accessways, drives or parking areas affecting off-site traffic; 
5.  An increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than fifteen (15) percent where previously specified; 
6.  A reduction of more than ten (10) percent of the area reserved for common open space; or 
7.  Change to a condition of approval, or a change similar to subsections (A)(1) through (A)(6) of this section, that could have a detrimental impact on adjoining properties. The city planning official shall have discretion in determining detrimental impacts warranting a major modification. 
B.  Major Modification Applications-Approval Criteria. An applicant may request a major modification using a Type II or Type III review procedure, as follows: 
1.  Upon the city planning official determining that the proposed modification is a major modification, the applicant shall submit an application form, filing fee and narrative, and a site plan using the same plan format as in the original approval. The planning official may require other relevant information, as necessary, to evaluate the request. 
2.  The application shall be subject to the same review procedure (Type II or III), decision making body, and approval criteria used for the initial project approval, except that adding a conditional use to an approved project shall be reviewed using a Type III procedure. 
3.  The scope of review shall be limited to the modification request. For example, a request to modify a parking lot shall require site design review only for the proposed parking lot and any changes to associated access, circulation, pathways, lighting, trees, and landscaping. Notice shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.80. 
4.  The decision making body shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for major modification based on written findings on the criteria. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.100.040 - Minor modifications. 
A.  Minor Modification. Any modification to a land use decision or approved development plan that is not within the description of a major modification as provided in Section 17.100.030(A) above. 
B.  Minor Modification Review Procedure. An application for approval of a minor modification shall be reviewed by the planning official using a Type I or a Type II review procedure under Section 17.80.020 or 17.80.030. The planning official is responsible for determining the appropriate review procedure based on the following criteria: 
1.  Minor modifications that involve only clear and objective code standards may be reviewed using a Type I procedure; 
2.  Minor modifications that involve one or more discretionary standards shall be reviewed through Type II procedure; and 
3.  When the code is unclear on whether the application should be a Type I or Type II review, a Type II procedure shall be used. 
C.  Minor Modification Applications. An application for minor modification shall include an application form, filing fee and narrative, and a site plan using the same plan format as in the original approval. The planning official may require other relevant information, as necessary, to evaluate the request. 
D.  Minor Modification Approval Criteria. The planning official shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for minor modification based on written findings that the modification is in compliance with all applicable requirements of the development code and conditions of approval on the original decision, and the modification is not a major modification as described in Section 17.100.030(A) above. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.104 - LAND USE DISTRICT MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS 

17.104.010 - Amendments-Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures for legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to this code and the land use district map. These will be referred to as "map and text amendments." Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs and desires, to correct mistakes, or to address changes in the law. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.104.020 - Legislative amendments. 
    Legislative amendments are policy decisions made by city council. They are reviewed using the Type IV procedure in Section 17.80.050 and shall conform to the transportation planning rule provisions in Section 17.104.060, as applicable. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.104.030 - Quasi-judicial amendments. 
A.  Applicability of Quasi-Judicial Amendments. Quasi-judicial amendments are those that involve the application of adopted policy to a specific development application or code revision, and not the adoption of new policy (i.e., through legislative decisions). Quasi-judicial district map amendments and application of master planned development overlay zones to individual properties shall follow the Type III procedure, as governed by Section 17.80.040, using standards of approval in subsection B of this section. The approval authority shall be as follows: 
1.  The planning commission shall review and recommend land use district map changes that do not involve comprehensive plan map amendments; 
2.  The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on an application for a comprehensive plan map amendment. The city council shall decide such applications; and 
3.  The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on a land use district change application that also involves a comprehensive plan map amendment application. The city council shall decide both applications. 
B.  Criteria for Quasi-Judicial Amendments. A recommendation or a decision to approve, approve with conditions or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial amendment shall be based on all of the following criteria: 
1.  Approval of the request is consistent with the statewide planning goals; 
2.  Approval of the request is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
3.  The property and affected area is presently provided with adequate public facilities, services and transportation networks to support the use, or such facilities, services and transportation networks are planned to be provided in the planning period; 
4.  The change is in the public interest with regard to neighborhood or community conditions, or corrects a mistake or inconsistency in the comprehensive plan or land use district map regarding the property which is the subject of the application; and 
5.  The amendment conforms to the transportation planning rule provisions under Section 17.104.060. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.104.040 - Conditions of approval for quasi-judicial amendments. 
    A quasi-judicial decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions; conditions shall be based on applicable regulations and factual evidence in the record. A legislative amendments may only be approved or denied. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.104.050 - Record of amendments. 
    The city recorder shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this code and the land use districts map in a format convenient for public use. This shall be located in Division VI. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.104.060 - Transportation planning rule compliance. 
A.  Review of Applications for Effect on Transportation Facilities. When a development application includes a proposed comprehensive plan amendment or land use district change, the proposal shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a transportation facility, in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 (the Transportation Planning Rule-TPR) and the Traffic Impact Analysis provisions of Section 17.80.090. "Significant" means the proposal would: 
1.  Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility (exclusive of correction of map errors). This would occur, for example, when a proposal causes future traffic to exceed the levels associated with a "collector" street classification, requiring a change in the classification to an "arterial" street, as identified by the Coquille comprehensive plan; 
2.  Change the standards implementing a functional classification system; 
3.  As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the Coquille comprehensive plan or the adopted plan of any other applicable roadway authority, allow types or levels of land use that would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; 
4.  Reduce the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in road authority's adopted plan; 
5.  Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the road authority's adopted plan; or 
6.  Where the city lacks specific transportation policies or standards, the city council shall be consulted, as provided under Section 17.80.050 (Type IV procedure (legislative). 
B.  Amendments that Affect Transportation Facilities. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, amendments to the comprehensive plan and land use regulations which significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility identified in the comprehensive plan. This shall be accomplished by one of the following: 
1.  Adopting measures that demonstrate that allowed land uses are consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility; 
2.  Amending the comprehensive plan to provide transportation facilities, improvements, or services adequate to support the proposed land uses; such amendments shall include a funding plan to ensure the facility, improvement, or service will be provided by the end of the planning period; 
3.  Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; 
4.  Amending the planned function, capacity or performance standards of the transportation facility; or 
5.  Providing other measures as a condition of development or through a development agreement or similar funding method, specifying when such measures will be provided. 
C.  Exceptions. Amendments to the comprehensive plan or land use regulations with a significant effect on a transportation facility, where the facility is already performing below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the comprehensive plan, may be approved when all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  The amendment does not include property located in an interchange area, as defined under applicable law; 
2.  The currently planned facilities, improvements or services are not adequate to achieve the standard; 
3.  Development resulting from the amendment will, at a minimum, mitigate the impacts of the amendment in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the facility by the time of the development; and 
4.  The road authority provides a written statement that the proposed funding and timing for the proposed development mitigation are sufficient to avoid further degradation to the facility. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.108 - CODE INTERPRETATIONS 

17.108.010 - Interpretations-Purpose. 
    Some terms or phrases within the code may have two or more reasonable meanings. This section provides a process for resolving differences in the interpretation of the code text. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.108.020 - Code interpretation procedure. 
A.  Requests. A request for a code interpretation shall be made in writing to the planning official. 
B.  Decision to Issue Interpretation. The planning official shall have the authority to interpret the code, or refer the request to the planning commission for its interpretation. The planning official shall advise the person making the inquiry in writing within fourteen (14) days after the request is made, on whether or not the city will make an interpretation. 
C.  Written Interpretation. If the city decides to issue an interpretation, it shall be issued in writing and shall be mailed or delivered to the person requesting the interpretation and any other person who specifically requested a copy. The written interpretation shall be issued within fourteen (14) days of the request. The decision shall become effective fourteen (14) days later, unless an appeal is filed in accordance with subsections E through F of this section. 
D.  Type II Procedure. Code interpretations shall be made using a Type II procedure under Section 17.80.030. Alternatively, the city planning official may initiate a code interpretation (i.e., without an application being filed by a property owner) and ask the planning commission to ratify the decision, in which case the city shall provide notice of the decision to affected property owner(s) with an opportunity to appeal the decision to city council. Such appeals must be filed in accordance with Section 17.80.060. 
E.  Appeals. The applicant and any party who received notice or who participated in the proceedings through the submission of written or verbal evidence may appeal the decision to the planning commission for a Type III decision. The appeal must be filed within fourteen (14) days after the interpretation was mailed or delivered to the applicant. Initiating an appeal requires filing a notice of appeal with the city planning official pursuant to Section 17.80.040. 
F.  Interpretations on File. The city shall keep on file a record of all code interpretations. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.112 - MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS 

17.112.010 - Temporary use permits. 
    Temporary uses are characterized by their short-term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses include, but are not limited to: construction trailers, leasing offices, temporary carnivals and fairs, parking lot sales, retail warehouse sales, and seasonal sales such as Christmas tree sales and vegetable stands. (Note: for temporary medical hardship dwellings, please refer to Section 17.24.110.) Three types of temporary uses require permit approval. See the following: 
A.  Seasonal and Special Events. These types of uses occur only once in a calendar year and for no longer a period than thirty (30) days. Using the Type II procedure under Section 17.80.040, the city shall approve, approve with conditions or deny a temporary use permit based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
1.  The use is permitted in the underlying land use district and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval); 
2.  The applicant has proof of the property-owner's permission to place the use on his or her property; 
3.  No parking will be utilized by customers and employees of the temporary use which is needed by the property owner to meet their minimum parking requirement under Chapter 17.68 (vehicle and bicycle parking); 
4.  The use provides adequate vision clearance, as required by Section 17.60.020, and shall not obstruct pedestrian access on public streets; 
5.  Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the other uses of the property; as required by Section 17.60.020, Vehicular access and circulation; 
6.  The use does not create adverse off-site impacts, including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner in which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use; and 
7.  The use is adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable. (The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits.) 
B.  Temporary Sales Office or Model Home. Using a Type I procedure under Section 17.80.020, the city may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for the use of any real property within the city as a temporary sales office, offices for the purpose of facilitating the sale of real property, or model home in any subdivision or tract of land within the city, but for no other purpose, based on the following criteria: 
1.  Temporary Sales Office. 
a.  The temporary sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be sold; 
b.  The property to be used for a temporary sales office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose; 
c.  Conditions may be imposed regarding temporary utility connections, and as necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare. 
2.  Model House. 
a.  The model house shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land where the real property to be sold is situated; and 
b.  The model house shall be designed as a permanent structure that meets all relevant requirements of this code and other applicable codes and permit requirements. 
C.  Temporary Building, Trailer, Kiosk or Structure. Temporary or permanent placement of a building, trailer or recreational vehicle per Chapter 17.36, kiosk, or structure, including, but not limited to, prefabricated building(s), for use on any real commercial or industrial property within the city shall require land use approval. Using a Type II procedure, as governed by Section 17.80.040, the city may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for a placement of a building, trailer, kiosk, or structure for temporary use, or temporary placement, such as a temporary commercial or industrial use or space associated with the primary use on the property, based on following criteria: 
1.  The temporary trailer or building shall be located within the specified property line setbacks of the parcel of land on which it is located; 
2.  The primary use on the property to be used for a temporary trailer is already developed; 
3.  Ingress and egress are safe and adequate as demonstrated by an approach permit approved by the road authority, as applicable. See also Section 17.60.020, Vehicular access and circulation; 
4.  There is adequate parking for the customers or users of the temporary use as required by Chapter 17.68 (bicycle and vehicle parking); 
5.  The use will not result in vehicular congestion on streets; 
6.  The use will pose no impediment or hazard to pedestrians in the area of the use; 
7.  The use does not create adverse off-site impacts, including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use; 
8.  The building complies with applicable building codes; 
9.  The use can be adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable. (The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits); and 
10.  The length of time that the temporary building will be used does not exceed six months. When a temporary building exceeds this time frame, the applicant shall be required to remove the building, or renew the temporary use permit; and 
11.  Conditions may be imposed regarding temporary utility connections, and as necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.112.020 - Home occupation permits. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage those who are engaged in small commercial ventures that do not conform to the special standards for certain uses in Section 17.24.110(E), Home Occupation. The standards referenced above allow home occupations as outright permitted uses that do not require development review or site design review. 
    This section provides a process for more intense home occupations to be allowed with site design review by the planning commission and notice to surrounding property owners. These home occupations may be permitted, with conditions of approval when appropriate, in order to increase the benefits of people working and living in the same place, while protecting neighboring residents from adverse impacts of home occupation activities. These benefits to the business owner and to the general public include: reduced number of commute-to-work trips, daytime "eyes on the street" at the residence, and a neighborhood-scale version of mixed residential and commercial uses. 
B.  Approval Process and Criteria. 
1.  Home Occupation Permit. Applications for proposals that cannot meet all of the standards in Section 17.24.110(E) shall be processed using a Type III procedure, as governed by Section 17.80.040, using the approval criteria in subsection (B)(2) of this section. In addition to the application requirements contained in Section 17.80.040(B), the applicant shall provide: 
a.  A written narrative or letter: 
i.  Describing the proposed home occupation, 
ii.  Demonstrating compliance with those standards in Section 17.24.110(E) that can be met, and explaining why the other standards in Section 17.24.110(E) cannot be met, and 
iii.  Demonstrating compliance with the criteria in subsection (B)(2) of this section; 
b.  A site plan, not necessarily to scale, of the lot proposed for the home occupation, including: 
i.  The property lines and their dimensions, 
ii.  Outlines of the foundations of all buildings proposed for home occupation use with dimensions for each wall, and the distances from each wall to the nearest property line, 
iii.  Boundaries and dimensions of driveways and parking areas, indicating areas for use by home occupation employees and customers, 
iv.  Outlines of the foundations of abutting residences, and the distances from the shared property line to the nearest wall of each neighboring residence, and 
v.  Identifying the buildings and areas of those buildings in which home occupation activities will take place, and identifying which activities will take place in which buildings and areas; 
2.  The city shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a Type III home occupation based on all of the following criteria: 
a.  The proposed use will not be materially detrimental to the stated purposes of applicable code requirements and to other properties within a radius of one hundred (100) feet of the subject property, 
b.  Impacts to surrounding properties may exist but can be mitigated, 
c.  Existing physical and natural systems, such as, but not limited to drainage, natural resources, and parks, will not be adversely affected any more than would occur if the development occurred in compliance with Section 17.24.110(E). 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Division V. - Exceptions to Code Standards 
Chapter 17.116 - VARIANCES 

17.116.010 - Variances-Purpose. 
    This chapter provides standards and procedures for variances, which are modifications to land use or development standards that are not otherwise permitted elsewhere in this code as exceptions to code standards. This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The city's varied geography, and complexities of land development, require flexibility. This chapter provides that flexibility, while maintaining the purposes and intent of the code. The variance procedures provide relief from specific code provisions when they have the unintended effect of preventing reasonable development in conformance with all other codes. The variance procedures are intended to provide flexibility while ensuring that the purpose of each development standard is met. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.116.020 - Variances-Applicability. 
A.  Exceptions and Modifications Versus Variances. A code standard or approval criterion ("code section") may be modified without approval of a variance if the applicable code section expressly allows exceptions or modifications. If the code section does not expressly provide for exceptions or modifications, then a variance is required to modify that code section and the provisions of this chapter apply. 
B.  Combining Variances with Other Approvals-Permit Approvals by Other Agencies. Variance requests may be combined with and reviewed concurrently by the city approval body with other land use and development applications (e.g., development review, site design review, subdivision, conditional use, etc.), however, some variances may be subject to approval by other permitting agencies, such as ODOT in the case of state highway access. 
C.  Types of Variances. As provided in Section 17.116.030, there are two types of variances (Class A and Class B); the type of variance required depends on the extent of the variance request and the discretion involved in the decision making process. Class A variances can be granted administratively by means of a Type II procedure (Section 17.80.030) because they involve limited discretion. Class B variances require a public hearing under a Type III procedure (Section 17.80.040) because they involve more discretion. Note: some flexibility is built-in to the code, for example, through provisions for lot size averaging, building height bonuses, and flexible setbacks. Other standards such as permissible uses may be adjusted or modified only if approved as part of a master planned development under Chapter 17.96. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.116.030 - Class A variances. 
A.  Applicability. The following variances are reviewed using a Type II procedure, as governed by Chapter 17.80, using the approval criteria in subsection B of this section: 
1.  Front Yard Setbacks. Up to a ten (10) percent change to the front yard setback standard in the land use district. 
2.  Interior Setbacks. Up to a ten (10) percent reduction of the dimensional standards for the side and rear yard setbacks required in the base land use district. 
3.  Lot Coverage. Up to ten (10) percent increase of the maximum lot coverage required in the base zone. 
4.  Landscape Area. Up to ten (10) percent reduction in landscape area (overall area or interior parking lot landscape area). 
B.  Approval Criteria. A Class A variance shall be granted if the applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the following criteria: 
1.  The variance requested is to provide for greater compatibility between proposed structures and the built or natural environment, or is needed to make more efficient use of the site. 
2.  The variance will not result in violation(s) of any other adopted ordinance or code standard; each code standard to be modified shall require a separate variance request. 
3.  An application for a Class A variances is limited to one lot per application. 
4.  No more than three Class A variances may be approved for one lot or parcel in twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.116.040 - Class B variances. 
A.  Applicability. Class B variance requests apply to the types of requests meeting the approval criteria in subsections B through F of this section. Class B variances shall be reviewed using a Type III procedure under Section 17.80.040, and are subject to the following limitations: 
1.  The Class B variance standards apply to individual platted and recorded lots only. 
2.  The Class B variance procedure shall not be used to modify a standard for lots yet to be created through a partition or subdivision process; such requests shall utilize the Class C variance procedure. 
3.  A variance shall not be approved that would vary the "permitted uses" or "prohibited uses" of a land use district (Division II). 
B.  Variance to Vehicular Access and Circulation Standards (Chapter 17.60). Where vehicular access and circulation cannot be reasonably designed to conform to code standards within a particular parcel, shared access with an adjoining property shall be considered. If shared access in conjunction with another parcel is not feasible, the city may grant a variance to the access requirements after finding all of the following: 
1.  There is not adequate physical space for shared access, or the owners of abutting properties do not agree to execute a joint access easement; 
2.  There are no other alternative access points on the street in question or from another street; 
3.  The access separation requirements cannot be met; 
4.  The request is the minimum variance required to provide adequate access; 
5.  The approved access or access approved with conditions will result in a safe access; 
6.  The visual clearance requirements of Chapter 17.60 will be met; 
7.  Variances for street access deviations shall be subject to review and approval by the roadway authority; 
8.  Variances for access deviations on a road right-of-way shall be subject to review and approval by applicable road authority. 
C.  Variance to Street Tree Requirements (Chapter 17.64). The city may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a variance to the street tree requirements in Chapter 17.64, after finding the following: 
1.  Installation of the tree would interfere with existing utility lines, and no substitute tree with a lower canopy is appropriate for the site; 
2.  The tree would cause visual clearance problems; or 
3.  There is not adequate space in which to plant a street tree; and 
4.  The city may require the installation of additional or replacement landscaping elsewhere on the site (e.g., parking lot area trees) to compensate for the street tree variance; 
5.  Street tree approval or modification of standards within a right-of-way requires approval by the road authority. 
D.  Variance to Parking and Loading Standards (Chapter 17.68). 
1.  The city may approve variances to the minimum or maximum standards for off-street parking (quantities and dimensions of parking spaces) in Chapter 17.68 upon finding all of the following: 
a.  The individual characteristics of the use at that location require more or less parking than is generally required for a use of this type and intensity, or modified parking dimensions, as demonstrated by a parking analysis or other facts provided by the applicant; 
b.  The need for additional parking cannot reasonably be met through provision of on-street parking or shared parking with adjacent or nearby uses; and 
c.  All other code standards are met, in conformance with Division II (Land Use Districts) and Division III (Community Design Standards). 
2.  The city may reduce the number of required bicycle parking spaces per Section 17.68.040, if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed use by its nature would be reasonably anticipated to generate a lesser need for bicycle parking. 
3.  The city may allow a reduction in the amount of vehicle stacking area required in for drive-through facilities if such a reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the size and location of the development, limited services available and other pertinent factors. 
4.  The city may modify the loading area standards if such a reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the use, anticipated shipping or delivery traffic generated by the use and alternatives for loading/unloading, such as use of on- or off-street parking areas during nonbusiness hours provided that traffic is not impeded. 
E.  Variance to Maximum or Minimum Yard Setbacks to Avoid or Reduce Impacts in Areas Subject to Geological Hazards, Floodplains, Significant Trees, Wetlands, or Other Natural Features (Chapters 17.20 through 17.54, Land Use Districts). The city may grant a variance to the applicable setback requirements of this code for the purpose of avoiding or reducing impact to floodplains, significant trees, wetlands, or other natural features. Modification of the standard shall not be more than is necessary for the preservation of the nature feature to be protected. 
F.  Variances to Transportation Improvement Requirements (Section 17.72.020). The city may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a variance to a transportation improvement standard (city right-of-way only) in Table 17.72.020(F) when the variance does not exceed ten (10) percent of the standard, and as recommended by the city engineer. When a variance request to the standards in Table 17.72.020(F) exceeds ten (10) percent, then the request shall be reviewed as a Class C variance. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.116.050 - Variance application and appeals. 
A.  Application. The variance application shall conform to the requirements for Type II or III applications (Section 17.80.030 or 17.80.040), as applicable. In addition, the applicant shall provide a narrative or letter explaining the reason for his or her request, alternatives considered, how the stated variance criteria are satisfied, and why the subject standard cannot be met without the variance. 
B.  Appeals to variance decisions shall be processed in accordance with the appeal provisions of Chapter 17.80. 
C.  Expiration. A variance approval shall expire if not acted upon by the property owner within one year of the city approving the variance. Where the owner has applied for a building permit or final plat, or has made site improvements consistent with an approved development plan (e.g., site design review or preliminary subdivision plan), the planning official may extend the variance approval accordingly. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.120 - NONCONFORMING USES AND DEVELOPMENTS 

17.120.010 - Nonconforming uses and developments purpose. 
    This chapter provides standards and procedures for nonconforming situations (i.e., existing uses or development that do not comply with the code). The standards for nonconforming uses and development are intended to provide some relief from code requirements for uses and developments that were established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title and do not comply with current standards. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.120.020 - Nonconforming uses. 
    Where at the time of adoption of this code a use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this code and was lawful at the time it was established, the use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
A.  Expansion Prohibited. No such nonconforming use is enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or space than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title. No additional structure, building or sign shall be constructed on the lot in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
B.  Location. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title. 
C.  Discontinuation or Abandonment. The nonconforming use of land is not discontinued for any reason for a period of more than twelve (12) months. For purposes of calculating the twelve (12) month period, a use is discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events: 
1.  On the date when the use of land is physically vacated; 
2.  On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services; 
3.  On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; or 
4.  On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility districts. 
D.  Application of Code Criteria and Standards. If the use is discontinued or abandoned for any reason for a period of more than twelve (12) months, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the applicable standards and criteria specified by this code for the land use district in which such land is located. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.120.030 - Nonconforming development. 
    Where a development exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title that could not be built under the terms of this code by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, height, yard, equipment, access, parking, landscaping, its location on the lot or other requirements concerning the development; and the development was lawful when constructed, the development may remain on the site so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Alterations. No such nonconforming development may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but any development or portion thereof may be enlarged or altered in a way that satisfies the current requirements of this code or will decrease its nonconformity. 
B.  Destruction. Should such nonconforming development or nonconforming portion of development be destroyed by any means to an extent more than fifty (50) percent of its current value as assessed by the Coos County assessor, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with this code. 
C.  Roadway Access. The owner of a nonconforming access connection (i.e., street or highway access) may be required to bring the nonconforming access into conformance with this code and other applicable standards as a condition of the city or other roadway authority approving a new access connection permit, or a change in land use. 
D.  Relocation or Removal. Should such development be moved for any reason and by any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of this code. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 17.124 - LOTS OF RECORD-LEGAL LOT DETERMINATION 

17.124.010 - Lots of record-Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria and a process for determining when a lot of record exists. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.124.020 - Lots of record-Criteria. 
    A lot of record is a plot of land that was not created through an approved subdivision or partition, was created and recorded before the effective date of city's first subdivision ordinance, and for which the deed, or other instrument dividing the land, is recorded with Coos County. A lot of record shall be entitled to development of no less than one single-family dwelling. Additional land use or development may be approved subject to applicable code requirements. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
17.124.030 - Lots of record-Legal lot determination-Procedure. 
A.  Purpose. A lot of record determination shall be made by the planning official through a Type I or Type II procedure (Section 17.80.020 or Section 17.80.030), as determined by the planning official. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to demonstrate that his or her plot of land meets the lot of record criteria in Section 17.124.020. 
B.  Applicability. An application for legal lot determination shall be required when any of the following thresholds apply: 
1.  The owner of a lot or parcel, or the owner's authorized representative or contract purchaser, has requested the legal lot determination for one or more contiguous lots or parcels under the same ownership. 
2.  The purchaser of a lot or parcel may requests a legal lot determination to validate a unit of land alleged to be improperly created by sale. Under this threshold, fewer than all the owners of a unit of land may apply for a legal lot determination, provided the applicant is the purchaser of an interest in the subject lot or parcel and the purchase occurred prior to January 1, 2007. 
3.  The director requires a legal lot determination be made as a prerequisite to, or concurrently with, the filing of a land use application. 
C.  Approval Criteria. In determining whether the subject lot or parcel is a legal lot, the decision making authority shall make findings based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied: 
1.  The unit of land conforms to the lot area and dimensional standards of the applicable land use district; except where a unit of land was created by sale prior to January 1, 2007 and was not lawfully established, the approval body may deem the unit of land a legal lot upon finding: 
a.  The unit of land could have complied with the applicable criteria for creation of a lawful parcel or lot in effect when the unit of land was sold; or 
b.  If the city, or county prior to annexation, approved a permit as defined in ORS 215.402 or 227.402 for the construction or placement of a dwelling or other structure on the unit of land after the sale, and such dwelling has all of the features listed in ORS 215.755(1)(a)-(e). 
D.  Evidence. An application for a legal lot determination shall be made by the owner of the subject property, the owner's authorized agent, or contract purchaser on a form provided by the director and shall be filed with the director; provided, however, fewer than all the owners of a unit of land created by sale prior to January 1, 2007, may apply for a legal lot determination. The legal lot determination application shall be accompanied by all of the following information: 
1.  The information required by the application form and by Section 50.25 (Application Completeness) of the development code; 
2.  An application for legal lot determination where the unit of land was created by sale prior to January 1, 2007 and was not lawfully established, shall include a sworn statement that the applicant is the purchaser of an interest in the subject lot or parcel and that their interest was represented at the time of their purchase to be that of a discrete lot or parcel but that it appears the discrete lot or parcel may have been improperly created; 
3.  Any other information identified through a pre-application conference. 
E.  Conditions of Approval. The approval body may impose conditions on the legal lot determination to ensure compliance with applicable code requirements. For a unit of land created by sale for which the city has made a legal lot determination pursuant to this chapter, such unit of land shall not become a lawfully established parcel until the owner of the unit of land records a final plat with Coos County, subject to review by the county surveyor, and within ninety (90) days after the city makes the legal lot determination. The final plat shall conform to the city's legal lot determination and conditions thereof. 
F.  Appeal of a Decision. Any appeal of a legal lot determination shall follow the applicable appeal procedures under Chapter 17.80. 
(Ord. 1471 § 2 (part), 2008) 
[Text continues pg. 257] 
FRANCHISES 
ORDINANCE NO. 1265 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO PACIFICORP, DOING BUSINESS AS PACIFIC POWER & LIGHT COMPANY, AN OREGON CORPORATION, AND TO ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A NONEXCLUSIVE RIGHT AND FRANCHISE FOR A PERIOD OF TWENTY (20) YEARS TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE, IN, ON AND UNDER THE PRESENT AND FUTURE STREETS, ALLEYS, BRIDGES AND PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF COQUILLE, COOS COUNTY, OREGON, ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER LINES AND APPURTENANCES FOR THE PURPOSE OF SUPPLYING ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRIC SERVICE TO THE CITY OF COQUILLE, THE INHABITANTS THEREOF AND OTHERS, SUBJECT TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS AND TO THE MAKING OF PAYMENTS SPECIFIED IN THE ORDINANCE; AND PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE NO. 808 OF THE CITY OF COQUILLE, PASSED AND APPROVED JULY, 3, 1969. 
    The city of Coquille ordains as follows: 
    Section 1. The City of Coquille, Coos County, Oregon, hereinafter called the City, does hereby grant to PacifiCorp, doing business as Pacific Power & Light Company, an Oregon corporation, and to its successors and assigns, hereinafter called Grantee, a right and franchise for the period of twenty (20) years from and after the effective date of this ordinance, to construct, maintain, and operate in, on and under the present and future streets, alleys, bridges and public places of the City, hereinafter referred to as "streets," electric light and power lines, with all the necessary or desirable appurtenances, for the purpose of supplying electricity and electric service to the City and to the inhabitants thereof, subject to the terms and conditions and to the making of payments hereinafter specified. 
    Section 2. The right and franchise hereby granted shall not be exclusive; and the City expressly reserves the right, at any time during the term of this franchise, to grant rights or franchises for such purposes to other persons or corporations, as well as the right in its own name as a municipality to use said streets for such purposes in the event that the City shall hereafter decide to engage in the business of supplying electricity and electric service for municipal or other uses. If, during the term hereof, the City shall decide to engage in such business and shall elect to acquire by condemnation or otherwise the property used by Grantee in furnishing service hereunder, no value or damage of any kind shall be claimed by or allowed to Grantee in respect to the unexpired term of the franchise hereby granted. 
    Section 3. The locations and methods of installation and maintenance of all poles, wires, fixtures, underground lines, and appurtenances thereto (hereinafter referred to as "facilities") shall be subject at all times to reasonable regulation by the Council of the City; and all such facilities shall be so constructed and maintained as to interfere as little as practicable with street or other traffic. All of such facilities shall be installed and at all times maintained by Grantee in accordance with good electrical practice. If the removal or relocation of facilities is caused by an identifiable development of property in the area, or is made for the convenience of a customer, this agreement shall not preclude the Grantee from charging the expense of removal or relocation to the developer or customer. 
    Section 4. The service to be furnished hereunder by Grantee shall be continuous and shall be adequate for the requirements of the City and its inhabitants, subject to accidents, interferences or interruptions beyond the reasonable control of Grantee, and shall be furnished under such reasonable rules and regulations as Grantee may make from time to time for the proper conduct of its business. Such service and all rates and charges therefore and all rules and regulations pertaining thereto or to the making of necessary and proper extension of service shall be subject at all times to any rules, regulations and orders lawfully prescribed by the Public Utility Commissioner of Oregon, or by any other governmental authority having jurisdiction thereof. 
    Section 5. When necessary, in order to permit any duly authorized person to move any building or structure across or along any of said streets, Grantee shall temporarily raise or remove its facilities upon such streets, upon reasonable notice in advance from the Recorder of the City, and at such time and in such manner as may be reasonably required to accommodate such moving, consistent with the maintenance of proper service to Grantee's customers; provided, however, that the cost to Grantee of such temporary raising or removal, and of any interruption of Grantee's service to its customers caused thereby, shall first be paid or satisfactorily secured to Grantee by the owner or mover of such building or other structure. 
    Section 6. The City shall have the right, upon reasonable notice to Grantee and without payment or charge therefor, to attach its fire alarm, police signal wires or traffic control systems to the poles of Grantee, but at its own risk and only in accordance with good electrical practice. If there is not sufficient space available thereon for said purposes, Grantee's structures may be changed, altered, or rearranged at the expense of the City so as to provide proper clearance for such wires or appurtenant facilities. Such facilities shall be subject to interference by Grantee only when and to the extent necessary for the proper construction, maintenance, operation or repair of Grantee's facilities. 
    Section 7. Grantee shall protect and save the City, its officers, employees and agents, harmless against and from any and all damage claims, and any and all loss, liability, cost or expense, occasioned by any negligent act or omission of Grantee in the construction, maintenance, operation or repair of Grantee's property or any use thereof; and Grantee shall at all times comply with any lawful present or future charter provisions, ordinances, rules or regulations of the City relating to the manner of occupation or use, or to the repair or improvement of said streets. 
    Section 8. Grantee shall have the right and privilege of trimming all trees which overhang said streets, in such a manner and to such an extent as will prevent the branches or limbs or other parts of such trees from touching or interfering with its facilities; providing no such trees are trimmed or cut back further than may be reasonably necessary to prevent such interference and to allow the proper operation and maintenance of said facilities. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent Grantee, when necessary and with the approval of the owner of the property on which they may be located, from cutting down and removing any trees which overhang said streets. 
    Section 9. 
(a)  Grantee shall pay to the City a franchise fee or charge equivalent to five percent (5%) of Grantee's gross operating revenue as the same is defined herein. 
(b)  "Gross operating revenue," means Grantee's gross revenues from the sale and use of electricity and electric service within the corporate limits of the City, other than such revenues derived from business done with the government of the United States or any agency thereof, and after deducting therefrom any amounts paid by Grantee to the United States or to the State of Oregon as excise, occupation, or business taxes upon the sale or distribution of electric service in the City. At the election of Grantee, Grantee may also deduct uncollectible accounts of customers within the City. 
(c)  Said franchise fee shall not be in addition to any other license, occupation, franchise or excise taxes or charges which might otherwise be levied or collected by the City from Grantee with respect to Grantee's electric business or the exercise of this franchise within the corporate limits of the City and the amount due to the City under any such other license, occupation, franchise or excise taxes or other charges for corresponding periods shall be reduced by deducting therefrom the amount of said franchise fee paid hereunder. 
(d)  Said franchise fee shall be paid monthly on or before the 20th of each month during the term hereof, and shall be computed upon the gross operating revenue accruing during the previous calendar month or portion thereof. 
    Section 10. Grantee shall provide emergency repair service on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. Grantee shall also maintain an office operated by Grantee in the City where its customers may pay their bills for electricity service during normal office hours. In the event of extreme financial hardship, the Grantee may request permission to discontinue operation of said facility. City shall not unreasonably withhold such permission. 
    Section 11. Upon the effective date hereof, but not otherwise, Ordinance No. 807 of the City of Coquille passed and approved July 3, 1969 is repealed. 
    Section 12. This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after its enactment by the Council and approval by the Mayor, but shall become null and void unless within sixty (60) days after such effective date Grantee shall file with the Recorder Grantee's written acceptance of the terms conditions and obligations to be complied with or performed by it hereunder. 
    Passed by the council and approved by the mayor February 19, 1990. 
ORDINANCE NO. 1326 
    AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1252 ENACTED MAY 15, 1989, AND ENTITLED "AN ORDINANCE GRANTING KARL J. WADSWORTH, DBA WADSWORTH GARBAGE DISPOSAL, EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO COLLECT GARBAGE IN THE CITY OF COQUILLE, INCLUDING DEFINITIONS, GARBAGE COLLECTIONS RATES, PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE; AND REPEALING ALL PRIOR FRANCHISES FOR GARBAGE COLLECTION"; BY ESTABLISHING PROVISIONS REQUIRING A MINIMUM RECYCLING PROGRAM EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 1992 AND BY AMENDING PROVISIONS TO ADD A RECYCLING RATE TO THE GARBAGE RATES. 
    The City of Coquille ordains as follows: 
    SECTION 1. Ordinance No. 1252 enacted May 15, 1989, is hereby amended to include Section 14 which shall read in full as follows: 
    SECTION 14. Effective July 1, 1992, the Grantee shall, within the City limits of the City of Coquille, provide the following recycling programs: 
(a)  Weekly same day as garbage residential curbside collection recycling collection by July 1, 1992; 
(b)  Expanded education and promotion of recycling by July 1, 1992; and 
(c)  Residential recycling containers to be provided to each household by January 1, 1993. 
    SECTION 2. Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1252 enacted May 15, 1989, as previously amended, is hereby amended to provide a rate for recycling services to each household as follows: 
Weekly Residential $3.00 Per Household Recycling Service Per Month  
    SECTION 3. This rate increase set out in Section 2 hereof shall be effective July 1, 1992. 
    Adopted by a majority vote of the Common Counsel taken by ayes and nays this 1st day of June, 1992. 
ATTEST: ____________ SHIRLEY J. PATTERSON City Recorder ____________ Loran C. Wiese Mayor  
ORDINANCE NO. 1329 
    AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1252 ENACTED MAY 15, 1989, AND ENTITLED "AN ORDINANCE GRANTING KARL J. WADSWORTH, DBA WADSWORTH GARBAGE DISPOSAL, EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO COLLECT GARBAGE IN THE CITY OF COQUILLE, INCLUDING DEFINITIONS, GARBAGE COLLECTIONS RATES, PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE; AND REPEALING ALL PRIOR FRANCHISES FOR GARBAGE COLLECTION"; BY AMENDING PROVISIONS TO ADD A COMMERCIAL RECYCLING RATE TO THE GARBAGE RATES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
    The City of Coquille ordains as follows: 
    SECTION 1 Section 3
For Non-Container Service; Weekly Commercial Recycling Service 
ORDINANCE NO. 1345 
    AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1252 ENACTED MAY 15, 1989, AND ENTITLED "AN ORDINANCE GRANTING KARL J. WADSWORTH, DBA WADSWORTH GARBAGE DISPOSAL, EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO COLLECT GARBAGE IN THE CITY OF COQUILLE, INCLUDING DEFINITIONS, GARBAGE COLLECTIONS RATES, PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE; AND REPEALING ALL PRIOR FRANCHISES FOR GARBAGE COLLECTION", BY ESTABLISHING A NEW RATE SCHEDULE AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
    The City of Coquille ordains as follows: 
    SECTION 1. Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1252 enacted May 15, 1989, as previously amended, is hereby amended to provide as follows: 
"Section 3. The Grantee shall collect the garbage at various residences, business establishments, and other places within the corporate limits of the City where such service is requested and required, promptly and with dispatch and haul such garbage from the City, upon the payment of reasonable prices and rates for such services by the persons requesting the same. The maximum rates and charges to be made are as follows: 
    RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL PICKUP RATES 
ONCE A WEEK SERVICE TOTAL PER 
MONTH  1 Can $ 10.25  2 Cans 18.50  3 Cans 26.25  Each Additional Can 9.25 TWICE A WEEK SERVICE  1 Can $17.60  2 Cans 33.15  3 Cans 50.25  Each Additional Can 16.25 THREE TIMES A WEEK SERVICE  1 Can $25.75  2 Cans 44.40  3 Cans 72.75  Each Additional Can 19.75 FOUR TIMES A WEEK SERVICE  1 Can $33.10  2 Cans 51.75  3 Cans 93.00  Each Additional Can 25.00 FIVE TIMES A WEEK SERVICE  1 Can $ 40.25  2 Cans 73.05  3 Cans 102.30  Each Additional Can 30.25 SIX TIMES A WEEK SERVICE  1 Can $ 51.50  2 Cans 86.50  3 Cans 107.50  Each Additional Can 35.20  5% more up or down 1 flight of stairs  10% more up or down 2 flights of stairs ONCE A WEEK SERVICE  1 yard cont. $52.50 plus $10.00 rent $ 68.30  Each additional times per week 61.90  1 1/2 yard cont. $87.75 plus $10 $107.40  Each additional times per week 95.20 The Grantee is authorized to charge the following rates for residential recycling services to each household:  
Weekly Residential $3 Per Household Recycling Service Per Month The Grantee is also authorized to charge the following rates for recycling services to commercial accounts: For Non-container Service; Weekly Commercial $3 Per Commercial Recycling Service Account Per Month For Container Service; 1 Yard Container Recycling Service $15.75 Per Month 1 1/2 Yard Container Recycling Service $26.25 Per Month"  
    SECTION 2. EMERGENCY. In order to continue garbage disposal service, maintain recycling collection service and provide adequate revenue and for the peace, health and safety of the City, an emergency is hereby declared to exist under this Ordinance and the rates will be effective immediately upon its passage. 
    Adopted by a three-fourths majority vote of the Common Council taken by ayes and nays this 2nd day of August 1993. 
APPROVED: ____________ MIKE SWINDALL, Mayor ATTEST: ____________ SHIRLEY J. PATTERSON City Recorder  
Ordinance No. 1486 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING FALCON CABLE SYSTEMS COMPANY II, L.P., LOCALLY KNOWN AS CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS, A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM WITHIN THE CITY OF COQUILLE, COOS COUNTY, OREGON, AND SETTING FORTH REGULATIONS, TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS SHALL OPERATE WITH THE CITY OF COQUILLE. 
    The City of Coquille ordains as follows: 
    Section 1. The City of Coquille, Coos County, Oregon hereby grants to Falcon Cable Systems Company II, L.P., locally known as Charter Communications, a franchise, the terms of which are specifically set forth in the attached Exhibit "A" and by this reference incorporated herein as though fully set forth. 
    Section 2. Ordinance No 1373, enacted October 7, 1996, which granted Falcon Cable Systems Company II, L.P., its successors and assigns, a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within the City of Coquille, Coos County, is hereby repealed. 
    Approved by majority vote of the Common Council taken by ayes and nays this 20th day of May, 2013; ordinance effective June 20, 2013. 
Approved: ;sigr; Matt Rowe\Mayor 
Attest: 
/s/ Rene Collins 
      City Recorder   SECTION 1 
Definition of Terms 
1.1 Terms. For the purpose of this franchise the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), unless otherwise defined herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
A.  "Cable System," "Cable Service," and "Basic Cable Service" shall be defined as set forth in the Cable Act. 
B.  "Board Council" shall mean the governing body of the Grantor. 
C.  "Cable Act" shall mean the Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et. seq. 
D.  "FCC" shall mean the Federal Communications Commission and any successor governmental entity thereto. 
E.  "Franchise" shall mean the non-exclusive rights granted pursuant to this Franchise to construct operate and maintain a Cable System along the Public Ways within all or a specified area in the Service Area. 
F.  "Gross Revenue" shall mean all revenues actually received by the Grantee, or its Affiliate, which are cable operators, derived from the operation of the Cable System for the provision of Cable Services by the Grantee within the Service Area, as long as all such gross revenues are in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAPP). Gross Revenues shall not include: (1) any local, state or federal tax, fee or assessment of general applicability; (2) the FCC User Fee and the Franchise Fee; (2) unrecovered bad debt; (3) credits, refunds and deposits paid to Subscribers; and (4) any exclusions available under applicable State law. Gross Revenues includes monthly fees charged to subscribers for Basic Service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any optional, premium or per-channel or per-program service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any tier of service other than Basic Service; installation, disconnection, re-connection; change-in-service fees; leased access channel fees; late fees; converter fees, equipment rentals to subscribers for use of the Cable System to provide Cable Service and accounted for as revenue under GAAP; advertising revenues; and revenues derived by the Grantee from home shopping channel sales to subscribers. Gross Revenues as here defined shall be the basis for computing the franchise fee. 
G.  "Person" shall mean an individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation, trust or governmental entity. 
I.  "Service Area" shall mean the geographic boundaries of the Grantor, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means, subject to the exception in subsection 6.1 hereto. 
J.  "State" shall mean the State of Oregon. 
K.  "Street", "Rights-of-Way" or "Public Way" shall include each of the following located within the Service Area: public streets, roadways, highways, bridges, land paths, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, circles, drives, easements, and similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, including but not limited to public utility easements, dedicated utility strips. or property dedicated for compatible uses now or hereafter held by the Grantor in the Service Area, which shall entitle the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the Cable System. 
L.  "Subscriber" shall mean any Person lawfully receiving Cable Service from the Grantee. 
SECTION 2 
Grant of Franchise 
2.1 Grant. The Grantor hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the Streets, now in existence and as may be created or established during its terms; any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a Cable System. Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to prohibit the Grantee from offering any service over its Cable System that is not prohibited by federal, State or local law. 
2.2 Term. The Franchise and the rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall be for an initial term of ten (10) years, commencing on the Effective Date of this Franchise as set forth in subsection 14.10. 
2.3 Police Powers and Conflicts with Franchise. The Grantee agrees to comply with the terms of any lawfully adopted generally applicable local ordinance to the extent that the provisions of the ordinance do not have the effect of limiting the benefits or expanding the obligations of the Grantee that are granted by this Franchise. This Franchise is a contract and except as to those changes which are the result of the Grantor's lawful exercise of its general police power, the Grantor may not take any unilateral action which materially changes the explicit mutual promises in this contract. Any changes to this Franchise must be made in writing signed by the Grantee and the Grantor. In the event of any conflict between this Franchise and any Grantor ordinance or regulation, this Franchise will prevail. 
2.4 Cable System Franchise Required. No Cable System shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets or public Rights-Of-Way of the Service Area or be allowed to operate without a Cable System Franchise. 
SECTION 3 
Franchise Renewal 
3.1 Procedures for Renewal. The Grantor and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Grantor that relate to the renewal of the Grantee's Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, or any such successor statute. 
SECTION 4 
Indemnification and Insurance 
4.1 Indemnification. The Grantee shall, by acceptance of the Franchise granted herein, defend the Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees for all claims for injury to any Person or property caused by the negligence of Grantee in the construction or operation of the Cable System and in the event of a determination of liability shall indemnify and hold Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees harmless from any and all liabilities, claims, demands, or judgments growing out of any injury to any Person or property as a result of the negligence of Grantee arising out of the construction, repair, extension, maintenance, operation or removal of its wires, poles or other equipment of any kind or character used in connection with the operation of the Cable System, provided that the Grantor shall give the Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Grantor within ten (10) days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this section. In the event any such claim arises, the Grantor shall tender the defense thereof to the Grantee and the Grantee shall have the right to defend, settle or compromise any claims arising hereunder and the Grantor shall cooperate fully herein. If the Grantor determined in good faith that its interests cannot be represented by the Grantee, the Grantee shall be excused from any obligation to represent the Grantor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall not be obligated to indemnify the Grantor for any damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the Grantor or for the Grantor's use of the Cable System. 
4.2 Insurance. 
A.  The Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the Franchise insurance in amounts at least as follows: 
Workers' Compensation Statutory Limits Commercial General Liability [$1,000,000] per occurrence, Combined Single Liability (C.S.L.) [$2,000,000] General Aggregate Auto Liability including coverage on all owned, non-owned hired autos [$1,000,000] per occurrence C.S.L. Umbrella Liability [$1,000,000] per occurrence C.S.L.  
B.  The Grantor shall be added as an additional insured, arising out of work performed by Grantee, to the above Commercial General Liability, Auto Liability and Umbrella Liability insurance coverage. 
C.  The Grantee shall furnish the Grantor with current certificates of insurance evidencing such coverage upon request. 
SECTION 5 
Service Obligations 
5.1 No Discrimination. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against Subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. 
5.2 Privacy. The Grantee shall fully comply with the privacy rights of Subscribers as contained in Cable Act Section 631 (47 U.S.C. § 551). 
SECTION 6 
Service Availability 
6.1 Service Area. The Grantee shall make Cable Service distributed over the Cable System available to every residence within the Service Area reaching the minimum density of at least thirty (30) occupied residences per linear strand mile of cable (excluding any home subscribing to any satellite service) as measured from Grantee's closest trunk line or distribution cable that is actively delivering Cable Service as of the date of such request for service. If such occupied residence is located within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of Grantee's feeder cable, the Cable Service will be provided at Grantee's published rates for standard installation. The Grantee may elect, but not be obligated to provide Cable Service to areas not meeting the above standards. Grantee shall not be obligated to provide Cable Service to any area that is financially or technically infeasible. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall have the right, but not the obligation, to extend the Cable System into any portion of the Service Area where another operator is providing Cable Service, or into any annexed area which is not contiguous to the present Service Area of the Grantee. 
6.2 Subscriber Charges for Extensions of the Cable System. No Subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, if an area does not meet the density requirements of Section 6.1 above, the Grantee shall only be required to extend the Cable System to Subscribers in that area if the Subscribers are willing to share the capital costs of extending the Cable System. The Grantee may require that payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential Subscribers be paid in advance. Subscribers shall also be responsible for any standard/non-standard installation charges to extend the Cable System from the tap to the residence. 
6.3 New Development Underground. In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the Grantor agrees to require as a condition of issuing a permit for open trenching to any developer or property owner that such developer or property owner give Grantee at least thirty (30) days prior notice of such construction or development, and of the particular dates on which open trenching will be available for Grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at Grantee's expense. Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if Grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals within five (5) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five-day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by Grantee. 
6.4 Annexation. In the event the Grantor modifies the Service Area by annexation or any other means, the Grantor shall provide at least sixty (60) day prior notice to the Grantee. The Grantor shall also notify Grantee of all new street address assignments or changes within the Service Area. Said notice shall be in writing to the address set forth below by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested. Grantor shall provide address files and maps in sufficient detail and in an acceptable digital format. Grantee shall begin to collect Franchise Fees from Subscribers in any annexed area within one hundred and twenty (120) days of such notice and address information as described above. Grantee shall not be obligated to collect and remit Franchise Fees until such notice and information has been received by Grantee. 
All notices provided under this subsection shall be delivered to the Grantee at the following addresses: 
Attn: Director of Government Relations 
Charter Communications 
222 NE Park Plaza Drive, #231 
Vancouver, WA 98684 
With a copy to: 
Attn: Vice President of Government Relations 
Charter Communications 
12405 Powerscourt Drive 
St. Louis, MO 63131 
Grantee shall provide Grantor thirty (30) days written notice of address changes affecting this subsection pursuant to section 14.5. 
SECTION 7 
Construction and Technical Standards 
7.1 Compliance with Codes. All construction practices and installation of equipment shall be done in accordance with all applicable sections of the National Electric Safety Code. 
7.2 Construction Standards and Requirements. All of the Grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, head-end and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices and performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel. 
7.3 Safety. The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage. 
7.4 Network Technical Requirements. The Cable System shall be designed, constructed and operated so as to meet those technical standards adopted by the FCC relating to Cable Systems contained in part 76 of the FCC's rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be amended. 
7.5 Performance Monitoring. Grantee shall test the Cable System consistent with the FCC regulations. 
SECTION 8 
Conditions on Street Occupancy 
8.1 General Conditions. Grantee shall have the right to utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on public property without obtaining all legally required permits of the Grantor. 
8.2 Underground Construction. The facilities of the Grantee shall be installed underground in those Service Areas where existing telephone and electric services are both underground at the time of system construction. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of system construction, the Grantee may install its facilities aerially with the understanding that at such time as the existing aerial facilities are required to be placed underground by the Grantor, the Grantee shall likewise place its facilities underground. In the event that any telephone or electric utilities are reimbursed by the Grantor or any agency thereof for the placement of cable underground or the movement of cable, Grantee shall be reimbursed upon the same terms and conditions as any telephone, electric or other utilities. 
8.3 Construction Codes and Permits. Grantee shall obtain all legally required permits before commencing any work requiring a permit, including the opening or disturbance of any Street within the Service Area. The Grantor shall cooperate with the Grantee in granting any permits required, providing such grant and subsequent construction by the Grantee shall not unduly interfere with the use of such Streets. The Grantee shall adhere to all building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to construction, operation or maintenance of the Cable System in the Service Area, provided that such codes are of general applicability and such codes are uniformly and consistently applied by the Grantor as to other public utility companies and other entities operating in the Service Area. 
8.3.1 Payments not to be set off against taxes or vice-versa. The parties agree that the compensation and other payments to be made pursuant to this Section 8 and any other provision of this Agreement are not a tax and are not in the nature of a tax and are in addition to any and all taxes of general applicability or other fees or charges (including any fees or charges which may be imposed on the Grantee for the use of poles, Rights-Of-Way, conduits or similar facilities that may be owned or controlled by the Grantor) which the Grantee or any affiliated Person shall be required to pay to the Grantor. 
8.4 System Construction. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The Grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any Public Way by the Grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such Public Way. 
8.5 Restoration of Public Ways. Grantee shall, at its own expense, restore any damage or disturbance caused to the Public Way as a result of its operation, construction, or maintenance of the Cable System to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the Streets immediately prior to such damage or disturbance. 
8.6 Removal in Emergency. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the Grantor to remove any of the Grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by the Grantee against the Grantor for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by the Grantor. 
8.7 Tree Trimming. Grantee or its designee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities. 
8.8 Relocation for the Grantor. The Grantee shall, upon receipt of reasonable advance written notice, to be not less than ten (10) business days, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of Grantee when lawfully required by the Grantor pursuant to its police powers. Grantee shall be responsible for any costs associated with these obligations to the same extent all other users of the Grantor Rights-Of-Way are responsible for the costs related to the relocation of their facilities. 
8.9 Relocation for a Third Party. The Grantee shall, on the request of any Person holding a lawful permit issued by the Grantor, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from the Street as necessary any property of the Grantee, provided that the expense of such is paid by any such Person benefiting from the relocation and the Grantee is give reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. The Grantee may require such payment in advance. For purposes of this subsection, "reasonable advance written notice" shall be no less than ten (10) business days in the event of a temporary relocation and no less than one hundred twenty (120) days for a permanent relocation. 
8.10 Reimbursement of Costs. If funds are available to any Person using the Streets for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, the Grantor shall reimburse the Grantee in the same manner in which other Persons affected by the requirement are reimbursed. If the funds are controlled by another governmental entity, the Grantor shall make application for such funds on behalf of the Grantee. 
8.11 Emergency Use. If the Grantee provides an Emergency Alert System ("EAS"), then the Grantor shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized Persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the Grantee's Cable System in any manner that results in inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the Cable System. The Grantor shall hold the Grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless from any claims or costs arising out of use of the EAS, including, but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees and costs. 
SECTION 9 
Service and Rates 
9.1 Phone Service. The Grantee shall maintain a toll-free telephone number and a phone service operated such that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
9.2 Notification of Service Procedures. The Grantee shall furnish each Subscriber at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the Grantee's name, address and local telephone number. Grantee shall give the Grantor thirty (30) days prior notice of any rate increases, channel lineup or other substantive service changes. 
9.3 Rate Regulation. Grantor shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the Grantor. If and when exercising rate regulation, the Grantor shall abide by the terms and conditions set forth by the FCC. 
9.4 Customer Service Standards. Grantee shall be bound by the FCC's Customer Service Standards, as they may be amended from time to time. 
9.5 Continuity of Service. It shall be the right of all Subscribers to continue receiving Cable Service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored, and subject to Grantee's rights under this Agreement. 
SECTION 10 
Franchise Fee 
10.1 Amount of Fee. Grantee shall pay to the Grantor an annual Franchise Fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the annual Gross Revenue. Such payment shall be in addition to taxes of general applicability owed to the Grantor by the Grantee that are not included as Franchise Fee under Federal law. Franchise Fees may be passed through to Subscribers as a line item on Subscriber bills or otherwise as Grantee chooses, consistent with Federal law. 
10.2 Payment of Fee. Payment of the Franchise Fee due the Grantor shall be calculated on an annual basis consistent with Federal law. Grantee agrees to pay Franchise Fees to the Grantor within forty-five (45) days of the close of each calendar-quarter and transmitted by electronic funds transfer to a bank account designated by Grantor. The payment period and the collection of the Franchise Fees that are to be paid to the Grantor pursuant to the Franchise shall commence sixty (60) days after the Effective Date of the Franchise. The Grantor shall be furnished a statement of said payment, reflecting the Gross Revenues and the applicable charges. 
10.3 Accord and Satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the Grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Grantor may have for additional sums payable as a Franchise Fee under this Franchise. 
10.4 Limitation on Recovery. In the event that any Franchise payment or recomputed payment is not made on or before the dates specified herein, Grantee shall pay an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate of one percent over the prime interest rate. The period of limitation for recovery of any Franchise Fee payable hereunder shall be three (3) years from the date on which payment by the Grantee was due. The due date for the purposes of calculating any interest owed by the Grantee to the Grantor shall be December 31 following the quarterly prepaid due date. 
SECTION 11 
Transfer of Franchise 
11.1 Franchise Transfer. The Franchise granted hereunder shall not be assigned, other than to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the Grantee, without the prior consent of the Grantor, and such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Grantee in the Franchise or Cable System to secure indebtedness. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a request for transfer, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the Grantor has not taken action on the Grantee's request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, consent by the Grantor shall be deemed given. 
SECTION 12 
Records, Reports and Maps 
12.1 Reports Required. The Grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms for regular Subscriber service, policy regarding the processing of Subscriber complaints, delinquent Subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the Grantee's policy in connection with its Subscribers shall be filed with the Grantor upon request. 
12.2 Records Required. 
The Grantee shall at all times maintain: 
A.  A record of all written complaints received regarding interruptions or degradation of Cable Service for one (1) year. 
B.  A full and complete set of plans, records and strand maps showing the location of the Cable System. 
12.3 Inspection of Records. Grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the Grantor, upon receipt of advance written notice to examine during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis any and all records as is reasonably necessary to ensure Grantee's compliance with the Franchise. Such notice shall specifically reference the subsection of the Franchise that is under review so that the Grantee may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by the Grantor. The Grantee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for Franchise compliance purposes longer than three (3) years, except for service complaints, which shall be kept for one (1) year as specified above. The Grantee shall not be required to provide Subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act. The Grantor agrees to treat as confidential any books, records or maps that constitute proprietary or confidential information to the extent Grantee makes the Grantor aware of such confidentiality. If the Grantor believes it must release any such confidential books or records in the course of enforcing this Franchise, or for any other reason, it shall advise Grantee in advance so that Grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. Until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the Grantor agrees that, to the extent permitted by State and federal law, it shall deny access to any of Grantee's books and records marked confidential, as set forth above, to any Person. The Grantor, its agents, employees, representatives or any other Person who has access to records provided by the Grantee shall sign Grantee's nondisclosure agreement prior to records review. 
SECTION 13 
Enforcement or Revocation 
13.1 Notice of Violation. If the Grantor believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the Franchise, the Grantor shall first informally discuss the matter with Grantee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance (the "Violation Notice"). 
13.2 Grantee's Right to Cure or Respond. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the Violation Notice to (i) respond to the Grantor, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or (ii) to cure such default, or (iii) if, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Grantor of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
13.3 Public Hearing. If the Grantee fails to respond to the Violation Notice received from the Grantor, or if the default is not remedied within the cure period set forth above, the Board shall schedule a public hearing if it intends to continue its investigation into the default. The Grantor shall provide the Grantee at least twenty (20) days prior written notice of such hearing, which specifies the time, place and purpose of such hearing, notice of which shall be published by the Clerk of the Grantor in a newspaper of general circulation within the Grantor in accordance with subsection 14.5 hereof. The Grantee shall have the right to present evidence and to question witnesses. The Grantor shall determine if the Grantee has committed a violation and shall make written findings of fact relative to its determination. If a violation is found, the Grantee may petition for reconsideration before any competent tribunal having jurisdiction over such matters. 
13.4 Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal and State law, in the event the Grantor, after the hearing set forth in subsection 13.3 above, determines that the Grantee is in default of any provision of the Franchise, the Grantor may: 
A.  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or 
B.  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or 
C.  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the Franchise, seek to revoke the Franchise itself in accordance with subsection 13.5 below. 
13.5 Revocation. 
A.  Prior to revocation or termination of the Franchise, the Grantor shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to revoke the Franchise on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the Grantee, including one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the Franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have sixty (60) days from such notice to either object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection and provide any explanation or to cure the alleged noncompliance. If the Grantor has not received a satisfactory response from Grantee, it may then seek to revoke the Franchise at a public hearing. The Grantee shall be given at least thirty (30) days prior written notice of such public hearing, specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to revoke the Franchise. 
B.  At the hearing, the Board shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses, after which it shall determine whether or not the Franchise shall be revoked. The public hearing shall be on the record and a written transcript shall be made available to the Grantee within ten (10) business days after Grantee requests it. The decision of the Board shall be made in writing and shall be delivered to the Grantee. The Grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the Board de novo. The Grantee may continue to operate the Cable System until all legal appeals procedures have been exhausted. 
C.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Grantee does not waive any of its rights under federal law or regulation. 
D.  Upon revocation of the Franchise, Grantee may remove the Cable System from the Streets of the Grantor, or abandon the Cable System in place. 
SECTION 14 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
14.1 Force Majeure. The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of the Grantee to anticipate and control. This provision includes work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their utility poles or to provide access to poles to which Grantee's Cable System is attached or access to other facilities necessary to provide Cable Services, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. 
14.2 Minor Violations. Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the Grantor's intention to subject the Grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the Franchise for violations of the Franchise where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the Subscribers within the Service Area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship to the Grantee which outweighs the benefit to be derived by the Grantor and/or Subscribers. 
14.3 Action of Parties. In any action by the Grantor or the Grantee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
14.4 Equal Protection. If any other provider of Cable Services or video services (without regard to the technology used to deliver such services) is lawfully authorized by the Grantor or by any other State or federal governmental entity to provide such services using facilities located wholly or partly in the public Rights-Of-Way of the Grantor, the Grantor shall within thirty (30) days of a written request from Grantee, modify this Franchise to insure that the obligations applicable to Grantee are no more burdensome than those imposed on the new competing provider. If the Grantor fails to make modifications consistent with this requirement, Grantee's Franchise shall be deemed so modified thirty (30) days after the Grantee's initial written notice. As an alternative to the Franchise modification request, the Grantee shall have the right and may choose to have this Franchise with the Grantor be deemed expired thirty (30) days after written notice to the Grantor. Nothing in this Franchise shall impair the right of the Grantee to terminate this Franchise and, at Grantee's option, negotiate a renewal or replacement franchise, license, consent, certificate or other authorization with any appropriate government entity. 
14.5 Notices. Unless otherwise provided by Federal, State or Local law, all notices, reports or demands pursuant to this Franchise shall be in writing and shall be deemed to be sufficiently given upon delivery to a Person at the address set forth below, or by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, nationally or internationally recognized courier service such as Federal Express. Grantee shall provide thirty (30) days written notice of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions using any reasonable written means. 
As set forth above, notice served upon the Grantor shall be delivered or sent to: 
Attn: City Manager 
City of Coquille 
851 N. Central Blvd. 
Coquille, OR 97423 
And every notice served upon Grantee shall be delivered or sent to: 
Attn: Director, Government Relations 
Charter Communications 
222 NE Park Plaza Drive, #231 
Vancouver, WA 98684 
With a copy to: 
Attn: Vice President, Government Relations 
Charter Communications 
12405 Powerscourt Drive 
St. Louis, MO 63131 
Each Party shall be responsible to promptly notify the other in writing of any change of address. 
14.6 Public Notice. Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to this Franchise or any such grant of additional franchises, licenses, consents, certificates, authorizations, or exemptions by the Grantor to any other Person(s) to provide Cable Services, video services, or other television services utilizing any system or technology requiring use of the public Rights Of Way shall be by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting and a posting at the administrative buildings of the Grantor. 
14.6.1 Grantor shall provide written notice within ten (10) days of Grantor's receipt from any other Person(s) of an application or request for a franchise(s), license(s), consent(s), certificate(s), authorization(s), or exemption(s) to provide Cable Services, video services, or other television services utilizing any system or technology requiring use of the public Rights Of Way. Any public hearings to consider such application or request shall have the same notice requirement as outlined in subsection 14.6 above. 
14.7 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Franchise is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Franchise. 
14.8 Entire Agreement. This Franchise sets forth the entire agreement between the parties respecting the subject matter hereof. All agreements, covenants, representations and warranties, express and implied, oral and written, of the parties with regard to the subject matter hereof are contained herein. No other agreements, covenants, representations or warranties, express or implied, oral or written, have been made by any party to another with respect to the matter of this Franchise. All prior and contemporaneous conversations. negotiations, possible and alleged agreements, representations, covenants and warranties with respect to the subject matter hereof are waived, merged herein and therein and are superseded hereby and thereby. 
14.9 Administration of Franchise. This Franchise is a contract and neither party may take any unilateral action that materially changes the explicit mutual promises and covenants contained herein. Any changes, modifications or amendments to this Franchise must be made in writing, signed by the Grantor and the Grantee. 
14.10 Effective Date. The Franchise granted herein will take effect and be in full force from such date of acceptance by Grantee recorded on the signature page of this Agreement. This Franchise shall expire on July 1, 2023, unless extended by the mutual agreement of the parties. 
Considered and approved this 11th day of June , 2013. 
City of Coquille, Oregon 
Signature: Matt Rowe 
Name/Title: Matt Rowe, Mayor 
Accepted this 28 day of June , 2013, subject to applicable federal, State and local law under Grantor's Police Powers. 
Falcon Cable Systems Company II, L.P., l/k/a Charter Communications 
By: Charter Communications VII, LLC its General Manager 
By: Charter Communications Inc., its Manager 
By: ____________ 
Printed Name: Mark E. Brown 
Title: Vice-President, Government Affairs, 
Charter Communications 
ORDINANCE NO. 1393 
    AN ORDINANCE GRANTING KARL J. WADSWORTH DBA WADSWORTH GARBAGE DISPOSAL AN EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO COLLECT GARBAGE IN THE CITY OF COQUILLE; REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 1252 AND ORDINANCE NO. 1366; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
    The City of Coquille ordains as follows: 
    Section 1. Exclusive Franchise. 
    1.1 The City of Coquille, hereinafter referred to as "City", hereby grants Karl J. Wadsworth dba Wadsworth Garbage Disposal, hereinafter referred to as "Grantee," an exclusive franchise, right and privilege, subject to such modifications as are hereinafter set forth, to collect garbage within the corporate limits of the City of Coquille, as such limits now exist or may hereafter be expanded, for a period of ten (10) years, beginning July 1,1999. 
    1.2 The term "garbage" as herein used shall be applied and construed to mean all classes of putrefactive or easily decomposable animal, vegetable, or fruit matter and includes kitchen refuse of residences, restaurants, hotels, and places where food is handled or prepared for human consumption, or waste or offal from fish, poultry, fruit, or vegetable matter, and all organic substances of whatever kind or nature unfit for human consumption that are subject to immediate or quick decay and that may attract flies or rodents. The term "garbage" might also include all material or waste coming from residences or places of business that may be destructible or partly destructible such as grass, weeds, brush, papers, ashes, boxes and tin cans. 
    1.3 For the franchise herein granted, Grantee shall pay to the City of Coquille, the sum of $1,500.00 per year. Payment shall be paid directly to the City's Finance Director. The franchise fee shall be paid as follows: annual payment shall be made on or before July 1, 1999, for the forthcoming year, and shall be payable in advance of July 1, of each year thereafter. The franchise fee may be changed or revised upward or downward by resolution of the Common Council of the City of Coquille after public hearing before the Common Council. 
    1.4 As additional consideration for the exclusive franchise, Grantee shall, without charge, collect garbage from the City Hall and the Community Building, City Parks and the trash receptacles placed on the sidewalks in various sections of the City, as needed. 
    1.5 The City of Coquille, through its appropriate officers, shall take all appropriate steps, within the power of the City, to protect the exclusive right and interest hereby given to Grantee and shall cooperate in all particulars with Grantee in protecting such exclusive right and shall, if deemed necessary, pass such additional ordinances as may be required to make the Grantee's franchise exclusive and to enforce such ordinances. 
    1.6 This franchise and anything pertaining thereto may be assigned and transferred by Grantee to a third party only after the Common Council of the City of Coquille has approved such assignment and has adopted a resolution to that effect. 
    Section 2. Equipment. Grantec shall provide and furnish all equipment that may be necessary for hauling garbage from the City to a dump site. All trucks and other means of conveyance shall be kept in a sanitary condition, shall be maintained in a good workmanlike manner, and when operated within the corporate limits of the City of Coquille, shall be operated in conformity and obedience with all ordinances of the City. 
    Section 3. Garbage Collection Services. Grantee shall, properly and with dispatch, collect the garbage at various residences, business establishments, and other places within the corporate limits of the City where such service is requested and required, and haul such garbage from the City at Grantee's expense. 
    Section 4. Collection Rates. Residential and commercial rates for garbage collection and recycling services shall be determined, changed or revised upward or downward by resolution of the Common Council of the City of Coquille after public hearing before the Common Council. Any such determination, change or revision shall be fixed so as to accord Grantee a reasonable rate of return and to assure efficient and beneficial service to the residents and inhabitants of the City. The Council's resolution described in this Section 4 may provide that the rates described in the resolution be effective prior to the date the resolution is adopted. 
    Section 5. Annexation. Immediately upon annexation of additional territory to the City of Coquille, City shall take such steps as may be necessary to give Grantee the exclusive right to collect garbage within such area. City shall notify any other collector of garbage in such area to cease such collection on or before ninety (90) days from the date of such notices Grantee shall endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory agreement with any such collector in any such newly annexed area concerning the collection of garbage therein. If Grantee and such collector cannot reach an agreement concerning the collection of garbage in such newly annexed area, either party may elect to submit the matter to arbitrators, Grantee appointing one arbitrator, the City appointing one arbitrator. The decision of such arbitrators shall be binding upon all parties to the arbitrations, and the award made by them shall be final. Grantee shall be responsible for any expenses incurred as a result of the arbitration. It is understood that no payment shall be required for the privileges of collecting garbage from any collection station or place where the local collector has made collections for less than six months. 
    Section 6. Recycling and Waste Reduction Requirements. 
    6.1 Grantee shall be required to comply with the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) requirements for its Western Region Solid Waste Program, Recycling and Waste Reduction program set forth in Oregon Administrative Rules Chapter 340, Division 90, Section 0030 (General Requirements) and Section 0040 (Local Government Recycling Program Elements) copies of which are attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and by this reference incorporated herein as though fully set out. 
    6.2 If the City is cited or fined for Grantee's failure to comply with any of the requirements described in this Section 6, Grantee shall reimburse the City for any fines or expenses it may incur as a result of Grantee's failure to comply with DEQ's requirements, including, but not limited to, Grantee's attorney fees and costs. Failure of Grantee to reimburse City for any fines or expenses that City incurred, within five (5) days of City providing Grantee with written notice of such fines or expenses, shall be grounds for canceling or revoking this franchise subject to the provisions of Section 8 of this Ordinance. 
    Section 7. In addition to any requirements set forth in this Ordinance, Grantee shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations concerning solid waste management, including, but not limited to, those provisions of ORS Chapter 459 as now existing or later amended. 
    Section 8. Cancellation or Revocation. This franchise may be canceled or revoked by the City of Coquille if Grantee fails to abide by the. terms set forth in this Ordinance; fails to perform the obligations imposed upon Grantee herein; fails to meet the requirements of public convenience and necessity from an overall and community-wide standpoint in the removal of garbage from the City or for failure to adequately meet the reasonable demands of the residents of any section of the City garbage disposal service, even though such service may be unprofitable. 
    8.1 Such cancellation or revocation shall not be made until thirty (30) days written notice is given to Grantee, such notice to be mailed by regular and certified mail at Grantee's then current business address. 
    8.2 Grantee may request a hearing on the matter of the cancellation or revocation of this franchise if Grantee provides City with written notice that is delivered to the City Finance Director on or before fourteen (14) days from the mailing date of the notice of cancellation or revocation. The hearing shall be held before the Common Council, and such hearing may be continued from one Council meeting to another; provided, however, that not more than two continuances shall be made. The Council shall determine the matter of such cancellation or revocation by Ordinance. 
    8.3 Any time after written notice of cancellation or revocation is mailed to Grantee as provided in sub-section 8.1 and Grantee has failed to timely request a hearing or after this franchise is canceled or revoked, City may enter into the business of collecting garbage and generally perform the terms of this franchise on the part of Grantee or may contract with a third party to so perform and collect garbage and, in either of such events, Grantee shall save City harmless and pay to City any net financial loss it may sustain as a result of City's cancellation or revocation of Grantee's franchise, including, but not limited to, costs of collection, bookkeeping, payroll expenses or attorney fees. 
    Section 9. Repealing Ordinances. Ordinance No 1252, enacted May 15, 1989, and Ordinance 1366, enacted July 17,1995, are hereby repealed. 
    Section 10. Emergency. In order to continue to provide uninterrupted garbage service for the residents and inhabitants of the City of Coquille, and for the peace, health and safety of the City, an emergency is hereby declared to exist and this Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its enactment. 
    Adopted by a three-fourths majority vote of the Common Council taken by ayes and nays this 7th day of June, 1999. 
APPROVED: ____________ Mike Swindall, Mayor City of Coquille ATTEST: ____________ Shirley Patterson, Finance Director City of Coquille  
ORDINANCE NO. 1436 
    AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE GAS UTILITY FRANCHISE TO NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS COMPANY 
THE COQUILLE CITY COUNCIL FINDS AS FOLLOWS: 
1. The City of Coquille ("City") is authorized by state statutes and its charter to grant non-exclusive franchises to Persons desiring to occupy Rights-of-Way within the City. 
2. Northwest Natural Gas Company ("Grantee"), owns, maintains, and operates, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Public Utility Commission, a natural gas utility system and desires to install, operate, and maintain its Gas Facilities in Rights-of-Way in the City. 
3. The purposes of this Franchise are to: establish reasonable regulations applicable to the construction, operation and maintenance of Gas Facilities in, along, across, under and over City property and the provision of Services within the City; protect the health, safety and welfare of the public in the City; and to limit the City's liability for claims arising from the granting of this Franchise and the operations of Grantee thereunder. 
4. The City of Coquille agrees to grant a franchise to Grantee under the terms and conditions provided in this ordinance. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF COQUILLE 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance and Franchise, the following words and terms have the meaning stated in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular number include the plural number and vice versa. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
1.1  "City" means the City of Coquille, an Oregon municipal corporation. 
1.2  "City Facilities" means City-owned street light poles, lighting fixtures, pipes, cable, wire, conduit, or other City-owned structures or equipment located within the Right-of-Way. 
1.3  "City Limits" means the corporate boundaries of the City, as those boundaries may change from time to time. 
1.4  "Construct" or "Construction" means, without limitation, constructing, acquisition, laying, maintaining, testing, operating, extending, renewing, relocating, removing, replacing, repairing and using Gas Facilities. 
1.5  "Franchise" means this franchise ordinance and agreement as approved by the Coquille City Council and accepted by Grantee under section 13.8 of this Franchise. 
1.6  "Gas" means natural methane-based gas. 
1.7  "Gas Facilities" means Grantee's gas transmission, storage and distribution facilities, including pipes, pipe lines, mains, laterals, conduits, feeders, regulators, reducing and regulating stations, meters, fixtures, connections and all attachments, appurtenances, and all accessories necessary and incidental thereto located within City properties or within the City Limits, whether the facilities are located above or below ground. 
1.8  "Gas Utility System" means the Gas Facilities used for the provision of Services. 
1.9  "Grantee" means Northwest Natural Gas Company, a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Oregon, and its lawful successors, assigns, and transferees. 
1.10  "Gross Revenues" means revenues received from use of the Gas Utility System within the City Limits less related net uncollectibles. Gross revenues shall include revenues from the use, rental, or lease of the Gas Facilities. Gross revenues shall not include proceeds from the sale of bonds, mortgage or other evidence of indebtedness, securities or stocks, sales at wholesale by Grantee to any public utility or public agency when the public utility or public agency purchasing the gas is not the ultimate customer, or revenue from joint pole use. "Gross Revenue" shall include revenues from the use, rental, or lease of Grantee's Gas Facilities, except when those revenues have been paid to Grantee by another franchisee of the City and the paid revenues are used in the calculation of the franchise fee for the operations of the other franchisee within the City Limits. 
1.11  "Maintenance," "Maintaining," or "Maintain" means, without limitation, relaying, repairing, replacing, relocating, examining, testing, inspecting, removing, digging and excavating, and restoring operations incidental thereto. 
1.12  "Person" means any individual, municipality, governmental entity, sole proprietorship, partnership, public or private corporation, limited liability company, association or other organization authorized to act or do business in the State of Oregon, and includes any natural person. 
1.13  "Public Place" means any City-owned property that is open to the public and that is not a Right-of-Way, and includes public squares, fairgrounds and parks. 
1.14  "Public Utility Commission" means the Public Utility Commission of the State of Oregon, or its successor agency. 
1.15  "Right-of-Way" means the space in, upon, above, or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, bridges, and places used or intended to be used by the general public for travel as the same now or may hereafter exist, that the City has the right to allow Grantee to use. 
1.16  "Services" means the gas transmission, distribution, sales and marketing provided by Grantee to its customers located within the City Limits. "Services" does not include the use of any equipment, plant or facilities for the transmission of Gas which pass through or over but are not used to provide service in or do not terminate in the City. 
Section 2. Nature and Term of Grant. 
2.1  Grant of Franchise. Subject to the terms and conditions of this Franchise, the City grants Grantee a right, privilege and franchise during the term of this Franchise to: 
2.1.1 Construct, Maintain and operate a Gas Utility System and exercise all authority conferred upon Grantee by state law within the City Limits for the purpose of providing Services to customers within the City Limits. 
2.1.2 Install, operate, Maintain, remove, reinstall, relocate, and replace Gas Facilities on and under the Right-of-Way and to use the Right-of-Way for the provision of Services. This Franchise does not authorize Grantee to install or use Gas Facilities in the Right-of-Way for anything other than the provision of Services. Unless Grantee or its lessee or licensee obtains the written consent of the City, Gas Facilities shall not be used directly or indirectly for the provision of telecommunications services not required by Grantee to operate its Gas Utility System. 
2.1.3 Install, operate, Maintain, remove, reinstall, relocate and replace Gas Facilities for the transmission of Gas which are located within the City Limits but are not used to provide Services in or do not terminate in the City Limits. 
2.1.4 Offer and sell Services to customers within the City Limits. 
2.2  Duration. The term of this Franchise, and all rights and obligations pertaining thereto, shall be twenty years from the date Grantee signs and accepts this Franchise in accordance with section 13.8, unless terminated sooner as provided herein. Upon thirty (30) days written notice by either party to the other of a requested modification, the provisions of this Franchise may be renegotiated. A written notice of requested renegotiation may only be given during the eleventh full year of the franchise term, i.e., between ten (10) and eleven (11) years after the date the Grantee signs and accepts this Franchise in accordance with section 13.8. If the parties are unable to agree to renegotiated terms or to a continuation of the same provisions within one hundred and eighty (180) days of receipt of the notice of requested renegotiation, or such longer time as may be agreed to by the parties, the Franchise shall terminate. 
2.3  Non-Exclusive. This Franchise is not exclusive. The City expressly reserves the right to grant franchises or rights to other Persons similar to or different from those granted by this Franchise. This Franchise is subject to all deeds, easements, dedications, conditions, covenants, restrictions, encumbrances, and claims of title of record that may affect the Right-of-Way. Nothing in this Franchise shall be deemed to grant, convey, create, or vest in Grantee a real property interest in land, including any fee, leasehold interest, or easement. The Franchise shall not be deemed to create any compensable property right in any condemnation by City of any or all of Grantee's Gas Facilities. 
2.4  Reservation of City Rights. The City reserves the rights to: 
2.4.1 Construct, install, Maintain and operate any City Facility, Right-of-Way or Public Place. 
2.4.2 Do any work that the City may find desirable on, over or under any Right-of-Way or Public Place. 
2.4.2.1 Whenever the City shall excavate or perform any work in any Right-of-Way or Public Place, or shall contract for such excavation or work where such excavation or work may disturb Grantee's Gas Facilities, the City shall, in writing, notify Grantee sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to enable Grantee to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect its Gas Facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public. In any such case, the Grantee, upon request, shall furnish maps or drawings to the City showing the approximate location of all its Gas Facilities in the area involved in the proposed excavation or other work. The City shall treat any such map or drawing as confidential, subject to the provisions of state law and the Oregon Public Records Law. 
2.4.3 Exercise any non-regulatory power that the City currently holds, or may hereafter be authorized or granted by the laws of the State of Oregon or the City Charter, except where that power may be preempted or superseded by the constitutions of the United States or the State of Oregon. 
2.4.4 Vacate, alter or close any Right-of-Way or Public Place. Whenever the City shall vacate any Right-of-Way or Public Place for the convenience or benefit of any person or governmental agency or instrumentality, Grantee's rights under this Franchise shall be preserved as to any of its Gas Facilities then existing in the Right-of-Way or Public Place if reasonably practicable. To the extent Grantee's rights in the Right-of-Way cannot be preserved, City shall provide an alternative Right-of-Way for the location of Grantee's Gas Facilities. If Grantee's Gas Facilities must be relocated from a vacated Right-of-Way, the petitioners, other than City, of such vacation shall bear the costs of relocating the Gas Facilities. In no event shall the City be responsible for paying the costs of any such relocation. Upon receipt of a notice of a petition for vacation, Grantee shall as soon as practicable investigate and advise the City and petitioners in writing whether the Gas Facilities must be relocated, the estimated costs of relocation and the time needed for this relocation. 
2.4.5 Abate any nuisance or dangerous condition. 
2.4.6 Control or prevent the use of any Public Place by Grantee and require payment of additional compensation for the use of the Public Place in any amount that the City finds to be reasonable. 
2.4.7 In addition to the reservations contained in this Franchise and existing applicable ordinances, adopt such additional generally applicable regulations of the construction, maintenance and operation of Grantee's Gas Facilities as the City may find necessary in the exercise of its police powers or for the orderly development of the City (including but not limited to zoning, land use, historic preservation ordinances, safety or construction standards, and other applicable requirements), provided that these regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, are reasonable and not in conflict with the rights granted in this Franchise. These regulations shall be subject to any superseding provisions of state or federal law or regulations and shall be in conformance with standard engineering practices. The City may amend and add to these regulations from time to time. Grantee shall promptly comply with these regulations. 
2.5  Franchise as Contract. This ordinance and the written acceptance by Grantee constitutes a contract between the City and Grantee, and is binding upon and inures to the benefit of Grantee and its successors, legal representatives and assigns, under the conditions imposed herein. 
Section 3. Compensation. 
3.1  Amount. As compensation for the benefits and privileges granted under this Franchise, and for Grantee's entry upon and deployment within the Right-of-Way, Grantee shall pay to the City an amount equal to five percent (5%) of Grantee's Gross Revenues (the "Franchise Fee"). The Franchise Fee includes all compensation for the use of the Right-of-Way pursuant to this Franchise. The City may charge additional compensation for the use of any Public Place. The Grantee may offset against the Franchise Fee the amount of any license fee, permit fee or other fee or charge paid to the City in connection with Grantee's use of the Right-of-Way when the fee or charge is imposed upon Grantee alone or not under an ordinance or resolution applicable to others in addition to Grantee. Grantee may also offset against the Franchise Fee the amount of any privilege tax particularly imposed upon energy utilities. The Franchise Fee shall not be deemed to be in lieu of or a waiver of any ad valorem property tax which the City may now or hereafter be entitled to, or, or to participate in, or to levy upon the property of Grantee. 
3.2  Due Date. The Franchise Fee shall be due for each calendar year, or fraction thereof, within sixty (60) days after the close of such calendar year, or fraction thereof. Within sixty (60) days after the termination of this Franchise, compensation shall be paid for the period elapsing since the close of the last calendar year for which compensation has been paid. 
3.3  Report. Grantee shall furnish a statement to the City with each payment of compensation, in a form acceptable to the City, executed by an authorized officer of Grantee or the officer's authorized designee, showing the amount of Gross Revenues for the period covered by the payment. The compensation for the period covered by the statement shall be computed on the basis of the reported Gross Revenues. Grantee may identify information submitted to the City as confidential by prominently marking any such information with the mark "Confidential" in letters at least one-half inch in height. Subject to the disclosure requirements of state or federal law, including the Oregon Public Records Law, the City shall treat any such information as confidential and not subject to public disclosure. 
3.4  Acceptance of Payment and Recomputation. If Grantee discovers any underpayment in the correct amount of compensation due, the City shall be paid the difference due within thirty (30) days of discovery of the error or determination of the correct amount. Any overpayment to the City through error or otherwise shall be offset against the next payment. Acceptance by the City of any payment due under this section shall not be deemed as an accord that the amount paid is the correct amount, nor shall any acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional funds or as a waiver by the City of any breach of this Franchise. 
3.5  Favored Customer Provision. In the event the Grantee enters into a franchise agreement with another municipality in the State of Oregon for a term comparable to this Franchise and Grantee agrees to pay a franchise fee that is higher than the fees set out in this Franchise, Grantee shall notify City in writing of the details of this arrangement within sixty (60) days of its effective date. Upon receipt by the City of this notice, City may elect to re-negotiate the franchise fee for this Franchise and require payment of a similar fee as provided to the third party. Any change in the franchise fee under this section shall become effective on January 1 of the following calendar year. 
3.6  Renegotiation of Franchise Fee. Upon thirty (30) days written notice by either party to the other of a requested modification, the provisions of section 3.1 of this Franchise may be modified. A written notice of requested modification may only be given during the sixth full year of the franchise term, i.e., between five and six years after the date the Grantee signs and accepts this Franchise in accordance with section 13.8. If the parties are unable to agree to a modification of section 3.1 or to a continuation of the same provisions within ninety (90) days of receipt of the notice of requested modification, or such longer time as may be agreed to by the parties, the Franchise shall terminate. 
3.7  Itemization of Franchise Fee on Utility Billings. Any description of a customer charge for a portion of the Franchise Fee under OAR 860-022-0040 or any successor regulation shall be stated on the regular billings as a "fee" and not as a "tax." 
Section 4. Services Standards, Safety Standards and Work Specifications. 
4.1  Quality of Services. The Grantee shall Maintain and operate an adequate system for the distribution of gas in the City. The Grantee shall use due diligence to maintain continuous and uninterrupted 24-hour a day service which shall at all times conform at least to the standards common in the business and to the standards adopted by the Public Utility Commission and other state authorities. Under no circumstances shall the Grantee be liable for an interruption or failure of service cause by act of God, unavoidable accident or other circumstances beyond the control of the Grantee through no fault of its own. 
4.2  Construction and Maintenance of Gas Facilities. Grantee's Gas Facilities shall be Constructed and Maintained in good order and condition, in a safe manner, and in accordance with standard engineering practice and all lawful governmental regulations. 
4.3  Protection of Property. Grantee shall install and Maintain all Gas Facilities in a manner that does not injure the Right-of-Way, the City's property or the property belonging to another Person within the City Limits. Grantee shall, at its own expense, repair, renew, change, and improve the Gas Facilities from time to time as may be necessary to accomplish this purpose. 
4.4  Compliance with State and Federal Regulations. The rates to be charged and the rules and regulations in respect to the conditions, character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by Grantee shall be that as may be lawfully prescribed by the Public Utility Commission. In the event this jurisdiction or right of regulation, or any part thereof, is abandoned by the Public Utility Commission and is not vested exclusively by law in any other state regulatory body, and in the event this jurisdiction may be lawfully exercised by the City, consistent with section 2.4.9, the City reserves the right, and Grantee shall comply with, all reasonable ordinances, rules and regulations made by the City in the exercise of this jurisdiction or right of regulation. 
Section 5. Construction, Installation and Relocation. 
5.1  Construction and Installation. Subject to applicable City ordinances and regulations adopted by the City Council concerning work in the Rights of Way, including, but not limited to, permitting, insurance, bonding, work scheduling, standards for restoration and payment of administrative fees for permits, Grantee may enter upon the Right-of-Way to perform all work that is necessary to install, operate, Maintain, remove, reinstall, relocate, and replace Gas Facilities in or under the surface of the Right-of-Way. Grantee shall be responsible for all Construction, installation, and Maintenance work, regardless of who performs the work. Except in emergencies, prior to making an excavation in the traveled portion of any Right-of-Way, and, when required by the City, in any untraveled portion of any Right-of-Way, the Grantee shall obtain from the City approval of the proposed excavation and of its location. Grantee shall give notice to the City by telephone, electronic data transmittal or other appropriate means prior to the commencement of service or Maintenance work and as soon as is practicable after commencement of work performed under emergency conditions. 
5.2  Permit Imposition and Fee. Consistent with its authority under section 2.4.9 of this Franchise, and except when work is necessary during an emergency or to remedy an immediate risk of harm to persons or property, the City may require Grantee to obtain a permit before commencing the Construction, Maintenance, extension or relocation of any of its Gas Facilities in the Right-of-Way or a Public Place. Subject to the provisions of section 3.1 of this Franchise, the City may charge Grantee a permit fee no greater than the reasonable administrative costs and expenses of the City in administering the permit, supervising the work and inspecting the Gas Facilities. The City shall promptly respond to Grantee's requests for permits and shall otherwise cooperate with Grantee in facilitating the deployment of equipment in the Right-of-Way in a reasonable and timely manner. 
5.3  No Interference. All Gas Facilities of Grantee shall be Constructed and laid in such a manner as not to interfere unreasonably with the use by the City and the public of the Right-of-Way and Public Places or with any present public or private irrigation or drain ditches, sewers, water mains, conduits, sidewalks, paving or other public improvements or utility structures. However, if any of Grantee's Gas Facilities unreasonably interfere with the Construction or repair of any Right-of-Way or City Facility, Grantee's Gas Facility shall be removed or replaced in coordination with the City. Any and all removal or, replacement shall be at Grantee's sole expense. Should Grantee fail to remove, adjust or relocate its Gas Facility by the date established by the City, the City may cause such removal, adjustment or relocation through the use of qualified contractors, and the expense thereof shall be paid by Grantee, including all costs and expenses incurred by the City due to Grantee's delay. 
5.4  Location of Gas Mains. Grantee shall install all Gas Facilities in the Right-of-Way in a general location prescribed by the City, and in accordance with any ordinances adopted by the City governing the location of the facilities in the Right-of-Way. Grantee shall provide the City a map showing the proposed locations of Grantee's planned installation of gas mains in the Rights-of-Way prior to construction of the facility. 
5.5 Relocation. 
5.5.1 In case of any future improvement, Maintenance or Construction of City Facilities in the Right-of-Way or upon a Public Place, or of any of the streets, avenues, lanes, alleys, highways, sidewalks or pedestrian ways in the Right-of-Way, where any Gas Facilities are located, and the City determines it is necessary to change the location of the Gas Facilities in connection with the improvement, Maintenance or Construction, Grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by City and after reasonable evaluation of alternatives by City in cooperation with Grantee, at its own expense, move and change any Gas Facility to conform to the public improvement. 
15.5.2 The City shall avoid the need for moving or changing a Gas Facility whenever reasonably possible, as determined by the city manager or administrator, or his or her designee. In the event federal, state or other funds are available and budgeted in whole or in part for utility relocating purposes, City shall apply for these funds and Grantee will be reimbursed to the extent any such funds are actually obtained. 
5.5.3 When removal or relocation of a Gas Facility is required for the convenience or benefit of any Person other than the City, Grantee shall be entitled to reimbursement for the reasonable cost thereof from that Person. 
5.5.4 If Grantee shall fail to relocate or remove any Gas Facility as requested by the City by the date established by the City, the City may cause the Gas Facility to be removed by qualified contractors at Grantee's sole expense. Upon receipt of a demand for payment from the City, Grantee shall promptly reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred. 
5.6  Damage to Right-of-Way. Whenever the installation, operation, Maintenance, removal, reinstallation, replacement or relocation of Gas Facilities damages or disturbs the Right-of-Way, Grantee, at its sole cost and expense, shall promptly repair and return the Right-of-Way to the condition it was in before it was damaged or disturbed, as approved by the City. If Grantee does not repair the Right-of-Way as just described, then the City may, upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to Grantee, repair the Right-of-Way at Grantee's sole expense. Upon the receipt of a demand for payment from the City, Grantee shall promptly reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred. 
5.7  Safety. Grantee shall insure that all work performed in the Right-of-Way is performed in a manner that ensures safety of workers and the public. 
Section 6. General Financial, Liability and Insurance Provisions. 
6.1 Insurance. 
6.1.1 Grantee shall maintain public liability and property damage insurance that protects Grantee and the City, as well as the City's officers, agents, and employees, from the claims referred to in section 6. 
2.  The insurance shall provide coverage at all times of not less than $1,000,000 for personal injury to each person, $2,000,000 for each occurrence, and $500,000 for each occurrence involving property damages, plus costs of defense; or a single limit policy of not less than $2,000,000 covering all claims per occurrence, plus costs of defense. The insurance policies may provide for self-retention or deductibles in reasonable amounts. The limits of the insurance shall be subject to statutory changes as to maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the State of Oregon during the term of this Franchise. 
6.1.2 The insurance shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing and shall name as additional insureds the City and its officers, agents, and employees. Notwithstanding the naming of additional insureds, the insurance shall protect each insured in the same manner as though a separate policy had been issued to each, but nothing in this section 6.1.2 shall operate to increase the insurer's liability as set forth elsewhere in the policy beyond the amount or amounts for which the insurer would have been liable if only one person or interest had been named as insured. The coverage must apply as to claims between insureds on the policy. 
6.1.3 The insurance shall provide that the insurance shall not be canceled or materially altered without thirty (30) days' prior written notice first being given to the City. If the insurance is canceled or materially altered within the term of this Franchise, Grantee shall provide a replacement policy with the same terms. Grantee shall maintain continuous uninterrupted coverage, in the terms and amounts required, upon and after the effective date of this Franchise. 
6.2 Indemnification. 
6.2.1 Grantee hereby agrees and covenants to indemnify, defend, and hold the City, its officers, agents, and employees harmless from any claims for injury, damage, loss, liability, cost or expense, including court and appeal costs and attorney fees or expenses, arising from any casualty or accident to person or property by reason of any act done under this Franchise, by or for Grantee, its agents or employees, or by reason of any neglect or omission of Grantee to keep its Gas Facilities in a safe condition, but not if arising out of or by reason of any negligence or willful misconduct by the City, its officers, agents or employees. 
6.2.2 The City shall provide Grantee with prompt notice of any such claim, which Grantee shall defend with counsel of the City's choosing, and no settlement or compromise of any such claim will be done by the City without the prior written approval of Grantee. Grantee and its agents, contractors and others shall consult and cooperate with the City while conducting its defense. 
Section 7. Books of Account and Reports. The Grantee shall keep accurate books of account at an office in Oregon for the purpose of determining the amounts due to the City under section 3 of this Franchise. Authorized representatives of the City may inspect the books of account at any time during business hours and may audit the books from time to time. Except as provided herein, any audit shall be at the expense of City. If an audit of the records determines that franchise fees have been underpaid by three percent (3%) or more, Grantee shall reimburse the City for the total cost of the audit within thirty (30) days of City's written demand for reimbursement. The City may require periodic reports from the Grantee relating to its operations and revenues within the City Limits. The City shall treat any public record relating to Grantee's operations or revenues as confidential, subject to the provisions of state law and the Oregon Public Records Law. 
Section 8. Supplying Maps Upon Request. The Grantee shall maintain on file, at an office in Oregon, maps and operational data pertaining to its operations in the City Limits. Upon reasonable notice, authorized representatives of the City may inspect the maps and data at any time during business hours at a Coos County office of Grantee. Grantee and the City may determine that the location of certain Gas Facilities should be confidential as the public interest may require. In such a case, Grantee is under no obligation to provide records of the location of these facilities to City and the City shall treat any public record disclosing the location of these facilities as confidential, subject to the provisions of state law and the Oregon Public Records Law. The City shall limit access to any such confidential record to trustworthy employees of the City with a need to know the information set out in the record. The City shall store any such confidential record in a secure and private place and avoid making and distributing copies of the record. 
Section 9. Notices. 
9.1  Manner. All notices that shall or may be given pursuant to this Franchise shall be in writing and delivered personally or transmitted (a) through the United States mail, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid; (b) by means of prepaid overnight delivery service; or (c) by facsimile or e-mail transmission, if a hard copy of the same is followed by delivery through the United States mail or by overnight delivery service as just described and there is written confirmation of the facsimile or e-mail, addressed as follows: 
If to the City: City of Coquille 
99 East Second Street 
Coquille, OR 97423 
Attention: ____________ 
If to Grantee: NW Natural 
220 NW Second Avenue 
Portland, Oregon 97209 
Attention: Franchise Manager 
9.2  Date of Notices; Changing Notice Address. Notices shall be deemed effective upon receipt in the case of personal delivery, three (3) days after deposit in the mail, or one business day after in the case of facsimile, e-mail, or overnight delivery. Either party may from time to time designate other addresses for providing notice, if the change of address is provided in writing and delivered in the manner set forth above. 
Section 10. Forfeiture and Remedies. 
10.1  Forfeiture. The City may terminate this Franchise as provided in this section, subject to Grantee's right to a court review of the reasonableness of such action, upon the willful failure of Grantee to comply promptly and completely with each and every material term, condition or obligation imposed upon Grantee by this Franchise. 
10.2  Notice and Opportunity to Cure. The City shall give Grantee ninety (90) days' prior written notice of its intent to exercise its rights under Section 10.1, stating the reasons for declaring a forfeiture. If Grantee cures the stated reason within the ninety (90) day notice period, or if Grantee initiates efforts to remedy the stated reason and, to the City's satisfaction, the efforts continue in good faith, the City shall not exercise its right to terminate the Franchise by forfeiture. If Grantee fails to cure the stated reason within the ninety (90) day notice period, or if Grantee does not undertake and/or maintain efforts to remedy the stated reason to the City's satisfaction, then the City may declare the Franchise forfeited and terminate the Franchise. In no event shall the City exercise its rights under this section if a bona fide, good-faith dispute exists between the City and Grantee. 
10.3  Remedies Not Exclusive. All remedies and penalties under this Franchise, including termination of the Franchise, are cumulative, and the recovery or enforcement of one is not a bar to the recovery or enforcement of any other such remedy of penalty. The remedies and penalties contained in this Franchise, including termination of the Franchise, are not exclusive and the City reserves the right to enforce the penal provisions of any ordinance or resolution and to avail itself of any and all remedies available at law or in equity. Failure to enforce shall not be construed as a waiver of a breach of any term, condition or obligation imposed upon the Grantee by or pursuant to this Franchise. In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the City shall consider the nature of the violation, the person or persons burdened by the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further such violation, and any other matters the City deems appropriate. 
Section 11. Assignment. This Franchise shall not be assigned or transferred without the prior written consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed, provided the Franchise is transferred or assigned to an entity that controls, is controlled by, or is under the common control of the Grantee. If the City consents to an assignment or transfer of the Franchise, the transfer or assignment shall not be effective until the assignee or transferee has complied with the requirements in section 6 and filed a signed acceptance of the terms of this Franchise. Notwithstanding anything in this Franchise to the contrary, Grantee may mortgage this Franchise, together with its Gas Utility System and properties within the City Limits, in order to secure any legal bond issue or other indebtedness of Grantee, with no requirement that the trustees accept this Franchise. 
Section 12. Expiration. At the end of the Franchise term, or termination of the Franchise under sections 2.2 or 3.6, if the City and Grantee are negotiating another franchise and have not concluded their negotiations, Grantee's rights and responsibilities shall be controlled by this Franchise until the City grants a new franchise and Grantee accepts it. 
Section 13. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
13.1  Waiver of Breach. The waiver by either party of any breach or violation of any provision of this Franchise shall not be deemed to be a waiver or a continuing waiver of any subsequent breach or violation of the same or any other provision of this Franchise. 
13.2  Severability of Provisions. If any one or more of the provisions of this Franchise is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable or preempted by federal or state laws or regulations, such provision(s) shall be deemed severable from the remaining provisions of this Franchise and shall not affect the legality, validity, or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this Franchise to the extent consistent with the original intent of the parties. 
13.3  Governing Law and Choice of Forum. This Franchise shall be governed and construed by and in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon without reference to its conflicts of law principles. If suit is brought by a party to this Franchise, the parties agree that trial of such action shall be vested exclusively in the state courts of Oregon, County of Coos, or in the United States District Court for the District of Oregon. 
13.4  Representations and Warranties. Each of the parties to this Franchise represents and warrants that it has the full right, power, legal capacity, and authority to enter into and perform the parties' respective obligations hereunder and that such obligations shall be binding upon such party without the requirement of the approval or consent of any other person or entity in connection herewith. 
13.5  No Third Party Beneficiaries. Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed or applied to create rights in or grant remedies to any third party as a beneficiary of this Franchise or any duty or obligation established in this Franchise. 
13.6  Independent Contractor Status. When performing under this Franchise, Grantee shall be an independent contractor and not an agent, employee or representative of the City in the performance of work pursuant to this Franchise. No term or provision of this Franchise, or act of the Grantee or its agents shall be construed as changing that status. 
13.7  Amendment of Franchise. This Franchise may not be amended, except pursuant to a written instrument signed by Grantee and approved by the Coquille City Council. 
13.8  Acceptance. Within thirty (30) days after the Council adopts this Franchise Ordinance or the Mayor signs the Franchise Ordinance, whichever is earlier, Grantee shall file with the City Recorder a written unconditional acceptance of this Franchise. If Grantee fails to file its acceptance, this Franchise Ordinance shall be void, unless the City grants Grantee an extension of time. 
13.9  Notice of Change in Compensation. City shall provide Grantee at least 30 days notice prior to the effective date of this Franchise Ordinance before any increase in the Franchise Fee may take effect. 
13.10  Entire Agreement. This Franchise contains the entire understanding between the parties with respect to the subject matter herein. There are no representations, agreements, or understandings (whether oral or written) between or among the parties relating to the subject matter of this Franchise that are not fully expressed herein. 
Section 14. Emergency Clause. Inasmuch as it is necessary for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the people of the City of Coquille that this ordinance be immediately effective, so that the provisions of the Franchise can take effect at the earliest opportunity, an emergency is hereby declared to exist and this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the City Council and approval by the Mayor. 
PASSED by the City Council this 1 day of July, 2002. 
Signed and Approved by the Mayor this 1 day of July, 2002. 
____________ 
Mike Swindall, Mayor ATTEST: ____________ 
Sherri Flora, City Recorder  
ACCEPTANCE: 
    The terms and conditions of the foregoing Franchise and Ordinance No. 1436 are hereby accepted this 6th day of August, 2002. 
NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS CORPORATION 
By:  ____________ 
Mark Dodson, President 
ATTEST: 
By: ____________ , 
____________ Corporate Secretary 
This Acceptance was received by the City of Coquille on 12/16, 2002. 
____________ 
Sherri Flora, City Recorder 
ORDINANCE NO. 1464 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO CITY OF COQUILLE AN OREGON CORPORATION, A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AND RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A FIBER-BASED SERVICE FACILITY; TO OCCUPY CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY; AND TO PROVIDE FIBER-BASED SERVICES IN THE CITY OF COQUILLE, OREGON. 
THE CITY OF COQUILLE ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. Definitions - as used in this ordinance: 
"City" means City of Coquille, Oregon. 
"Grantee" means ComSpan Bandon, the grantee of rights under this franchise, including its successors or assigns. 
"Council" means the City Council of the City of Coquille, Oregon. 
"Facilities" means the conduits, cables, poles, wires, fixtures, underground lines, and appurtenances thereto, including other technical Facilities necessary for the purpose of providing voice and video services. 
"Gross revenues" means all revenues earned by the Grantee in the delivery of voice and video services within the City of Coquille, and is further defined in Section 9. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company or organization of any kind. 
"Rights of way" include streets, roads, highway, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, and public utility easements, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas. This definition applies only to the extent of the City's right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such areas for siting telecommunications facilities. "Rights of way" excludes other property owned by the City, such as parks or public buildings. 
"Ultimate consumer" means any entity that obtains services transmitted over Grantee's Facilities for its own use by any means, including purchase, lease or direct receipt of such services. 
Section 2. Grant of Authority. City grants to Grantee the right and privilege, subject to all City of Coquille ordinances, policies, rules and regulations, to construct, install, maintain and operate over, in, on and under the present and future City rights of way of the City of Coquille, Facilities necessary for the purpose of providing fiber-based services. This franchise is not exclusive, and City reserves the right to grant a similar privilege to any other Person at any time during the period of this franchise. This grant is further subject to all prior rights, interests, agreements, permits easements or licenses granted by the City, and to the City's right to use the rights of way for any purpose it deems fit, including the same or similar purposes allowed Grantee hereunder. 
Section 3. Compliance with Laws, Rules and Regulations. The locations and methods of installation and maintenance of all Grantee's Facilities shall be subject at all times to regulation by the City (including City's ordinances and policies on street cuts and use of right-of-way), and all such Facilities shall be so constructed and maintained as to interfere as little as practicable with street or other traffic. Nothing herein however shall be construed to change or modify any applicable Oregon law regarding Grantee's ability to recover costs for any relocation of its Facilities. All of such Facilities shall be installed and at all times maintained by Grantee in accordance with industry standards. Grantee shall change the location of or remove any pole, conduit, structure or Facility within the public right of way when the City determines that the public convenience requires such changes or removal. The expense of said change shall be paid by Grantee. 
Section 4. Grantee Liability, Indemnification of City and Insurance. 
1. Grantee shall at all times conduct its operations under this franchise, including installation, construction or maintenance of its Facilities, in a safe and workmanlike manner so as not to present a danger to the public or City. 
2. Grantee shall defend, save harmless and indemnify City from any loss or claim against City on account of or in connection with any activity of Grantee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its Facilities. 
3. This franchise shall not be effective until Grantee secures, and shall at all times be conditioned upon Grantee maintaining, a comprehensive liability insurance policy which shall contain the following provisions: 
a. Grantee shall obtain, at Grantee's expense, and keep in effect at all times during the term of this franchise, public liability and property damage insurance that protects Grantee and the City, as well as the City's officers, agents, and employees, from claims arising from claims referred to in section 4.2. The insurance shall provide coverage at all times of not less than $2,000,000 for personal injury to each person, $4,000,000 for each occurrence, and $1,000,000 for each occurrence involving property damages, plus cost of defense; or a single limit policy of not less than $4,000,000 covering all claims per occurrence, plus cost of defense. The insurance policies may provide for self-retention or deductibles in reasonable amounts. The limits of the insurance shall be subject to statutory changes as to the maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the State of Oregon during the term of this Franchise. 
b. Grantee, and its subcontractors, if any, will comply with the Oregon Worker's Compensation Law at all times. 
c. City, its officers, directors, and employees shall be added as additional insured with respect to all policies. All commercial general liability insurance policies will be endorsed to show this additional coverage. Grantee will require that its insurance carrier give the City 30 days written notice of any change in insurance coverage. 
d. There shall be no cancellation, material change, exhaustion of aggregate limits, or intent not to renew insurance coverage without 30 days written notice to City. Any failure to comply with this provision will not affect the insurance coverage provided to City. The 30 days notice of cancellation provision shall be physically endorsed on the policy. 
e. Coverages provided by Grantee must be underwritten by an insurance company deemed acceptable by City. City reserves the right to reject all or any insurance carrier(s) with an unacceptable financial rating or not authorized to transact business in Oregon. 
f. As evidence of the insurance coverage required by this franchise, Grantee shall furnish a Certificate of Insurance to City. This franchise shall not be in effect until the required certificates have been received and approved by City. The Certificate will specify and document all provisions within this franchise. A renewal certificate will be sent to City 10 days prior to coverage expiration. 
4. In the event that City's tort liability limits are raised by law, Grantee shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amount of two-times the City's tort liability limits as they are amended. 
Section 5. Conditions on Right of Way Occupancy. 
1.  Use. Grantee shall construct, install, maintain and operate its Facilities in designated City rights of way to the industry standard and City's satisfaction, in compliance with all City ordinances, rules, policies and regulations; and in a manner so as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways or places. 
2.  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing by Grantee, Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping or surface of any street or alley disturbed. If Grantee fails to make restoration as required, City may cause the repairs to be made at the expense of Grantee. 
3.  Relocation. Except as provided below, if the removal or relocation of Facilities is caused directly by an identifiable development of property and the removal or relocation of Facilities occurs within the area to be developed, or is made for the convenience of a customer, Grantee may charge the expense of removal or relocation to the developer or customer. Grantee shall be solely responsible for enforcing collection from the developer or customer. City may require Grantee to relocate its Facilities. If the removal or relocation of Facilities results from City's need to provide public Facilities, is a City project, or is otherwise requested by City and is made for the purpose of improving a street to City standards or other improvement for the benefit of the public, Grantee will remove or relocate its Facilities at Grantee's expense within a reasonable time frame after notification by City. In cases of capital improvement projects undertaken by City, Grantee shall convert existing overhead distribution Facilities to underground at Grantee's expense if requested to do so by City. City agrees to comply with provisions of applicable law when requiring such conversion. 
4.  Placement of Facilities. Grantee shall not place its Facilities where they will interfere with any existing or future City utility, gas, electric or telephone fixture, power, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water facility. Grantee will consult with City's Public Works Department prior to placement of Facilities, and will comply with all City ordinances, policies, rules and regulations in connection with its placement of Facilities. Whenever all existing electric utilities, cable facilities and telecommunications facilities are located underground with in a public right of way of the City, Grantee must also locate and relocate its facilities underground. 
5.  Temporary Rearrangement of Facilities. Grantee shall, consistent with City policies, ordinances, rules and regulations, arrange to temporarily raise, lower, or otherwise move its Facilities to permit the moving of buildings or other objects if the Person wishing to move the building or other object makes a reasonable arrangement to reimburse Grantee for its expenses in rearranging its Facilities. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude City from requiring Grantee to move its Facilities at its own expense when public convenience requires the move, as described in Subsections 3 and 4 of this section. 
Section 6. Transfer of Franchise. Grantee shall not sell, assign, dispose of, lease or transfer in any manner whatsoever any interest in this franchise or in the Facilities authorized by this franchise, or any part of the Facilities, without prior written approval of City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The City may impose reasonable conditions on its approval of any transfer, including but not limited to the requirement that the transferee acknowledge in writing and agree to be bound by the terms of this Franchise. City shall have the right to collect from Grantee City's actual administrative costs associated with processing a transfer request, including the cost of ascertaining the financial responsibility of the proposed transferee. 
Section 7. City Rights in Franchise. 
1.  City Supervision and Inspection. City shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation of Grantee's Facilities subject to the provisions of this franchise and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with governing laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
2.  Termination or Abandonment of Franchise. Upon any termination of this franchise, all Facilities installed or used by Grantee shall be removed by Grantee at Grantee's expense and the property upon which the Facilities were used restored by Grantee to the condition it was in before installation except that City or its designee shall have the following options after termination of this franchise: 
a. City or its designee may elect to acquire the Facilities for their fair market value consistent with any applicable law; and 
b. Value shall be determined by an appraiser who is mutually acceptable to City and Grantee. In the event that City and grantee are unable to agree on a single appraiser, then the City and grantee shall each appoint an appraiser, and those two appraisers shall select a third appraiser. The opinion of any two appraisers shall be determinative of the value of the Facilities. 
c. City agrees to provide Grantee with written notice of its intention to acquire Grantee's Facilities pursuant to this section within 120 days after termination of this franchise by City, or City's declaration of Facilities abandonment by Grantee, with the closing of the acquisition to occur as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
3.  City Connection to Facilities. In addition to City's other rights in this franchise, and so long as Grantee has sufficient capacity on its Facilities that is not being used by a paying customer at that time, City shall have the right to obtain voice and television services from Grantee at the Grantee's most favorable rate applicable to those services. In addition to the above, Grantee shall provide without charge to City, one service outlet activated for data at a speed of not less than 7 Mpbs. Said connection and outlet shall be at City Hall 851 N. Central Nothing in this subsection shall affect Grantee's obligation to pay franchise fees to the City under Section 9 of this Ordinance. 
Section 8. Franchise Fee. 
1. Grantee shall pay monthly to City the sum of 5% of Grantee's gross revenues earned in the delivery of basic voice services and video services within the corporate limits of the City to parties. Grantee also may at its option deduct uncollectible accounts of customers within the corporate limits of City from these gross revenues. 
2. The fee required by this section shall be due and payable within 60 days after the end of each applicable calendar month. Any payment not made when due shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per annum, compounded monthly, from the date due until paid. 
3. With each payment, Grantee shall furnish City with a written statement, under oath, executed by an officer of Grantee, verifying the amount of gross revenues of Grantee within City for the monthly period covered by payment computed on the basis set out in Subsection 1 of this section. 
4. City's acceptance of any payments due under this section shall not be considered a waiver by City of any breach of this franchise. 
5. Grantee agrees and covenants that it will not challenge the validity of the franchise fees under this ordinance as long as they do not exceed the maximum amounts established by applicable statutes. 
Section 9. Grantee Records and Reports. 
1. Grantee shall keep accurate books of financial accounts at an office within the State of Oregon throughout the term of this franchise. Grantee shall produce all books and records directly concerning its gross revenues and other financial information deemed necessary by City for purposes of calculation of the franchise fee for inspection by City, upon no less than 10 days prior written notice, during normal working hours. City may require periodic reports from Grantee relating to its operation within City. City shall have the right during the term of this franchise or within 180 days thereafter to conduct audits of Grantee's records. Such audits shall be undertaken by a qualified person or entity selected by City. The cost of any such audit shall be borne by City, unless the results of any such audit reveal an underpayment of more than 8% of the franchise fee for the period audited. In the case of such underpayment, the full cost of such audit shall be paid by Grantee. Grantee shall immediately pay the amount of the underpayment as determined by such audit to City together with 12% per annum interest from the date such payment should have been made to the date the payment is actually made. 
2. Any audit information obtained by City under these provisions shall be kept confidential to the maximum extent allowed by Oregon law, except that this obligation shall not prevent the City from introducing audit results in any forum where enforcement of the provisions of this franchise is at issue. 
Section 10. Permit and Inspection Fees. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit the right of City to require Grantee to pay reasonable costs incurred by City in connection with the issuance of a franchise or permit, making an inspection, or performing any other service for or in connection with Grantee or its Facilities, whether pursuant to this ordinance or any other ordinance or regulation now in effect or hereafter adopted by City. 
Section 11. Enforcement and Termination of Franchise for Violation. 
1.  Default: Time of payment and performance are of the essence in the franchise. The following shall be events of default: 
a.  Default in Payments. The failure of Grantee to pay City when due any amounts required by the franchise and such failure continues for a period of 10 days after the due date. 
b.  Default in Other Covenants. The failure of Grantee to perform any of the covenants and conditions required herein to be kept and performed by Grantee, and such failure continues for a period of 30 days after notice from City of such failure. If the same failure occurs within 24 months of the initial notice, City may terminate the franchise without further opportunity to cure. 
2.  Termination. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, this franchise may be terminated at the option of City by notice in writing to Grantee given within 30 days of the date of default. If this franchise is not terminated by election of City, Grantee shall pay to City the sum of $200 per day for each day the default continues along with any additional damages suffered by City as a result of Grantee's default. 
Section 12. Remedies not Exclusive; Waiver. All remedies under this ordinance, including termination of franchise, are cumulative, and recovery or enforcement of one is not a bar to the recovery or enforcement of any other remedy. Remedies contained in this ordinance, including termination of the franchise, are not exclusive and City reserves the right to enforce penal provisions of any ordinance and also use any remedy available to City at law or in equity. Failure to enforce any provision of this ordinance shall not be construed as a waiver of a breach of any other term, condition or obligation of this ordinance. 
Section 13. Franchise Term. This franchise is granted for a term of five years beginning on the date on which this franchise ordinance is approved. City agrees to renegotiate in good faith a renewal of this franchise for a similar term if this franchise is not in default at its expiration. 
Section 14. Acceptance of Franchise. Within 30 days from the effective date of this ordinance, Grantee shall file with the City Recorder a written unconditional acceptance of this franchise executed by its duly authorized representative and all of its terms and conditions, and if it fails to do so, this ordinance shall be void and of no effect. 
Section 15. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or rendered unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portion thereof. If for any reason, the franchise fee is invalidated or amended by the act of any court or governmental agency, then the highest reasonable franchise fee allowed by such court or other governmental agency shall be the franchise fee charged by this ordinance. 
Section 16. Notices. Any notice required or permitted under this franchise shall be deemed given when received or when deposited with postage prepaid in the United States Mail as registered or certified mail addressed as follows: 
TO CITY: TO GRANTEE: ________________________________________ 
or to such other address as may be specified from time to time by either parties in writing. 
Section 17. Interpretation/Jurisdiction. This franchise shall be deemed to have been entered into in Coos County, Oregon. Jurisdiction of any dispute shall be in the circuit court of the State of Oregon, and venue shall be in Coos County, Oregon. Interpretation of the franchise shall be governed by laws of the State of Oregon. 
Passed by the Common Council and approved by the Mayor, August 6, 2007. 
CITY OF COQUILLE ____________ 
Steve Britton, Mayor ATTEST: ____________ ____________ 
William C. Dufner, City Recorder 
City of Coquille  
ORDINANCE 1476 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1252 ENACTED MAY 15, 1989, AN ENTITLED "GRANTING KARL J. WADSWORTH DBS WADSWORTH GARBAGE DISPOSAL EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO COLLECT GARBAGE IN THE CITY OF COQUILLE, INCLUDING DEFINITIONS, GARBAGE COLLECTION RATES, PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE; AND REPEALING ALL PRIOR FRANCHISES FOR GARBAGE COLLECTION"; BY AMENDING SAID ORDINANCE TO GRANT SAID FRANCHISE FOR A PERIOD OF TEN (10) YEARS, BEGINNING JULY 1, 2009. 
The City of Coquille ordains as follows: 
    Section 1. Ordinance No. 1252 enacted May 15, 1989, is hereby amended to grant an additional five (10) years of franchise exclusivity, beginning July 1, 2009. 
    Adopted by a majority vote of the Common Council taken by ayes and neys this 6th day of July, 2009. 
APPROVED: ____________ 
  Steve Britton, Mayor 
ATTEST: ____________ ____________ 
   William C. Dufner, City Recorder 
ORDINANCE 1479 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AN ELECTRIC UTILITY FRANCHISE AND GENERAL UTILITY EASEMENT TO PACIFICORP 
    WHEREAS, PacifiCorp d.b.a. Pacific Power, is a regulated public utility that provides electric power and energy to the citizens of the City of Coquille (the "City") and other surrounding areas; 
    WHEREAS, providing electrical power and energy requires the installation, operation and maintenance of power poles and other related facilities to be located within the public ways of the City; 
    WHEREAS, the City desires to set forth the terms and conditions by which PacifiCorp shall use the public ways of the City; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the City: 
SECTION 1. Grant of Franchise and General Utility Easement. The City hereby grants to PacifiCorp the right, privilege and authority to construct, maintain, operate, upgrade, and relocate its electrical distribution and transmission lines and related appurtenances, including underground conduits and structures, poles, towers, wires, guy anchors, vaults, transformers, transmission lines, and communication lines (collectively referred to herein as "Electric Facilities") in, under, along, over and across the present and future streets, alleys, public ways and public places (collectively referred to herein as "Public Ways") within the City, for the purpose of supplying and transmitting electric power and energy to the inhabitants of the City thereof. 
SECTION 2. Term . The term of this Franchise and General Utility Easement is for ten (10) years commencing on the date of acceptance by the Company as set forth in Section 3 below. 
SECTION 3. Acceptance by PacifiCorp . Within sixty (60) days after the passage of this ordinance by the City, PacifiCorp shall file an unqualified written acceptance thereof, with the City Recorder otherwise the ordinance and the rights granted herein shall be null and void. 
SECTION 4. Non-Exclusive Franchise . The right to use and occupy the Public Ways of the City shall be nonexclusive and the City reserves the right to use the Public Ways for itself or any other entity; provided, however, that such use shall not unreasonably interfere with PacifiCorp's Electric Facilities or PacifiCorp's rights granted herein. 
SECTION 5. City Regulatory Authority . In addition to the provision herein contained, the City reserves the right to adopt such additional ordinances and regulations as may be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their properties or exercise any other rights, powers, or duties required or authorized, under the Constitution of the State of Oregon, the laws of Oregon or City Ordinances. 
SECTION 6. Indemnification . The City shall in no way be liable or responsible for any loss or damage to property or any injury to, or death, of any person that may occur in the construction, operation or maintenance by PacifiCorp of its Electric Facilities. PacifiCorp shall indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from and against claims, demands, liens and all liability or damage of whatsoever kind on account of PacifiCorp's use of the Public Ways within the City, and shall pay the costs of defense plus reasonable attorneys' fees for any claim, demand or lien brought thereunder. The City shall: (a) give prompt written notice to PacifiCorp of any claim, demand or lien with respect to which the City seeks indemnification hereunder; and (b) permit PacifiCorp to assume the defense of such claim, demand, or lien. If such defense is not assumed by PacifiCorp, PacifiCorp shall not be subject to liability for any settlement made without its consent. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the City harmless to the extent any claim, demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent or willful act or failure to act of the City or any of its officers or employees. 
SECTION 7. Annexation . 
    7.1 Extension of City Limits. Upon the annexation of any territory to the City, the rights granted herein shall extend to the annexed territory to the extent the City has such authority. All Electrical Facilities owned, maintained, or operated by PacifiCorp located within any public ways of the annexed territory shall thereafter be subject to all of the terms hereof. 
    7.2 Annexation. When any territory is approved for annexation to the City, the City shall, not later than ten (10) working days after passage of an ordinance approving the proposed annexation, provide by certified mail to PacifiCorp: (a) each site address to be annexed as recorded on county assessment and tax rolls; (b) a legal description of the proposed boundary change; and (c) a copy of the City's ordinance approving the proposed annexation. The notice shall be mailed to: 
PacifiCorp Customer Contact Center 
Attn: Annexations 
P.O. Box 400 
Portland, Oregon 97207-0400 
With a copy to: 
PacifiCorp 
Attn: Office of the General Counsel 
825 N.E. Multnomah, Suite 2000 
Portland, Oregon 97232 
    Additional or increased fees or taxes, other than ad valorem taxes, imposed on PacifiCorp as a result of an annexation of territory to the City shall become effective on the effective date of the annexation if notice is given to PacifiCorp by certified mail not later than ten (10) working days after the effective date of the annexation. However, if notification of the effective date of the annexation is provided to PacifiCorp later than the tenth (10 th ) working day after the effective date of the annexation, the additional or increased fees or taxes will become effective on the date of the notification. This provision shall be subject to any amendment of ORS 222.005. 
SECTION 8. Planning, Design, Construction and Installation of Company Facilities . 
    8.1 All Electrical Facilities installed or used under authority of this Franchise shall be used, constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable federal, state and city laws, codes and regulations. 
    8.2 Except in the case of an emergency, PacifiCorp shall, prior to commencing new construction or reconstruction work in the public way or street or other public places, apply for a permit from the City which permit shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed. PacifiCorp will abide by all applicable ordinances and all reasonable rules, regulations and requirements of the City, and the City may inspect the manner of such work and require remedies as may be reasonably necessary to assure compliance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to obtain a permit to perform emergency repairs. 
    8.3 All Electric Facilities shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the Public Ways of the City and shall be constructed, installed, maintained, cleared of vegetation, renovated or replaced in accordance with applicable rules, ordinances and regulations of the City. 
    8.4 If, during the course of work on its Electrical Facilities, PacifiCorp causes damage to or alters the Public Way or public property, PacifiCorp shall (at its own cost and expense and in a manner reasonably approved by the City) replace and restore it to a condition comparable to that which existed before the work commenced. 
    8.5 In addition to the installation of underground electric distribution lines as provided by applicable state law and regulations, PacifiCorp shall, upon payment of all charges provided in its tariffs or their equivalent, place newly constructed electric distribution lines underground as may be required by City ordinance. 
    8.6 The City shall have the right without cost to use all poles and suitable overhead structures owned by PacifiCorp within Public Ways for City wires used in connection with its fire alarms, police signal systems, or other public safety communication lines used for governmental purposes; provided, however, any such uses shall be for activities owned, operated or used by the City for a public purpose and shall not include the provision of CATV, internet, or similar services to the public. Provided further, that PacifiCorp shall assume no liability nor shall it incur, directly or indirectly, any additional expense in connection therewith, and the use of said poles and structures by the City shall be in such a manner as to prevent safety hazards or interferences with PacifiCorp's use of same. Nothing herein shall be construed to require PacifiCorp to increase pole size, or alter the manner in which PacifiCorp attaches its equipment to poles, or alter the manner in which it operates and maintains its Electric Facilities. City attachments shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the reasonable requirements of PacifiCorp and the current edition of the National Electrical Safety Code pertaining to such construction. Further, City attachments shall be attached or installed only after written approval by PacifiCorp in conjunction with PacifiCorp's standard pole attachment application process. PacifiCorp shall have the right to inspect, at the City's expense, such attachments to ensure compliance with this Section 8.6 and to require the City to remedy any defective attachments. 
    8.7 PacifiCorp shall have the right to excavate the Public Rights of Ways subject to reasonable conditions and requirements of the City. Before installing new underground conduits or replacing existing underground conduits, PacifiCorp shall first notify the City of such work by written notice and shall allow the City, at its own expense (to include a pro rata share of the trenching costs), to share the trench of PacifiCorp to lay its own conduit therein, provided that such action by the City will not unreasonably interfere with PacifiCorp's Electrical Facilities or delay project completion. 
    8.8 Before commencing any street improvements or other work within a Public Way that may affect PacifiCorp's Electric Facilities, the City shall give written notice to PacifiCorp. 
    8.9 No structures, buildings or signs shall be erected below PacifiCorp's facilities or in a location that prevents PacifiCorp from accessing or maintaining its facilities. 
SECTION 9. Relocation of Electric Facilities . 
    9.1 The City reserves the right to require PacifiCorp to relocate overhead Electric Facilities within the Public Ways in the interest of public convenience, necessity, health, safety or welfare at no cost to the City. Within a reasonable period of time after written notice, PacifiCorp shall promptly commence the overhead relocation of its Electrical Facilities. Before requiring a relocation of Electric Facilities, the City shall, with the assistance and consent of PacifiCorp, identify a reasonable alignment for the relocated Electric Facilities within the Public Ways of the City. The City shall assign or otherwise transfer to Company all right it may have to recover the cost for the relocation work and shall support the efforts of PacifiCorp to obtain reimbursement. In cases of capital improvement projects undertaken by the City, PacifiCorp shall convert existing overhead distribution facilities to underground, so long as PacifiCorp is allowed to collect the costs associated with conversion from overhead to underground distribution facilities consistent with OAR 860-022-0046, the Oregon Public Utility Commission rule on forced conversions. 
    9.2 PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to pay the cost of any relocation that is required or made a condition of a private development. If the removal or relocation of facilities is caused directly or otherwise by an identifiable development of property in the area, or is made for the convenience of a customer, PacifiCorp may charge the expense of removal or relocation to the developer or customer. For example, PacifiCorp shall not be required to pay relocation costs in connection with a road widening or realignment where the road project is made a condition of or caused by a private development. In such event, the City shall require the developer to pay PacifiCorp for such relocation costs as part of its approval procedures. 
SECTION 10. Subdivision Plat Notification . Before the City approves any new subdivision and before recordation of the plat, the City shall mail notification of such approval and a copy of the plat to PacifiCorp: 
PacifiCorp 
Attn: Property Management/Right-of-Way Department 
825 N.E. Multnomah, Suite 1700 
Portland, Oregon 97232 
SECTION 11. Vegetation Management . PacifiCorp or its contractor may prune all trees and vegetation which overhang the Public Ways, whether such trees or vegetation originate within or outside the Public Ways, to prevent the branches or limbs or other part of such trees or vegetation from interfering with PacifiCorp's Electrical Facilities. Such pruning shall comply with the American National Standard for Tree Care Operation (ANSI A300) and be conducted under the direction of an arborist certified with the International Society of Arboriculture. A growth inhibitor treatment may be used for trees and vegetation species that are fast-growing and problematic. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent PacifiCorp, when necessary and with the approval of the owner of the property on which they may be located, from cutting down and removing any trees which overhang streets. 
SECTION 12. Compensation . 
    12.1 In consideration of the rights, privileges, and franchise hereby granted, PacifiCorp shall pay to the City from and after the effective date of the acceptance of this franchise, five percent (5%) of its gross revenues derived from within the corporate limits of City. The term "gross revenue" as used herein shall be construed to mean any revenue of PacifiCorp derived from the retail sale and use of electric power and energy within the municipal boundaries of the City after adjustment for the net write-off of uncollectible accounts and corrections of bills theretofore rendered. All amounts paid under this Section 12 shall be subject to review by the City; provided that only payments which occurred during a period of thirty-six (36) months prior to the date the City notifies PacifiCorp of its intent to conduct a review shall be subject to such review. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, at any time during the term of this Franchise, the City may elect to increase the franchise fee amount as may then be allowed by state law. The City shall provide PacifiCorp with prior written notice of such increase following adoption of the change in percentage by the City. The increase shall be effective sixty (60) days after City has provided such written notice to PacifiCorp. 
    12.2 The franchise fee shall not be in addition to any other license, occupation, franchise or excise taxes or charges which might otherwise be levied or collected by the City from PacifiCorp with respect to PacifiCorp's electric business or the exercise of this franchise within the corporate limits of the City and the amount due to the City under any such other license, occupation, franchise or excise taxes or other charges for corresponding periods shall be reduced by deducting there from the amount of said franchise fee paid hereunder. 
SECTION 13. Renewal . At least 120 days prior to the expiration of this Franchise, PacifiCorp and the City either shall agree to extend the term of this Franchise for a mutually acceptable period of time or the parties shall use best faith efforts to renegotiate a replacement Franchise. PacifiCorp shall have the continued right to use the Public Ways of the City as set forth herein in the event an extension or replacement Franchise is not entered into upon expiration of this Franchise. 
SECTION 14. No Waiver . Neither the City nor PacifiCorp shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this Franchise by any failure of the other, or any of its officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions. 
SECTION 15. Transfer of Franchise . PacifiCorp shall not transfer or assign any rights under this Franchise to another entity, except transfers and assignments by operation of law, or to affiliates, parents or subsidiaries of PacifiCorp which assume all of PacifiCorp's obligations hereunder, unless the City shall first give its approval in writing, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed; provided, however PacifiCorp may assign, mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or otherwise transfer without consent its interest in this Franchise to any financing entity, or agent on behalf of any financing entity to whom PacifiCorp (1) has obligations for borrowed money or in respect of guaranties thereof, (ii) has obligations evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or similar instruments, or (iii) has obligations under or with respect to letters of credit, bankers acceptances and similar facilities or in respect of guaranties thereof. 
SECTION 16. Amendment . At any time during the term of this Franchise, the City, through its City Council, or PacifiCorp may propose amendments to this Franchise by giving thirty (30) days written notice to the other party of the proposed amendment(s) desired, and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will, within a reasonable time, negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon mutually satisfactory amendment(s). No amendment or amendments to this Franchise shall be effective until mutually agreed upon by the City and PacifiCorp and formally adopted as an ordinance amendment, which is accepted in writing by PacifiCorp. 
SECTION 17. Non-Contestability-Breach of Contract . 
    17.1 Neither the City nor PacifiCorp will take any action for the purpose of securing modification of this Franchise before either the Oregon Public Utility Commission or any Court of competent jurisdiction; provided, however, that neither shall be precluded from taking any action it deems necessary to resolve difference in interpretation of the Franchise nor shall PacifiCorp be precluded from seeking relief from the Courts in the event Oregon Public Utility Commission orders, rules or regulations conflict with or make performance under the Franchise illegal. 
    17.2 In the event PacifiCorp or the City fails to fulfill any of their respective obligations under this Franchise, the City, or PacifiCorp, whichever the case may be, will have a breach of contract claim and remedy against the other in addition to any other remedy provided by law, provided that no remedy which would have the effect of amending the specific provisions of this Franchise shall become effective without such action which would be necessary to formally amend the Franchise. 
SECTION 18. Notices . Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices from PacifiCorp to the City pursuant to or concerning this Franchise shall be delivered to the City Recorder's Office. Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices from the City to PacifiCorp pursuant to or concerning this Franchise shall be delivered to the Customer and Community Affairs Vice President, Pacific Power, 825 NE Multnomah, Lloyd Center Tower Suite 2000, Portland, Oregon 97232, and such other office as PacifiCorp may advise the City of by written notice. 
SECTION 19. Severability . If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, or superseded by other lawful authority including any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof or unconstitutional, illegal or invalid by any court of common jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the Franchise or any renewal or renewals thereof. 
PASSED and Approved by the Common Council of the City of Coquille, Oregon this 7 day of December, 2009. 
      Steve Britton, Mayor   ATTEST: 
      William C. Dufner, 
      City Recorder   ORDINANCE NO. 1485 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO LIGHTSPEED NETWORKS, INC., DBA "LS NETWORKS" AN OREGON CORPORATION, A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE & MAINTAIN A TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK WITHIN THE CITY OF COQUILLE OREGON, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS: Lightspeed Networks, Inc. dba LS Networks, an Oregon Corporation provides Telecommunications services within the City of COQUILLE, Oregon; and 
WHEREAS: Franchisee has applied for a Telecommunications Franchise pursuant to local ordinances relating to Telecommunications located in the public rights of way, and the City of COQUILLE "City" has reviewed said application and has determined that it meets the requirements of the City's Ordinance subject to the terms and conditions stated herein: 
NOW THEREFORE, THE CITY OF COQUILLE ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1: Definitions. 
Gross Revenues: Any and all revenue, of any kind, nature, or form, without deduction for expense in the City of COQUILLE and is further defined in Section 11. All such revenue remains subject to applicable FCC rules and regulations which exclude revenues from internet access services while prohibited by law. 
Rights-of-Way: the present and future streets, viaducts, elevated roadways, alleys, public highways and avenues in the City, including Rights-of-Way held in fee, or by virtue of an easement or dedication. 
Telecommunications: the transmission between and among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Telecommunications Network: infrastructure owned by Franchisee utilizing one or more facilities located within the City's Rights-of-Way, including, but not limited to, lines, poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduit, laterals, and other appurtenances, necessary and convenient to the provision of access to the Internet and Telecommunications service. 
Telecommunications Service: the offering of Telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities' uses. 
Section 2: Grant of Franchise. The City hereby grants to Franchisee, its successors and assigns as authorized herein, a nonexclusive right, privilege, authority and Franchise to erect, construct, operate, repair and maintain in, under, upon, along, across and over the City's Rights-of-Way, its lines, poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, laterals and other necessary and convenient fixtures and equipment, for the purposes of constructing, operating and maintaining a competitive Telecommunications network within the City. 
Section 3: Franchise Not Exclusive. The Franchise granted herein (the "Franchise") is not exclusive, and shall not be construed as any limitation upon the right of the City to grant to other persons or corporations, including itself, rights, privileges or authority the same as, similar to or different from the rights, privileges or authority herein set forth, in the same or other Rights-of-Way, by Franchise, permit or otherwise; provided, however, that any such grant shall be done in a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory manner with respect to the rights, privileges and authorities afforded Franchisee. 
Section 4: Term and Termination. The term of this Franchise shall be ten (10) years, commencing with the effective date of this Ordinance. Thereafter, this Franchise shall continue in full force and effect for an additional ten (10) years unless notice is given by either party ninety (90) days before expiration, of its intention to terminate or renegotiate the Franchise. Upon termination or expiration of the Franchise, Grantee shall, within one hundred and eighty days (180), remove all its facilities from the City's Rights-of-Way. Should the Grantee fail to remove its facilities within the one hundred and eighty day period (180), the City may remove. 
Section 5: No Limitation of City Authority. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 6 below, nothing in this Franchise shall in any way be construed or interpreted to prevent, or in any way limit, the City from modifying or performing any work in its Rights-of-Way, or granting other franchises for use of Rights-of-Way, or of adopting general ordinances regulating use of or activities in the Rights-of-Way, or of otherwise abrogating or limiting any rights, privileges or property interest the City now has in its Rights-of-Way, whether now owned or hereinafter acquired. 
(b)  In the event that any portion of the Franchisee's infrastructure interferes with any present or future use the City desires to make of its Rights-of-Way, Franchisee shall, upon request, and at its sole expense, promptly relocate such infrastructure, and restore the area where such relocation occurs to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the City. 
(c)  Where the Franchisee had paid for the relocation costs of the same facilities at the request of the City within the past five (5) years, the Franchisee's share of the cost of relocation will be paid by the City if it requested the subsequent relocation. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, and subject to Section 6 herein, nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to give the Franchisee any credit or exemption from any nondiscriminatory, generally applicable business tax, or other tax now or hereafter levied upon Franchisee's taxable real or personal property, or against any permit fees or inspection fees required as a condition of construction of any improvements upon Franchisee's real property and imposed under a generally applicable ordinance or resolution. 
Section 6: Competitively Neutral Application. The City shall impose, on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis, similar terms and conditions upon other similarly situated providers of Telecommunications services operating within the City. Any requirement imposed on Franchisee that is determined not in compliance with this Section 6 shall be unenforceable against Franchisee. 
Section 7: Construction, Maintenance and Repair of Infrastructure. 
(a)  Franchisee may make all needful excavations in any Right-of-Way for the purpose of placing, erecting, laying, maintaining or repairing Franchisee's infrastructure, and shall repair, renew and replace the same as reasonably possible to the condition that existed prior to such excavation. Franchisee shall obtain all necessary permits for such excavation and construction, and pay all applicable fees. Such work shall be done only in accordance with plans or designs submitted to, and approved by, the City, such plans (1) to be evaluated by the standards applied to the construction of other similar Telecommunications systems in the City, and (2) maintained by the City as confidential and exempt from public disclosure to the maximum extent allowed by law. Such work shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in compliance with all rules, regulations, or ordinances which may, during the term of this Franchise, be adopted from time to time by the City, or any other authority having jurisdiction over Rights-of-Way. Prior to commencing excavation or construction, Franchisee shall give appropriate notice to other franchisees, licensees or permittees of the City owning or maintaining facilities which may be affected by the proposed excavation or construction. 
(b)  In the event emergency repairs are necessary for Franchisee's facilities, Franchisee may immediately initiate such emergency repairs. Franchisee shall give notice to the City's Department of Public Works by telephone, electronic data transmittal or other appropriate means as soon as is practicable after commencement of work performed under emergency conditions. Franchisee shall make such repairs in compliance with applicable ordinances and regulations, and shall apply for any necessary permits no later than the business day next following the discovery of the need for such repairs. 
(c)  Franchisee shall construct and maintain its Telecommunications system in such a manner so as to not interfere with City sewer or water systems, or other City facilities. 
Section 8: Insurance. 
(a)  General. At all times during the term of this Franchise, Franchisee, at its own cost and expense, shall provide the insurance specified in this section. 
(b)  Evidence Required. Within 30 days of the effective date of this Franchise, Franchisee shall provide the City with a certificate of insurance executed by an authorized representative of the insurer or insurers, evidencing that Franchisee's insurance complies with this section. 
(c)  Notice of Cancellation, Reduction, or Material Change in Coverage. Policies shall include a provision requiring written notice by the insurer or insurers to the City not less than 30 calendar days prior to cancellation, reduction, or material change in coverage. If insurance coverage is canceled, reduced or materially changed, Franchisee shall, prior to the effective date of such cancellation, reduction or material change, obtain the coverage required under this section, and provide the City with documentation of such coverage. Franchisee shall be responsible, to the extent not caused by the City's negligence or intentional misconduct, for the costs of any damage, liability, or injury, which are not otherwise covered by insurance or because of a failure to comply with this section. 
(d)  Insurance Required. During the term of this contract. Franchisee shall maintain in force, at its own expense, the following insurance: 
(1)  Workers' compensation insurance for all subject workers; and 
(2)  General liability insurance with a combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than $500,000 for each person, and $1,000,000, for each occurrence of bodily injury and $1,000,000 for property damage, which coverages shall include contractual liability coverage for the indemnity provided under this contract, and naming the City, its officials, officers, employees and agents as additional insureds with respect to Franchisee's activities pursuant to this Franchise. 
Section 9: Transfers and Change in Control. 
(a)  Transfer. This Franchise shall not be sold, leased, assigned or otherwise transferred, nor shall any of the rights or privileges herein granted or authorized be leased, assigned, mortgaged, sold or transferred, either in whole or in part, nor shall title hereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property herein, pass to or vest in any person, except the Franchisee, either by act of the Franchisee or by operation of law, without the consent of the City, expressed in writing, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. If the Franchisee wishes to transfer this Franchise, the Franchisee shall give City written notice of the proposed transfer, and shall request consent of the transfer by the City. 
(b)  Any transfer of ownership affected without the written consent of the City shall render this Franchise subject to revocation. The City shall have 60 days to act upon any request for approval of a transfer. If the City fails to render a final decision on the request within said 60 days, the request shall be deemed granted unless the Franchisee and the City agree to an extension of time. 
(c)  The Franchisee, upon any transfer, shall within 60 days thereafter file with the City a certified statement evidencing the transfer and an acknowledgment of the transferee that it agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions contained in this Franchise. 
(d)  The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the use of the Franchisee's property as collateral for security in financing the construction or acquisition of all or part of a Telecommunications System of the Franchisee or any affiliate of the Franchisee. However, the Telecommunications System franchised hereunder, including portions thereof used as collateral, shall at all times continue to be subject to the provisions of this Franchise. 
(e)  The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit sale of tangible assets of the Franchisee in the ordinary conduct of the Franchisee's business without the consent of the City. The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit, without the consent of the City, a transfer to a transferee whose primary business is Telecommunications System operation and having a majority of its beneficial ownership held by the Franchisee, a parent of the Franchisee, or an affiliate, a majority of whose beneficial ownership is held by a parent of the Franchisee. 
Section 10: Indemnification. Each party shall indemnify and hold the other harmless for any losses, claims, damages, awards, penalties or injuries incurred by any third party, including reasonable attorney's fees, which arise from any alleged breach of such indemnifying party's representations and warranties made under this Agreement, provided that the indemnifying party is promptly notified of any such claims. The indemnifying party shall have the sole right to defend such claims at its own expense. The other party shall provide, at the indemnifying party's expense, such assistance in investigating and defending such claims as the indemnifying party may reasonably request. This indemnity shall survive the termination of this Agreement. 
Section 11: Compensation. 
(a)  Franchise Fee. In consideration of permission to use the streets and Rights-of-Way of the City for the construction, operation, and maintenance of a Telecommunications system within the Franchise area the Franchise shall pay to City during the term of this Franchise an amount equal to seven percent (7%) of the Franchisee's Gross Revenues ("Franchise Fee"). Any net uncollectibles, bad debts or other accrued amounts deducted from Gross Revenues shall be included in Gross Receipts at such time as they are actually collected. Revenue from point to point or multi-point services is based on the pro-rata share of the revenue from those services. 
(b)  Modification Resulting from Action by Law. Upon thirty days notice and in the event any law or valid rule or regulation applicable to this Franchise limits the Franchise Fee below the amount provided herein, or as subsequently modified, the Franchisee agrees to and shall pay the maximum permissible amount and, if such law or valid rule or regulation is later repealed or amended to allow a higher permissible amount, then Franchisee shall pay the higher amount commencing from the date of such repeal or amendment, up to the maximum allowable by law. 
(c)  Payment of Franchise Fees. Payments due under this provision shall be computed and paid quarterly for the preceding quarter, as of March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31, each quarterly payment due and payable no later than 45 days after such dates. Not later than the date of each payment, the Franchisee shall file with the City a written statement, in a form satisfactory to the City and signed under penalty of perjury by an officer of the Franchisee, identifying in detail the amount of gross revenue received by the Franchisee, the computation basis and method, for the quarter for which payment is made. 
(d)  The Franchise Fee includes all compensation for the use of the City's Rights-of-Way. Franchisee may offset against the Franchise Fee the amount of any fee or charge paid to the City in connection with the Grantee's use of the Rights-of-Way when the fee or charge is not imposed under a generally applicable ordinance or resolution. The Franchise Fee shall not be deemed to be in lieu of or a waiver of any ad valorem property tax which the City may now or hereafter be entitled to, or to participate in, or to levy upon the property of Franchisee. 
Section 12: Extension of City Limits. Upon the annexation of any territory to the City, the rights granted herein shall extend to the annexed territory to the extent the City has such authority. All Facilities owned, maintained, or operated by Grantee located within any public Rights-of-Ways of the annexed territory shall be subject to all of the terms of this Ordinance. 
Section 13: Right to Inspect Records. In order to manage the Franchisee's use of Rights-of-Way pursuant to this Franchise, and to determine and verify the amount of compensation due to the City under this Franchise, the Franchisee shall provide, upon request, the following information in such form as may be reasonably required by the City: maps of the Franchisee's Telecommunications System; the amount collected by the Franchisee from users of Telecommunications Service provided by Franchisee via its Telecommunications network; the character and extent of the Telecommunications Service rendered therefore to them; and any other related financial information required for the exercise of any other lawful right of Franchisee under this Franchise. The City agrees that such information is confidential and that the City will use such information only for the purpose of managing its Rights-of-Way, determining compliance with the terms of this Franchise, and verifying the adequacy of Franchisee's Fee payments. The City further agrees to protect such information from disclosure to third parties to the maximum extent allowed by Oregon law. 
Section 14: Right to Perform Franchise Fee Audit or Review; Default. In addition to all rights granted under Section 13, the City shall have the right to have performed, a formal audit or a professional review of the Franchisee's books and records by an independent private auditor, for the sole purpose of determining the Gross Receipts of the Franchisee generated through the provision of Telecommunications Services under this Franchise and the accuracy of amounts paid as Franchise Fees to the City by the Franchisee; provided, however, that any audit or review must be commenced not later than 3 years after the date on which Franchise Fees for any period being audited or reviewed were due. The cost of any such audit or review shall be borne by the City. The City agrees to protect from disclosure to third parties, to the maximum extent allowed by State law, any information obtained as a result of its rights pursuant to this Section, or any compilation or other derivative works created using information obtained pursuant to the exercise of its rights hereunder. 
Section 15: Right to Inspect Construction. The City or its representatives shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to this Franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Franchise and other pertinent provisions of law relating to management of the City's Rights-of-Way. 
Section 16: Limited Waiver of Sovereign Immunity; Venue. 
(a)  The City may have sovereign or other immunities which might prevent or impair enforcement or enjoyment of the terms of this Franchise. Without making a general waiver, limitation or modification of such sovereign or other immunity, the City hereby expressly grants, in favor of Franchisee, a limited, non-assignable waiver of its immunities for claims arising under this Franchise, it being the intent of the parties that the waivers herein provided shall result in the terms and conditions of this franchise being enforced in a competitively neutral manner. 
(b)  Venue for any proceeding brought to enforce any term or condition of this Franchise shall be the local Circuit Court for the City; provided, however, that should any proceeding be brought in a federal forum, such proceeding shall be brought in the U.S. District Court of Oregon in Portland, Oregon, with the parties stipulating to trial in Portland, Oregon. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any applicable statute of limitations or other law, these limited waivers of sovereign immunity shall expire when all obligations under this Franchise have been fully and completely performed, or the passage of twenty-four months from the termination of this Franchise, whichever is later. 
Section 17: Limitation of Liability. The City and the Franchisee agree that neither shall be liable to the other for any indirect, special, or consequential damages, or any lost profits, arising out of any provision or requirement contained herein, or, in the event this Franchise, or any part hereof, is determined or declared to be invalid. 
Section 18: Compliance with Applicable Laws. Franchisee shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, and regulations, whether now in existence or hereinafter enacted. Nothing contained in this Franchise shall be construed as authorizing the Franchisee, its officers, employees or agents, to violate any federal, state or local law, whether now in existence or hereinafter enacted, including, by way of illustration but not of limitation, any provision of Oregon anti-trust law, ORS 646.750-646.836, or the Oregon Unlawful Trade Practices Act, ORS 646.650-646.652. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring Franchisee to comply with any federal, state or local law that is repealed or otherwise rendered unenforceable subsequent to the adoption of this Franchise. 
Section 19: Notice. Any notice provided for under this Franchise shall be sufficient if in writing and (1) delivered personally to the other party or deposited in the U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested; (2) sent overnight by commercial air courier; or (3) sent by facsimile transmission, provided receipt of such facsimile is confirmed, in writing, on the first business day following the date of transmission. Notice shall be sent to the following address, or such other address as each party may specify in writing: 
  
Name _____      Contracts Administration Title _____      LS Networks Address _____      921 SW Oregon St., STE 370 COQUILLE, OR Portland, OR 97205 Phone: _____      Phone: (503) 294-5300 Facsimile: _____      Facsimile: (503) 227-8585  
Notice shall be deemed effective upon the earliest date of actual delivery; three business days after deposit in the U.S. mail as provided herein; one business day after shipment by commercial air courier; or the same day as transmitted by facsimile, provided transmission of such facsimile is confirmed in writing as provided herein. 
Section 20: Captions. The captions to sections of this Franchise are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference of the sections and provisions contained herein, and shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of any section or provision of this Franchise. 
Section 21: Severability. If any part of this Franchise becomes or is held to be invalid for any reason, the determination will affect only the invalid portion of this Franchise. In all other respects this Franchise will stand and remain in full force and effect as if the invalid provision had not been part of this Franchise. 
Section 22: Waiver. 
(a)  The City is vested with the power and authority to reasonably regulate, and manage, its Rights-of-Way in a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory manner, and in the public interest. Franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply with any provision of this Franchise by reason of the failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance, nor does the City waive or limit any of its rights under this Franchise by reason of such failure or neglect. 
(b)  No provision of this Franchise will be deemed waived unless such waiver is in writing and signed by the party waiving its rights. However, if Franchisee gives written notice of a failure or inability to cure or comply with a provision of this Franchise, and the City fails to object within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice, such provision shall be deemed waived. 
Section 24: Emergency. The City Council of COQUILLE finds the health, safety and welfare of the City requires this Ordinance to have immediate effect. Therefore, the City Council hereby declares the existence of an emergency and this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from the time of its passage and approval. 
PASSED by the City Council and approved by the Mayor ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 2012. 
APPROVED: _____
Mayor Attest: _____
City Recorder Approved as to form 
_____
City Attorney Accepted  11/5/2012  (date) LightSpeed Networks, Inc. By _____
Michael Weidman 

Title President and CEO  
ORDINANCE 1496 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO COMSPAN AN OREGON CORPORATION, A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AND RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A FIBER-BASED SERVICE FACILITY; TO OCCUPY CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY; AND TO PROVIDE FIBER-BASED SERVICES IN THE CITY OF COQUILLE, OREGON. 
THE CITY OF COQUILLE ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. Definitions - as used in this ordinance: 
"City" means City of Coquille, Oregon. 
"Grantee" means ComSpan Bandon, the grantee of rights under this franchise, including its successors or assigns. 
"Council" means the City Council of the City of Coquille, Oregon. 
"Facilities" means the conduits, cables, poles, wires, fixtures, underground lines, and appurtenances thereto, including other technical Facilities necessary for the purpose of providing voice and video services. 
"Gross revenues" means all revenues earned by the Grantee in the delivery of voice and video services within the City of Coquille, and is further defined in Section 9. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company or organization of any kind. 
"Rights of way" include streets, roads, highway, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, and public utility easements, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas. This definition applies only to the extent of the City's right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such areas for siting telecommunications facilities. "Rights of way" excludes other property owned by the City, such as parks or public buildings. 
"Ultimate consumer" means any entity that obtains services transmitted over Grantee's Facilities for its own use by any means, including purchase, lease or direct receipt of such services. 
Section 2. Grant of Authority. City grants to Grantee the right and privilege, subject to all City of Coquille ordinances, policies, rules and regulations, to construct, install, maintain and operate over, in, on and under the present and future City rights of way of the City of Coquille, Facilities necessary for the purpose of providing fiber-based services. This franchise is not exclusive, and City reserves the right to grant a similar privilege to any other Person at any time during the period of this franchise. This grant is further subject to all prior rights, interests, agreements, permits, easements or licenses granted by the City, and to the City's right to use the rights of way for any purpose it deems fit, including the same or similar purposes allowed Grantee hereunder. 
Section 3. Compliance with Laws, Rules and Regulations. The locations and methods of installation and maintenance of all Grantee's Facilities shall be subject at all times to regulation by the City (including City's ordinances and policies on street cuts and use of right-of-way), and all such Facilities shall be so constructed and maintained as to interfere as little as practicable with street or other traffic. Nothing herein however shall be construed to change or modify any applicable Oregon law regarding Grantee's ability to recover costs for any relocation of its Facilities. All of such Facilities shall be installed and at all times maintained by Grantee in accordance with industry standards. Grantee shall change the location of or remove any pole, conduit, structure or Facility within the public right of way when the City determines that the public convenience requires such changes or removal. The expense of said change shall be paid by Grantee. 
Section 4. Grantee Liability, Indemnification of City and Insurance. 
1.  Grantee shall at all times conduct its operations under this franchise, including installation, construction or maintenance of its Facilities, in a safe and workmanlike manner so as not to present a danger to the public or City. 
2.  Grantee shall defend, save harmless and indemnify City from any loss or claim against City on account of or in connection with any activity of Grantee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its Facilities. 
3.  This franchise shall not be effective until Grantee secures, and shall at all times be conditioned upon Grantee maintaining, a comprehensive liability insurance policy which shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  Grantee shall obtain, at Grantee's expense, and keep in effect at all times during the term of this franchise, public liability and property damage insurance that protects Grantee and the City, as well as the City's officers, agents, and employees, from claims arising from claims referred to in section 4.2. The insurance shall provide coverage at all times of not less than $2,000,000 for personal injury to each person, $4,000,000 for each occurrence, and $1,000,000 for each occurrence involving property damages, plus cost of defense; or a single limit policy of not less than $4,000,000 covering all claims per occurrence, plus cost of defense. The insurance policies may provide for self-retention or deductibles in reasonable amounts. The limits of the insurance shall be subject to statutory changes as to the maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the State of Oregon during the term of this Franchise. 
b.  Grantee, and its subcontractors, if any, will comply with the Oregon Worker's Compensation Law at all times. 
c.  City, its officers, directors, and employees shall be added as additional insured with respect to all policies. All commercial general liability insurance policies will be endorsed to show this additional coverage. Grantee will require that its insurance carrier give the City 30 days written notice of any change in insurance coverage. 
d.  There shall be no cancellation, material change, exhaustion of aggregate limits, or intent not to renew insurance coverage without 30 days written notice to City. Any failure to comply with this provision will not affect the insurance coverage provided to City. The 30 days notice of cancellation provision shall be physically endorsed on the policy. 
e.  Coverages provided by Grantee must be underwritten by an insurance company deemed acceptable by City. City reserves the right to reject all or any insurance carrier(s) with an unacceptable financial rating or not authorized to transact business in Oregon. 
f.  As evidence of the insurance coverage required by this franchise, Grantee shall furnish a Certificate of Insurance to City. This franchise shall not be in effect until the required certificates have been received and approved by City. The Certificate will specify and document all provisions within this franchise. A renewal certificate will be sent to City 10 days prior to coverage expiration. 
4.  In the event that City's tort liability limits are raised by law, Grantee shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amount of two-times the City's tort liability limits as they are amended. 
Section 5. Conditions on Right of Way Occupancy. 
1.  Use. Grantee shall construct, install, maintain and operate its Facilities in designated City rights of way to the industry standard and City's satisfaction, in compliance with all City ordinances, rules, policies and regulations; and in a manner so as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways or places. 
2.  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing by Grantee, Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping or surface of any street or alley disturbed. If Grantee fails to make restoration as required, City may cause the repairs to be made at the expense of Grantee. 
3.  Relocation. Except as provided below, if the removal or relocation of Facilities is caused directly by an identifiable development of property and the removal or relocation of Facilities occurs within the area to be developed, or is made for the convenience of a customer, Grantee may charge the expense of removal or relocation to the developer or customer. Grantee shall be solely responsible for enforcing collection from the developer or customer. City may require Grantee to relocate its Facilities. If the removal or relocation of Facilities results from City's need to provide public Facilities, is a City project, or is otherwise requested by City and is made for the purpose of improving a street to City standards or other improvement for the benefit of the public, Grantee will remove or relocate its Facilities at Grantee's expense within a reasonable time frame after notification by City. In cases of capital improvement projects undertaken by City, Grantee shall convert existing overhead distribution Facilities to underground at Grantee's expense if requested to do so by City. City agrees to comply with provisions of applicable law when requiring such conversion. 
4.  Placement of Facilities. Grantee shall not place its Facilities where they will interfere with any existing or future City utility, gas, electric or telephone fixture, power, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water facility. Grantee will consult with City's Public Works Department prior to placement of Facilities, and will comply with all City ordinances, policies, rules and regulations in connection with its placement of Facilities. Whenever all existing electric utilities, cable facilities and telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public right of way of the City, Grantee must also locate and relocate its facilities underground. 
5.  Temporary Rearrangement of Facilities. Grantee shall, consistent with City policies, ordinances, rules and regulations, arrange to temporarily raise, lower, or otherwise move its Facilities to permit the moving of buildings or other objects if the Person wishing to move the building or other object makes a reasonable arrangement to reimburse Grantee for its expenses in rearranging its Facilities. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude City from requiring Grantee to move its Facilities at its own expense when public convenience requires the move, as described in Subsections 3 and 4 of this section. 
Section 6. Transfer of Franchise. Grantee shall not sell, assign, dispose of, lease or transfer in any manner whatsoever any interest in this franchise or in the Facilities authorized by this franchise, or any part of the Facilities, without prior written approval of City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The City may impose reasonable conditions on its approval of any transfer, including but not limited to the requirement that the transferee acknowledge in writing and agree to be bound by the terms of this Franchise. City shall have the right to collect from Grantee City's actual administrative costs associated with processing a transfer request, including the cost of ascertaining the financial responsibility of the proposed transferee. 
Section 7. City Rights in Franchise. 
1.  City Supervision and Inspection. City shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation of Grantee's Facilities subject to the provisions of this franchise and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with governing laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
2.  Termination or Abandonment of Franchise. Upon any termination of this franchise, all Facilities installed or used by Grantee shall be removed by Grantee at Grantee's expense and the property upon which the Facilities were used restored by Grantee to the condition it was in before installation except that City or its designee shall have the following options after termination of this franchise: 
a.  City or its designee may elect to acquire the Facilities for their fair market value consistent with any applicable law; and 
b.  Value shall be determined by an appraiser who is mutually acceptable to City and Grantee. In the event that City and grantee are unable to agree on a single appraiser, then the City and grantee shall each appoint an appraiser, and those two appraisers shall select a third appraiser. The opinion of any two appraisers shall be determinative of the value of the Facilities. 
c.  City agrees to provide Grantee with written notice of its intention to acquire Grantee's Facilities pursuant to this section within 120 days after termination of this franchise by City, or City's declaration of Facilities abandonment by Grantee, with the closing of the acquisition to occur as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
3.  City Connection to Facilities. In addition to City's other rights in this franchise, and so long as Grantee has sufficient capacity on its Facilities that is not being used by a paying customer at that time, City shall have the right to obtain voice and television services from Grantee at the Grantee's most favorable rate applicable to those services. In addition to the above, Grantee shall provide without charge to City, one service outlet activated for data at a speed of not less than 7 Mpbs. Said connection and outlet shall be at City Hall 851 N. Central [Blvd.]. Nothing in this subsection shall affect Grantee's obligation to pay franchise fees to the City under Section 9 of this Ordinance. 
Section 8. Franchise Fee. 
1.  Grantee shall pay monthly to City the sum of seven percent (7%) of Grantee's gross revenues earned in the delivery of basic voice services and video services within the corporate limits of the City to parties. Grantee also may at its option deduct uncollectible accounts of customers within the corporate limits of City from these gross revenues. 
2.  The fee required by this section shall be due and payable within 60 days after the end of each applicable calendar month. Any payment not made when due shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per annum, compounded monthly, from the date due until paid. 
3.  With each payment, Grantee shall furnish City with a written statement, under oath, executed by an officer of Grantee, verifying the amount of gross revenues of Grantee within City for the monthly period covered by payment computed on the basis set out in Subsection 1 of this section. 
4.  City's acceptance of any payments due under this section shall not be considered a waiver by City of any breach of this franchise. 
5.  Grantee agrees and covenants that it will not challenge the validity of the franchise fees under this ordinance as long as they do not exceed the maximum amounts established by applicable statutes. 
Section 9. Grantee Records and Reports. 
1.  Grantee shall keep accurate books of financial accounts at an office within the State of Oregon throughout the term of this franchise. Grantee shall produce all books and records directly concerning its gross revenues and other financial information deemed necessary by City for purposes of calculation of the franchise fee for inspection by City, upon no less than 10 days prior written notice, during normal working hours. City may require periodic reports from Grantee relating to its operation within City. City shall have the right during the term of this franchise or within 180 days thereafter to conduct audits of Grantee's records. Such audits shall be undertaken by a qualified person or entity selected by City. The cost of any such audit shall be borne by City, unless the results of any such audit reveal an underpayment of more than 8% of the franchise fee for the period audited. In the case of such underpayment, the full cost of such audit shall be paid by Grantee. Grantee shall immediately pay the amount of the underpayment as determined by such audit to City together with 12% per annum interest from the date such payment should have been made to the date the payment is actually made. 
2.  Any audit information obtained by City under these provisions shall be kept confidential to the maximum extent allowed by Oregon law, except that this obligation shall not prevent the City from introducing audit results in any forum where enforcement of the provisions of this franchise is at issue. 
Section 10. Permit and Inspection Fees. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit the right of City to require Grantee to pay reasonable costs incurred by City in connection with the issuance of a franchise or permit, making an inspection, or performing any other service for or in connection with Grantee or its Facilities, whether pursuant to this ordinance or any other ordinance or regulation now in effect or hereafter adopted by City. 
Section 11. Enforcement and Termination of Franchise for Violation. 
1.  Default. Time of payment and performance are of the essence in the franchise. The following shall be events of default: 
a.  Default in Payments. The failure of Grantee to pay City when due any amounts required by the franchise and such failure continues for a period of 10 days after the due date. 
b.  Default in Other Covenants. The failure of Grantee to perform any of the covenants and conditions required herein to be kept and performed by Grantee, and such failure continues for a period of 30 days after notice from City of such failure. If the same failure occurs within 24 months of the initial notice, City may terminate the franchise without further opportunity to cure. 
2.  Termination. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, this franchise may be terminated at the option of City by notice in writing to Grantee given within 30 days of the date of default. If this franchise is not terminated by election of City, Grantee shall pay to City the sum of $200 per day for each day the default continues along with any additional damages suffered by City as a result of Grantee's default. 
Section 12. Remedies not Exclusive; Waiver. All remedies under this ordinance, including termination of franchise, are cumulative, and recovery or enforcement of one is not a bar to the recovery or enforcement of any other remedy. Remedies contained in this ordinance, including termination of the franchise, are not exclusive and City reserves the right to enforce penal provisions of any ordinance and also use any remedy available to City at law or in equity. Failure to enforce any provision of this ordinance shall not be construed as a waiver of a breach of any other term, condition or obligation of this ordinance. 
Section 13. Franchise Term. This franchise is granted for a term of five years beginning on the date on which this franchise ordinance is approved. City agrees to renegotiate in good faith a renewal of this franchise for a similar term if this franchise is not in default at its expiration. 
Section 14. Acceptance of Franchise. Within 30 days from the effective date of this ordinance, Grantee shall file with the City Recorder a written unconditional acceptance of this franchise executed by its duly authorized representative and all of its terms and conditions, and if it fails to do so, this ordinance shall be void and of no effect. 
Section 15. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or rendered unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portion thereof. If for any reason, the franchise fee is invalidated or amended by the act of any court or governmental agency, then the highest reasonable franchise fee allowed by such court or other governmental agency shall be the franchise fee charged by this ordinance. 
Section 16. Notices. Any notice required or permitted under this franchise shall be deemed given when received or when deposited with postage prepaid in the United States Mail as registered or certified mail addressed as follows: 
TO CITY: TO GRANTEE: City Manager 851 North Central Boulevard Coquille, Oregon 97423  
or to such other address as may be specified from time to time by either parties in writing. 
Section 17. Interpretation/Jurisdiction. This franchise shall be deemed to have been entered into in Coos County, Oregon. Jurisdiction of any dispute shall be in the circuit court of the State of Oregon, and venue shall be in Coos County, Oregon. Interpretation of the franchise shall be governed by laws of the State of Oregon. 
Section 18: Emergency. The City Council of Coquille finds the health, safety and welfare of the City requires this Ordinance to have immediate effect. Therefore, the City Council hereby declares the existence of an emergency and this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from the time of its passage and approval. 
Passed by the Common Council and approved by the Mayor this 5th day of October, 2015. 
Approved: 
/s/   
      Matt Rowe, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Rene Collins, City Recorder 
      City of Coquille   Accepted: 
/s/   
      Mark Scully, President ComSpan   ORDINANCE 1498 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AN ELECTRIC UTILITY FRANCHISE AND GENERAL UTILITY EASEMENT TO PACIFICORP 
WHEREAS, PacifiCorp d.b.a. Pacific Power, is a regulated public utility that provides electric power and energy to the citizens of the City of Coquille (the "City") and other surrounding areas; 
WHEREAS, providing electrical power and energy requires the installation, operation and maintenance of power poles and other related facilities to be located within the public ways of the City; 
WHEREAS, the City desires to set forth the terms and conditions by which PacifiCorp shall use the public ways of the City; 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the City: 
SECTION 1. Grant of Franchise and General Utility Easement. The City hereby grants to PacifiCorp the right, privilege and authority to construct, maintain, operate, upgrade, and relocate its electrical distribution and transmission lines and related appurtenances, including underground conduits and structures, poles, towers, wires, guy anchors, vaults, transformers, transmission lines, and communication lines (collectively referred to herein as "Electric Facilities") in, under, along, over and across the present and future streets, alleys, public ways and public places (collectively referred to herein as "Public Ways") within the City, for the purpose of supplying and transmitting electric power and energy to the inhabitants of the City thereof. 
SECTION 2. Term. The term of this Franchise and General Utility Easement is for ten (10) years commencing on the date of acceptance by the Company as set forth in Section 3 below. 
SECTION 3. Acceptance by PacifiCorp. Within sixty (60) days after the passage of this ordinance by the City, PacifiCorp shall file an unqualified written acceptance thereof, with the City Recorder otherwise the ordinance and the rights granted herein shall be null and void. 
SECTION 4. Non-Exclusive Franchise. The right to use and occupy the Public Ways of the City shall be nonexclusive and the City reserves the right to use the Public Ways for itself or any other entity; provided, however, that such use shall not unreasonably interfere with PacifiCorp's Electric Facilities or PacifiCorp's rights granted herein. 
SECTION 5. City Regulatory Authority. In addition to the provision herein contained, the City reserves the right to adopt such additional ordinances and regulations as may be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their properties or exercise any other rights, powers, or duties required or authorized, under the Constitution of the State of Oregon, the laws of Oregon or City Ordinances. 
SECTION 6. Indemnification. The City shall in no way be liable or responsible for any loss or damage to property or any injury to, or death, of any person that may occur in the construction, operation or maintenance by PacifiCorp of its Electric Facilities. PacifiCorp shall indemnity, defend and hold the City harmless from and against claims, demands, liens and all liability or damage of whatsoever kind on account of PacifiCorp's use of the Public Ways within the City, and shall pay the costs of defense plus reasonable attorneys' fees for any claim, demand or lien brought thereunder. 
The City shall: (a) give prompt written notice to PacifiCorp of any claim, demand or lien with respect to which the City seeks indemnification hereunder; and (b) permit PacifiCorp to assume the defense of such claim, demand, or lien. If such defense is not assumed by PacifiCorp, PacifiCorp shall not be subject to liability for any settlement made without its consent. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the City harmless to the extent any claim, demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent or willful act or failure to act of the City or any of its officers or employees. 
SECTION 7. Annexation. 
7.1  Extension of City Limits. Upon the annexation of any territory to the City, the rights granted herein shall extend to the annexed territory to the extent the City has such authority. All Electrical Facilities owned, maintained, or operated by PacifiCorp located within any public ways of the annexed territory shall thereafter be subject to all of the terms hereof. 
7.2  Annexation. When any territory is approved for annexation to the City, the City shall, not later than ten (10) working days after passage of an ordinance approving the proposed annexation, provide by certified mail to PacifiCorp: (a) each site address to be annexed as recorded on county assessment and tax rolls; (b) a legal description of the proposed boundary change; and (c) a copy of the City's ordinance approving the proposed annexation. The notice shall be mailed to: 
PacifiCorp Customer Contact Center 
Attn: Annexations 
P.O. Box 400 
Portland, Oregon 97207-0400 
With a copy to: 
PacifiCorp 
Attn: Office of the General Counsel 
825 N.E. Multnomah, Suite 2000 
Portland, Oregon 97232 
Additional or increased fees or taxes, other than ad valorem taxes, imposed on PacifiCorp as a result of an annexation of territory to the City shall become effective on the effective date of the annexation if notice is given to PacifiCorp by certified mail not later than ten (10) working days after the effective date of the annexation. However, if notification of the effective date of the annexation is provided to PacifiCorp later than the tenth (10th) working day after the effective date of the annexation, the additional or increased fees or taxes will become effective on the date of the notification. This provision shall be subject to any amendment of ORS 222.005. 
SECTION 8. Planning, Design, Construction and Installation of Company Facilities. 
8.1  All Electrical Facilities installed or used under authority of this Franchise shall be used, constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable federal, state and city laws, codes and regulations. 
8.2  Except in the case of an emergency, PacifiCorp shall, prior to commencing new construction or reconstruction work in the public way or street or other public places, apply for a permit from the City which permit shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed. PacifiCorp will abide by all applicable ordinances and all reasonable rules, regulations and requirements of the City, and the City may inspect the manner of such work and require remedies as may be reasonably necessary to assure compliance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to obtain a permit to perform emergency repairs. 
8.3  All Electric Facilities shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the Public Ways of the City and shall be constructed, installed, maintained, cleared of vegetation, renovated or replaced in accordance with applicable rules, ordinances and regulations of the City. 
8.4  If, during the course of work on its Electrical Facilities, PacifiCorp causes damage to or alters the Public Way or public property, PacifiCorp shall (at its own cost and expense and in a manner reasonably approved by the City) replace at once restore it to a condition comparable to that which existed before the work commenced. 
8.5  In addition to the installation of underground electric distribution lines as provided by applicable state law and regulations, PacifiCorp shall, upon payment of all charges provided in its tariffs or their equivalent, place newly constructed electric distribution lines underground as may be required by City ordinance. 
8.6  The City shall have the right without cost to use all poles and suitable overhead structures owned by PacifiCorp within Public Ways for City wires used in connection with its fire alarms, police signal systems, or other public safety communication lines used for governmental purposes; provided, however, any such uses shall be for activities owned, operated or used by the City for a public purpose and shall not include the provision of CATV, internet, or similar services to the public. Provided further, that PacifiCorp shall assume no liability nor shall it incur, directly or indirectly, any additional expense in connection therewith, and the use of said poles and structures by the City shall be in such a manner as to prevent safety hazards or interferences with PacifiCorp's use of same. Nothing herein shall be construed to require PacifiCorp to increase pole size, or alter the manner in which PacifiCorp attaches its equipment to poles, or alter the manner in which it operates and maintains its Electric Facilities. City attachments shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the reasonable requirements of PacifiCorp and the current edition of the National Electrical Safety Code pertaining to such construction. Further, City attachments shall be attached or installed only after written approval by PacifiCorp in conjunction with PacifiCorp's standard pole attachment application process. 
PacifiCorp shall have the right to inspect, at the City's expense, such attachments to ensure compliance with this Section 8.6 and to require the City to remedy any defective attachments. 
8.7  PacifiCorp shall have the right to excavate the Public Rights of Ways subject to reasonable conditions and requirements of the City. Before installing new underground conduits or replacing existing underground conduits, PacifiCorp shall first notify the City of such work by written notice and shall allow the City, at its own expense (to include a pro rata share of the trenching costs), to share the trench of PacifiCorp to lay its own conduit therein, provided that such action by the City will not unreasonably interfere with PacifiCorp's Electrical Facilities or delay project completion. 
8.8  Before commencing any street improvements or other work within a Public Way that may affect PacifiCorp's Electric Facilities, the City shall give written notice to PacifiCorp. 
8.9  No structures, buildings or signs shall be erected below PacifiCorp's facilities or in a location that prevents PacifiCorp from accessing or maintaining its facilities. 
SECTION 9. Relocation of Electric Facilities. 
9.1  The City reserves the right to require PacifiCorp to relocate overhead Electric Facilities within the Public Ways in the interest of public convenience, necessity, health, safety or welfare at no cost to the City. Within a reasonable period of time after written notice, PacifiCorp shall promptly commence the overhead relocation of its Electrical Facilities. Before requiring a relocation of Electric Facilities, the City shall, with the assistance and consent of PacifiCorp, identify a reasonable alignment for the relocated Electric Facilities within the Public Ways of the City. The City shall assign or otherwise transfer to Company all right it may have to recover the cost for the relocation work and shall support the efforts of PacifiCorp to obtain reimbursement. In cases of capital improvement projects undertaken by the City, PacifiCorp shall convert existing overhead distribution facilities to underground, so long as PacifiCorp is allowed to collect the costs associated with conversion from overhead to underground distribution facilities consistent with OAR 860-022-0046, the Oregon Public Utility Commission rule on forced conversions. 
9.2  PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to pay the cost of any relocation that is required or made a condition of a private development. If the removal or relocation of facilities is caused directly or otherwise by an identifiable development of property in the area, or is made for the convenience of a customer, PacifiCorp may charge the expense of removal or relocation to the developer or customer. For example, PacifiCorp shall not be required to pay relocation costs in connection with a road widening or realignment where the road project is made a condition of or caused by a private development. In such event, the City shall require the developer to pay PacifiCorp for such relocation costs as part of its approval procedures. 
SECTION 10. Subdivision Plat Notification. Before the City approves any new subdivision and before recordation of the plat, the City shall mail notification of such approval and a copy of the plat to PacifiCorp: 
PacifiCorp 
Attn: Property Management/Right-of-Way Department 
825 N.E. Multnomah, Suite 1700 
Portland, Oregon 97232 
SECTION 11. Vegetation Management. PacifiCorp or its contractor may prune all trees and vegetation which overhang the Public Ways, whether such trees or vegetation originate within or outside the Public Ways, to prevent the branches or limbs or other part of such trees or vegetation from interfering with PacifiCorp's Electrical Facilities. Such pruning shall comply with the American National Standard for Tree Care Operation (ANSI A300) and be conducted under the direction of an arborist certified with the International Society of Arboriculture. A growth inhibitor treatment may be used for trees and vegetation species that are fast-growing and problematic. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent PacifiCorp, when necessary and with the approval of the owner of the property on which they may be located, from cutting down and removing any trees which overhang streets. 
SECTION 12. Compensation. 
12.1  In consideration of the rights, privileges, and franchise hereby granted, PacifiCorp shall pay to the City from and after the effective date of the acceptance of this franchise, eight and one half percent (8.5%) of its gross revenues derived from within the corporate limits of City. The term "gross revenue" as used herein shall be construed to mean any revenue of PacifiCorp derived from the retail sale and use of electric power and energy within the municipal boundaries of the City after adjustment for the net write-off of uncollectible accounts and connections of bills theretofore rendered. All amounts paid under this Section 12 shall be subject to review by the City; provided that only payments which occurred during a period of thirty-six (36) months prior to the date the City notifies PacifiCorp of its intent to conduct a review shall be subject to such review. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, at any time during the term of this Franchise, the City may elect to increase the franchise fee amount as may then be allowed by state law. The City shall provide PacifiCorp with prior written notice of such increase following adoption of the change in percentage by the City. The increase shall be effective sixty (60) days after City has provided such written notice to PacifiCorp. 
12.2  The franchise fee shall not be in addition to any other license, occupation, franchise or excise taxes or charges which might otherwise be levied or collected by the City from PacifiCorp with respect to PacifiCorp's electric business or the exercise of this franchise within the corporate limits of the City and the amount due to the City under any such other license, occupation, franchise or excise taxes or other charges for corresponding periods shall be reduced by deducting there from the amount of said franchise fee paid hereunder. 
SECTION 13. Renewal. At least 120 days prior to the expiration of this Franchise, PacifiCorp and the City either shall agree to extend the term of this Franchise for a mutually acceptable period of time or the parties shall use best faith efforts to renegotiate a replacement Franchise. PacifiCorp shall have the continued right to use the Public Ways of the City as set forth herein in the event an extension or replacement Franchise is not entered into upon expiration of this Franchise. 
SECTION 14. No Waiver. Neither the City nor PacifiCorp shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this Franchise by any failure of the other, or any of its officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions. 
SECTION 15. Transfer of Franchise. PacifiCorp shall not transfer or assign any rights under this Franchise to another entity, except transfers and assignments by operation of law, or to affiliates, parents or subsidiaries of PacifiCorp which assume all of PacifiCorp's obligations hereunder, unless the City shall first give its approval in writing, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed; provided, however PacifiCorp may assign, mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or otherwise transfer without consent its interest in this Franchise to any financing entity, or agent on behalf of any financing entity to whom PacifiCorp (i) has obligations for borrowed money or in respect of guaranties thereof, (ii) has obligations evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or similar instruments, or (iii) has obligations under or with respect to letters of credit, bankers acceptances and similar facilities or in respect of guaranties thereof. 
SECTION 16. Amendment. At any time during the term of this Franchise, the City, through its City Council, or PacifiCorp may propose amendments to this Franchise by giving thirty (30) days written notice to the other party of the proposed amendment(s) desired, and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will, within a reasonable time, negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon mutually satisfactory amendment(s). No amendment or amendments to this Franchise shall be effective until mutually agreed upon by the City and PacifiCorp and formally adopted as an ordinance amendment, which is accepted in writing by PacifiCorp. 
SECTION 17. Non-Contestability-Breach of Contract. 
17.1  Neither the City nor PacifiCorp will take any action for the purpose of seeming modification of this Franchise before either the Oregon Public Utility Commission or any Court of competent jurisdiction; provided, however, that neither shall be precluded from taking any action it deems necessary to resolve difference in interpretation of the Franchise nor shall PacifiCorp be precluded from seeking relief from the Court in the event Oregon Public Utility Commission orders, rules or regulations conflict with or make performance under the Franchise illegal. 
17.2  In the event PacifiCorp or the City fails to fulfill any of their respective obligations under this Franchise, the City, or PacifiCorp, whichever the case may be, will have a breach of contract claim and remedy against the other in addition to any other remedy provided by law, provided that no remedy which would have the effect of amending the specific provisions of this Franchise shall become effective without such action which would be necessary to formally amend the Franchise. 
SECTION 18. Notices. Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices from PacifiCorp to the City pursuant to or concerning this Franchise shall be delivered to the City Recorder's Office. Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices from the City to PacifiCorp pursuant to or concerning this Franchise shall be delivered to the Customer and Community Affairs Vice President, Pacific Power, 825 NE Multnomah, Lloyd Center Tower Suite 2000, Portland, Oregon 97232, and such other office as PacifiCorp may advise the City of by written notice. 
SECTION 19. Severability. If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, or superseded by other lawful authority including any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof or unconstitutional, illegal or invalid by any court of common jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the Franchise or any renewal or renewals thereof. 
PASSED and Approved by the Common Council of the City of Coquille, Oregon this 5th day of October, 2015. 
/s/   
      Matt Rowe, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Rene Collins, City Recorder   CITY OF COQUILLE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1499 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF COQUILLE, OREGON, AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1436 TO AMEND THE FRANCHISE FEE OF THE NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE WITH NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS COMPANY FOR THE REMAINDER OF THE TERM OF THE PARTIES' FRANCHISE AGREEMENT 
WHEREAS, The City of Coquille ("City") and Northwest Natural Gas Company ("NW Natural") entered into a Franchise Agreement, effective July 1, 2002 (the "Franchise"), which was approved and adopted by the City in Ordinance No. 1436 (the "Ordinance"); and 
WHEREAS, The City and NW Natural now wish to amend the Franchise to increase the Franchise Fee set forth in Section 3.1 of the Franchise to 5.94% for the remainder of the term of the Franchise effective January 1, 2016. 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY OF COQUILLE CITY COUNCIL ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1: The Franchise Fee of the Franchise is hereby increased effective January 1, 2016 to 5.94% by agreement NW Natural and the City for the remainder of the term of the Franchise, as indicated in the Amendment attached hereto and made part of this Ordinance as Exhibit A. 
Section 2: Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective upon execution of the Amendment by NW Natural and thirty (30) days after passage of this Ordinance. 
Read the first time: n/a 
Read the second time: Nov. 2, 2015 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 2nd day of November 2015. 
/s/   
      Matt Rowe, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Rene Collins, City Recorder   EXHIBIT A 
AMENDMENT TO FRANCHISE AGREEMENT 
    THIS AMENDMENT TO FRANCHISE AGREEMENT (this "Amendment") is made and effective on December 2, 2015, by and between NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS COMPANY, a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Oregon ("NW Natural"), and CITY OF COQUILLE, a municipality organized under the laws of Oregon ("City"). NW Natural and City are sometimes referred to collectively as, the "Parties" and each individually, a "Party". 
    WHEREAS, the Parties entered into a Franchise Agreement, effective July l, 2002 (the "Agreement"), which was approved and adopted by the City in Ordinance No. 1436; 
    WHEREAS, the Parties wish to amend the Agreement to reflect the agreed-upon increase in the Franchise Fee to 5.94% from five percent (5%) effective January 1, 2016; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, for and in consideration of the mutual promises of the Parties as set forth herein, and other valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the Parties agree as follows: 
1. Amendment the Agreement relating to Franchise Fee. Section 3.1 of the Agreement is replaced with and amended to the text below, and NW Natural and City Agree that the increased Franchise Fee reflected below will be effective as of January 1, 2016: 
" 3.1 Amount. As compensation for the benefits and privileges granted under this Franchise, and for Grantee's entry upon and deployment within the Right-of-Way, Grantee shall pay to the City an amount equal to five point ninety-four percent (5.94%) of Grantee's Gross Revenues (the "Franchise Fee"). The Franchise Fee includes all compensation for the use of the Right-of-Way pursuant to this Franchise. The City may charge additional compensation for the use of any Public Place. The Grantee may offset against the Franchise Fee the amount of any license fee, permit fee or other fee or charge paid to the City in connection with the Grantee's use of the Right-of-Way when the fee or charge is imposed upon Grantee alone or not under an ordinance or resolution applicable to others in addition to Grantee. Grantee may also offset against the Franchise Fee the amount of any privilege tax particularly imposed upon energy utilities. The Franchise Fee shall not be deemed to be in lieu of or a waiver of any ad valorem property tax which the City may not or hereafter be entitled to, or, or to participate in, or to levy upon the property of Grantee." 
2. Continued Effectiveness of Agreement. All other provisions of the Agreement remain in full force and effect, except as otherwise amended in writing, by mutual consent of NW Natural and City. 
3. Miscellaneous. 
    3.1 Captions. The captions contained in this Amendment are for convenience and reference only and in no way define, describe, extend or limit the scope or intent of this Amendment or the intent of any provision contained herein. 
    3.2 Governing Law. This Amendment shall be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon. 
    3.3 Counterparts; Facsimile Signatures. This Amendment may be executed in counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original, but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument. Any signature page of any such counterpart, or any electronic facsimile thereof, may be attached or appended to any other counterpart to complete a fully executed counterpart of this Amendment, and any telecopy or other facsimile transmission of any signature of a Party shall be deemed an original and shall bind such Party. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have caused this Amendment to be executed by their respective authorized representatives as of the date first set forth above. 
NW Natural Gas Company 
By: ____________ 
Name: ____________ 
Title: ____________ 
CITY OF COQUILLE 
By: Matt Rowe 
Name: Matt Rowe 
Title: Mayor 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR OREGON CITIES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Oregon cities. They are current with the 2015 Regular Session of the State legislature. 
General Provisions 
Incorporation of cities 
ORS § 221.005 et seq. 
City charters 
Oregon Const. Art. XI, § 2 
Charter amendments 
ORS § 221.210 
Boundary changes 
ORS ch. 222 
Ordinances 
ORS § 221.275 et seq. 
Enforcement of ordinances 
ORS §§ 30.315 and 221.315 
Procedures for infractions, violations and traffic offenses 
ORS ch. 153 
Elections 
ORS §§ 221.180, 221.200, 221.230 
Initiative and referendum 
ORS §§ 221.210 and 250.255 et seq. 
Administration and Personnel 
City officers 
ORS § 221.110 et seq. 
Municipal courts 
ORS §§ 221.140, 221.336 et seq. 
Public meetings 
ORS § 192.610 et seq. 
Emergency management and services 
ORS ch. 401 
Planning commissions 
ORS § 227.010 et seq. 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial administration 
ORS ch. 294 
Public contracts and purchasing 
ORS chs. 279A-279C 
Assessments for local improvements 
ORS ch. 223 
Limitations on powers of city to assist corporations 
Oregon Const. Art. XI § 9 
Revenue sharing for cities 
ORS § 221.770 
Business Licenses and Regulations 
Taxation of liquor prohibited 
ORS § 473.190 
Animals 
Animal control 
ORS ch. 609 
Rabies control 
ORS § 433.340 et seq. 
Health and Safety 
General authority 
ORS § 221.410 
Health Hazard Abatement Law 
ORS § 222.840 et seq. 
Camping by homeless 
ORS § 203.077 et seq. 
Fireworks 
ORS § 480.111 et seq. 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
General authority 
ORS § 221.410 
State penal code 
ORS title 16 
Curfew 
ORS § 419C.680 
Firearms regulation 
ORS § 166.170 et seq. 
Public intoxication 
ORS § 430.402 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Oregon vehicle code 
ORS title 59 
Local authority 
ORS §§ 801.038, 801.040 
Rules of the road 
ORS ch. 811 
Driving under influence of intoxicants 
ORS ch. 813 
Off-road vehicles 
ORS ch. 821 
Abandoned vehicles 
ORS ch. 819 
Parking offenses 
ORS § 221.275 et seq. 
Bicycles 
ORS § 814.400 et seq. 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
City improvements and works 
ORS ch. 223 
City parks, memorials and cemeteries 
ORS ch. 226 
Public Services 
Municipal utilities 
ORS ch. 225 
Regulation of public utilities 
ORS § 221.420 et seq. 
City sewers and sanitation 
ORS ch. 224 
System development charges 
ORS § 223.297 et seq. 
Buildings and Construction 
State building code 
ORS ch. 455 
Adoption of codes by reference 
ORS § 221.330 
Radio antennas 
ORS § 221.295 
Subdivisions 
Subdivisions and partitions 
ORS ch. 92 
Zoning 
City planning and zoning 
ORS ch. 227 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Note: City of Coquille ordinances prior to the ordinance dated 12-16-01 are either missing, of a special nature, or repealed and have not been included in this ordinance list and disposition table. 
    A prefix preceding an ordinance number indicates the number of the group to which the ordinance belongs. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
Number Date 12-16-01 (Repealer) 4-55 02-04-02 Bond issue (Special) 4-18 09-16-02 (Repealed by 705) 4-19 99-23-02 (Repealed by 705) 09-23-02 (Repealed by 93) 02-01-04 (Repealed by 705) 02-15-04 (Repealed by 705) 03-07-04 (Repealed by 705) 03-07-04 (Repealed by 705) 4-24 03-07-04 (Repealed by 330) 08-01-04 (Repealed by 705) 10-03-04 (Repealed by 116) 11-04 (Failed to pass) 4-26 12-08-04 (Repealed by 330) 12-14-04 (Repealed by 705) 12-19-04 Street improvement (Special) 12-21-04 (Repealed by 705) 02-06-05 (Repealed by 705) 03-09-05 (Repealed by 705) 4-28 09-05-05 (Repealed by 87) 4-29 10-02-05 (Repealed by 707) 4-87 12-15-05 Boarding moving trains (10.08) 4-88 04-02-06 Franchise (Special) 4-89 (Repealed by 705) 4-90 04-23-06 (Missing) 4-91 07-02-06 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 4-92 07-02-06 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 4-93 (Repealed by 705) 4-94 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 08-06-06 (Repealed by 66) 4-33 12-03-06 (Repealed by 705) 4-96 09-07-06 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 5-34 06-05-07 (Repealed by 705) 5-35 (Repealer) 5-36 (Repealed by 949) 5-37 (Repealed by 330) 5-38 (Repealed by 705) 5-39 (Repealed by 705) 5-40 (Repealed by 705) 5-41 (Repealed by 705) 5-42 (Repealed by 116) 5-43 (Repealed by 93) 5-44 (Repealed by 144) 5-45 (Missing) 5-46 (Repealed by 121) 5-47 (Repealed by 330) 5-48 (Repealed by 705) 5-9 (Repealed by 705) 5-50 Public ways (Special) 5-51 (Repealed by 99) 5-52 (Repealed by 332) 5-53 (Repealed by 93) 5-54 (Repealed by 705) 5-55 (Repealed by 316) 5-56 (Repealed by 705) 5-57 (Repealed by 330) 5-58 (Repealed by 705) 5-59 (Repealed by 182) 5-60 (Repealed by 705) 5-61 Public ways (Special) 5-62 (Repealed by 705) 5-63 (Repealed by 705) 5-64 (Repealed by 705) 5-65 (Repealed by 106) 5-66 (Repealed by 709) 5-67 Franchise (Special) 5-68 (Repealed by 84) 5-69 (Repealed by 705) 5-70 (Repealed by 705) 5-71 (Missing) 5-72 (Repealed by 110) 5-73 Public ways (Special) 5-74 (Repealed by 705) 5-75 (Repealed by 950) 5-76 (Repealed by 330) 5-77 Franchise (Special) 5-78 (Repealed by 330) 5-79 (Repealed by 705) 5-80 Franchise (Special) 5-81 (Repealed by 332) 5-82 (Repealed by 332) 5-83 (Repealed by 330) 5-84 (Repealer) 5-85 (Repealed by 176) 5-86 (Repealed by 705) 5-87 (Repealer) 5-88 (Repealed by 705) 5-89 (Repealed by 108) 5-90 (Repealed by 93) 5-91 (Repealed by 705) 5-92 (Missing) 5-93 (Repealed by 104) 5-94 (Repealed by 330) 5-95 (Repealed by 110) 5-96 (Repealed by 104) 5-97 Public ways (Special) 5-98 (Repealed by 705) 5-99 (Repealer) 5-100 (Repealed by 108) 5-101 Public ways (Special) 5-102 (Repealed by 705) 5-103 (Repealed by 330) 5-104 (Repealed by 705) 5-106 (Repealed by 121) 5-107 (Repealed by 118) 5-108 (Repealer) 5-109 Election (Special) 5-110 (Repealer) 5-111 Franchise (Special) 5-112 Miscellaneous (Special) 5-113 (Repealed by 124) 5-114 (Repealed by 121) 5-115 (Repealed by 218) 5-116 (Repealed by 228) 5-117 (Repealed by 121) 5-118 (Repealed by 708) 5-119 (Repealed by 706) 5-120 (Repealed by 121) 5-121 (Repealed by 705) 5-122 (Repealed by 705) 5-123 (Repealed by 705) 5-124 (Repealer) 5-125 (Repealed by 705) 5-126 (Repealed by 705) 5-127 (Repealed by 330) 5-128 (Repealed by 705) 5-129 (Repealed by 705) 5-130 06-23-13 Franchise (Special) 5-131 (Repealed by 344) 5-132 (Repealed by 705) 5-133 Miscellaneous (Special) 5-134 Bond issue (Special) 5-135 Public ways (Special) 5-136 (Repealed by 705) 5-137 Bond issue (Special) 5-138 11-24-14 Miscellaneous (Special) 5-139 Tax levy (Special) 5-140 Election (Special) 5-141 Bond issue (Special) 5-142 Public ways (Special) 5-143 Bond issue (Special) 5-144 (Repealed by 330) 5-145 Tax levy (Special) 5-146 (Repealer) 5-147 (Repealed by 705) 5-148 (Repealed by 217) 5-149 (Repealed by 332) 5-150 (Repealed by 705) 5-151 Tax levy (Special) 5-152 (Repealed by 705) 5-153 (Repealed by 226) 5-154 (Repealed by 938) 5-155 Tax levy (Special) 5-156 Election (Special) 5-157 (Repealed by 705) 5-158 (Repealed by 214) 5-159 (Repealed by 705) 5-160 (Repealed by 327) 5-161 (Repealed by 705) 5-162 (Repealed by 225) 5-163 (Repealed by 705) 5-164 (Repealed by 218) 5-165 (Repealed by 218) 5-166 Election (Special) 5-167 Election (Special) 5-168 (Repealed by 705) 5-169 Franchise (Special) 5-170 (Repealed by 182) 5-171 Tax levy (Special) 5-172 (Repealed by 705) 5-173 (Repealed by 174) 5-174 Franchise (Special) 5-175 (Repealed by 705) 5-176 (Repealed by 329) 5-177 Franchise (Special) 5-178 (Repealed by 217) 5-179 Election (Special) 5-180 (Repealed by 553) 5-181 (Repealed by 332) 5-182 (Repealed by 705) 5-183 (Repealed by 339) 5-184 (Repealed by 226) 5-185 (Repealed by 329) 5-186 (Repealer) 5-187 Election (Special) 5-188 Tax levy (Special) 5-189 Public ways (Special) 5-190 Election (Special) 5-191 Bond issue (Special) 5-192 Tax levy (Special) 5-193 Tax levy (Special) 5-194 (Repealed by 228) 5-195 Miscellaneous (Special) 5-196 (Repealed by 705) 5-197 (Repealed by 217) 5-198 (Repealed by 201) 5-199 (Repealed by 705) 5-200 Tax levy (Special) 5-201 (Repealed by 202) 5-202 (Repealer) 5-203 (Repealed by 314) 5-204 Franchise (Special) 5-205 (Repealed by 705) 5-206 (Repealer) 5-207 (Repealed by 705) 5-208 (Repealed by 705) 5-209 Election (Special) 5-210 (Repealed by 705) 5-211 Tax levy (Special) 5-212 (Repealed by 333) 5-213 (Repealed by 705) 5-214 (Repealed by 330) 5-215 (Repealed by 314) 5-216 (Repealed by 217) 5-217 (Repealed by 232) 5-218 (Repealed by 1119) 5-219 Election (Special) 5-220 (Repealed by 330) 5-221 (Repealed by 226) 5-222 (Repealed by 232) 5-223 (Repealed by 296) 5-224 (Repealed by 327) 5-225 (Repealed by 938) 5-226 (Repealed by 229) 5-227 (Repealed by 296) 5-228 (Repealed by 295) 5-229 (Repealed by 705) 5-230 (Repealed by 705) 5-231 (Repealed by 705) 5-232 (Repealed by 318) 5-233 (Repealed by 236) 5-234 (Repealed by 330) 5-235 (Repealed by 705) 5-236 (Repealed by 1151) 5-237 (Repealed by 318) 5-238 (Repealed by 332) 5-239 Fowl (6.04) 5-240 (Repealed by 330) 5-241 (Repealed by 717) 5-242 (Repealed by 318) 5-243 (Repealed by 709) 5-244 (Repealed by 1151) 5-245 (Repealed by 316) 5-246 (Repealed by 705) 5-247 (Repealed by 320) 5-248 (Superseded by 1152) 5-249 (Repealed by 708) 5-250 (Repealed by 330) 5-251 (Repealed by 1151) 5-252 (Repealed by 705) 5-253 (Repealed by 254) 5-254 (Repealed by 705) 5-255 (Repealed by 330) 5-256 (Repealed by 332) 5-256A (Repealed by 705) 5-257 (Repealed by 705) 5-258 Sewer improvement (Special) 5-259 (Missing) 5-260 (Repealed by 705) 5-261 (Repealed by 339) 5-262 (Repealed by 333) 5-263 (Repealed by 717) 5-264 Vehicle wrecking businesses (5.20) 5-265 (Repealed by 734) 5-266 (Repealed by 316) 5-267 Franchise (Special) 5-268 (Repealed by 705) 5-269 (Repealed by 316) 5-270 (Repealed by 1151) 5-271 (Repealed by 705) 5-272 Miscellaneous (Special) 5-273 Tax levy (Special) 5-274 (Repealed by 318) 5-275 Miscellaneous (Special) 5-276 (Repealed by 316) 5-277 (Repealed by 705) 5-278 (Repealed by 330) 5-279 (Repealed by 330) 5-280 (Repealed by 316) 5-281 (Missing) 5-282 (Repealed by 334) 5-283 (Repealed by 956, 975) 5-284 (Superseded by 1152) 5-285 (Repealed by 316) 5-286 (Repealed by 327) 5-287 (Repealed by 334) 5-288 (Repealed by 705) 5-289 (Repealed by 705) 5-290 (Repealed by 1297) 5-291 (Repealed by 952) 5-292 (Repealed by 1119) 5-293 (Repealed by 298) 5-294 Election (Special) 5-295 Peddlers; repeals Ord. 228 (Repealed by 1346) 5-296 (Repealed by 966) 5-297 Annexation (Special) 5-298 (Repealed by 316) 5-299 (Repealed by 316) 5-300 Miscellaneous (Special) 5-301 (Repealed) 5-302 (Repealed by 329) 5-303 (Repealed by 877) 5-304 (Repealed by 1048) 5-305 (Repealed by 325) 5-306 (Repealed by 1145) 5-307 (Repealed by 877) 5-308 (Repealed by 760) 5-309 (Repealed by 1119) 5-310 (Repealed by 1048) 5-311 (Repealed by 1048) 5-312 (Repealed by 329) 5-313 (Repealed by 707) 5-314 (Repealed) 5-315 (Repealed by 334) 5-316 (Repealed by 767) 5-317 (Repealed by 326) 5-318 (Repealed by 941) 5-319 Rezone (Special) 5-320 (Repealed by 941) 5-321 Street trees (12.16) 5-322 (Repealed by 1104) 5-323 Street improvement (Special) 5-324 (Repealed by 1307) 5-325 (Repealed by 332) 5-326 (Superseded by 851) 5-327 (Repealed by 1125) 5-328 (Repealed by 949) 5-329 (Superseded by 833) 5-330 (Repealed by 949) 5-331 (Repealed by 965) 5-332 (Repealed by 938) 5-333 (Repealer) 5-334 (Repealed by 844) 5-335 (Repealed by 950) 5-336 (Repealed by 867) 5-337 (Number not used) 5-338 (Repealed by 767) 5-339 (Repealed by 988) 5-340 Rezone (Special) 5-341 Rezone (Special) 5-342 (Repealed by 1102) 5-343 (Repealed by 1145, 1307) 5-344 (Repealed by 740) 35 06-05-07 (Repealer) 1 07-08-07 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 2 07-08-07 Street improvement (Special) 3 07-08-07 Street improvement (Special) 4 07-15-07 Street improvement (Special) 5 07-15-07 Street improvement (Special) 08-05-07 Street improvement (Special) 6 11-07-07 Street improvement (Special) 7 12-20-07 Tax levy (Special) 45 02-05-08 Public ways (Special) 8 02-05-08 Street improvement (Special) 9 02-05-08 Street improvement (Special) 10 02-05-08 Street improvement (Special) 11 05-05-08 Street improvement (Special) 12 05-25-08 Street improvement (Special) 13 05-25-08 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 14 06-08-08 Street improvement (Special) 15 12-21-08 Tax levy (Special) 71 06-10-09 Franchise (Special) 06-10-09 Street improvement (Special) 06-10-09 Street improvement (Special) 16 11-24-09 Street improvement (Special) 17 12-29-09 Tax levy (Special) 18 09-10 (Repealed by 41) 19 11-07-10 Public ways (Special) 20 11-07-10 Public ways (Special) 21 11-07-10 Public ways (Special) 22 12-20-10 Tax levy (Special) 23 03-06-11 (Repealed by 24) 24 04-10-11 (Repealer) 25 04-27-11 Election (Special) 26 Street improvement (Special) 27 Public ways (Special) 28 Public ways (Special) 29 Public ways (Special) 30 Public ways (Special) 31 Public ways (Special) 32 Public ways (Special) 33 Public ways (Special) 34 Public ways (Special) 35 Public ways (Special) 36 Public ways (Special) 37 Public ways (Special) 38 Public ways (Special) 39 Public ways (Special) 40 Public ways (Special) 41 Public ways (Special) 42 Street improvement (Special) 43 (Repealed by 45) 44 Tax levy (Special) 45 (Repealed by 46) 46 Miscellaneous (Special) 47 Sewer improvement (Special) 48 Street improvement (Special) 49 Election (Special) 50 Public ways (Special) 51 Public ways (Special) 52 Street improvement (Special) 53 Public ways (Special) 54 Street improvement (Special) 55 Sewer improvement (Special) 56 Sewer improvement (Special) 57 Street improvement (Special) 58 Street improvement (Special) 59 Street improvement (Special) 60 Miscellaneous (Special) 61 Public ways (Special) 62 Street improvement (Special) 63 Street improvement (Special) 64 Sewer improvement (Special) 65 Street improvement (Special) 65A Miscellaneous (Special) 66 Miscellaneous (Special) 67 Sewer improvement (Special) 68 Sewer improvement (Special) 69 Sewer improvement (Special) 70 Public ways (Special) 71 Street improvement (Special) 72 Street improvement (Special) 73 Street improvement (Special) 74 Street improvement (Special) 75 Street improvement (Special) 76 Street improvement (Special) 77 Sewer improvement (Special) 78 Street improvement (Special) 79 Street improvement (Special) 80 Street improvement (Special) 81 Tax levy (Special) 82 Public ways (Special) 83 Street improvement (Special) 84 Street improvement (Special) 85 Miscellaneous (Special) 86 Election (Special) 87 Election (Special) 88 Election (Special) 89 Public ways (Special) 90 Street improvement (Special) 91 Public ways (Special) 92 Street improvement (Special) 93 Public ways (Special) 94 (Repealer) 95 Public ways (Special) 96 Street improvement (Special) 97 Street improvement (Special) 98 Street improvement (Special) 99 Sewer improvement (Special) 100 Street improvement (Special) 101 Sewer improvement (Special) 102 Public ways (Special) 103 Public ways (Special) 104 Street improvement (Special) 105 Tax levy (Special) 106 Street improvement (Special) 107 Street improvement (Special) 108 Street improvement (Special) 109 Street improvement (Special) 110 Election (Special) 111 Street improvement (Special) 112 Street improvement (Special) 113 Bond issue (Special) 114 Public ways (Special) 115 Public ways (Special) 116 Public ways (Special) 117 Public ways (Special) 118 Public ways (Special) 119 Public ways (Special) 120 Public ways (Special) 121 Public ways (Special) 122 Public ways (Special) 123 Election (Special) 124 Street improvement (Special) 125 Street improvement (Special) 126 Street improvement (Special) 127 Street improvement (Special) 128 08-28-14 128 09-03-14 129 Street improvement (Special) 130 Street improvement (Special) 131 Street improvement (Special) 132 Street improvement (Special) 133 Street improvement (Special) 134 Public ways (Special) 135 Street improvement (Special) 136 Bond issue (Special) 137 Street improvement (Special) 138 Bond issue (Special) 139 Street improvement (Special) 140 Bond issue (Special) 141 Public ways (Special) 142 Street improvement (Special) 143 Public ways (Special) 144 Public ways (Special) 145 Street improvement (Special) 146 Street improvement (Special) 147 Street improvement (Special) 148 Street improvement (Special) 149 Miscellaneous (Special) 150 Public ways (Special) 151 Public ways (Special) 152 Street improvement (Special) 153 Street improvement (Special) 154 Street improvement (Special) 155 Street improvement (Special) 156 Miscellaneous (Special) 157 Bond issue (Special) 158 Bond issue (Special) 159 Bond issue (Special) 160 Street improvement (Special) 161 Bond issue (Special) 162 Public ways (Special) 163 Miscellaneous (Special) 164 Street improvement (Special) 165 Street improvement (Special) 166 Miscellaneous (Special) 167 Street improvement (Special) 168 Miscellaneous (Special) 169 Miscellaneous (Special) 170 Miscellaneous (Special) 171 [Same as Ord. 5-171] 172 Sewer improvement (Special) 173 Sewer improvement (Special) 174 Street improvement (Special) 175 Street improvement (Special) 176 Public ways (Special) 177 Street improvement (Special) 178 Public ways (Special) 179 Public ways (Special) 180 Public ways (Special) 181 Tax levy (Special) 182 Sewer improvement (Special) 183 Street improvement (Special) 184 Bond issue (Special) 185 Bond issue (Special) 186 Street improvement (Special) 187 Street improvement (Special) 188 Bond issue (Special) 189 Bond issue (Special) 190 Public ways (Special) 191 Street improvement (Special) 192 [Same as Ord. 5-192] 193 Street improvement (Special) 194 Miscellaneous (Special) 195 Public ways (Special) 196 Public ways (Special) 197 Street improvement (Special) 198 Street improvement (Special) 199 Street improvement (Special) 200 Public ways (Special) 201 Miscellaneous (Special) 202 Public ways (Special) 203 Street improvement (Special) 204 Street improvement (Special) 205 Public ways (Special) 206 Street improvement (Special) 207 Street improvement (Special) 208 Street improvement (Special) 209 Public ways (Repealed by 1403) 210 Street improvement (Special) 211 Street improvement (Special) 212 Street improvement (Special) 213 Street improvement (Special) 214 Public ways (Special) 215 Street improvement (Special) 216 Tax levy (Special) 217 Street improvement (Special) 218 Bond issue (Special) 219 Bond issue (Special) 220 Bond issue (Special) 221 Bond issue (Special) 222 Street improvement (Special) 223 Street improvement (Special) 224 Miscellaneous (Special) 225 Bond issue (Special) 226 Bond issue (Special) 227 Miscellaneous (Special) 228 Street improvement (Special) 229 Street improvement (Special) 230 Miscellaneous (Special) 231 Street improvement (Special) 232 Bond issue (Special) 233 Bond issue (Special) 234 Bond issue (Special) 235 Miscellaneous (Special) 236 Bond issue (Special) 237 Bond issue (Special) 238 Bond issue (Special) 239 08-07-22 Tax levy (Special) 239 11-25-22 Tax levy (Special) 240 Street improvement (Special) 241 Street improvement (Special) 242 Street improvement (Special) 243 Bond issue (Special) 244 Public ways (Special) 245 Street improvement (Special) 246 Public ways (Special) 247 Public ways (Special) 248 Street improvement (Special) 249 Street improvement (Special) 250 Street improvement (Special) 251 Bond issue (Special) 252 Tax levy (Special) 253 Bond issue (Special) 254 Bond issue (Special) 255 Public ways (Special) 256 Street improvement (Special) 257 Sewer improvement (Special) 258 Franchise (Special) 259 Election (Special) 260 Tax levy (Special) 261 Street improvement (Special) 262 Sewer improvement (Special) 263 Bond issue (Special) 264 Bond issue (Special) 265 Street improvement (Special) 266 Street improvement (Special) 267 Street improvement (Special) 268 Public ways (Special) 269 Street improvement (Special) 270 Street improvement (Special) 271 Bond issue (Special) 272 Bond issue (Special) 273 Street improvement (Special) 274 Miscellaneous (Special) 275 Bond issue (Special) 276 Street improvement (Special) 277 Public ways (Special) 278 Street improvement (Special) 279 Street improvement (Special) 280 Street improvement (Special) 281 Election (Special) 282 Street improvement (Special) 283 Street improvement (Special) 284 Street improvement (Special) 285 Street improvement (Special) 286 Bond issue (Special) 287 Bond issue (Special) 288 Street improvement (Special) 289 Street improvement (Special) 290 Street improvement (Special) 291 Street improvement (Special) 292 Street improvement (Special) 293 Bond issue (Special) 294 Bond issue (Special) 295 Street improvement (Repealed by 1405) 296 Bond issue (Special) 297 Bond issue (Special) 298 Bond issue (Special) 299 Bond issue (Special) 300 Sewer improvement (Special) 301 Street improvement (Special) 302 Public ways (Special) 303 Public ways (Special) 304 Public ways (Special) 305 Sewer improvement (Special) 306 Sewer improvement (Special) 307 Street improvement (Special) 308 Street improvement (Special) 309 Street improvement (Special) 310 Public ways (Special) 311 Bond issue (Special) 312 Bond issue (Special) 313 Bond issue (Special) 314 Bond issue (Special) 315 Street improvement (Special) 316 Bond issue (Special) 317 Sewer improvement (Special) 318 Public ways (Special) 319 Street improvement (Special) 320 Bond issue (Special) 321 Bond issue (Special) 322 Sewer improvement (Special) 323 Street improvement (Special) 324 Street improvement (Special) 325 Bond issue (Special) 326 Street improvement (Special) 327 Sewer improvement (Special) 328 Annexation (Special) 329 Street improvement (Special) 330 Bond issue (Special) 331 Street improvement (Special) 332 Public ways (Special) 333 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 334 Sewer improvement (Special) 335 Bond issue (Special) 336 Bond issue (Special) 337 Tax levy (Special) 338 Street improvement (Special) 339 Bond issue (Special) 340 Street improvement (Special) 341 Miscellaneous (Special) 342 Bond issue (Special) 343 Sewer improvement (Special) 344 Street improvement (Special) 345 Bond issue (Special) 346 Franchise (Special) 347 Public ways (Special) 348 Public ways (Special) 349 Tax levy (Special) 350 Street improvement (Special) 351 Bond issue (Special) 352 Bond issue (Special) 353 Sewer improvement (Special) 354 Bond issue (Special) 355 Public ways (Special) 356 Miscellaneous (Special) 357 Sewer improvement (Special) 358 (Repealed by 706) 359 Street improvement (Special) 360 Sewer improvement (Special) 361 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 362 Sewer improvement (Special) 363 Tax levy (Special) 364 Franchise (Special) 365 Tax levy (Special) 366 Bond issue (Special) 367 Tax levy (Special) 368 (Failed to pass) 369 (Repealed by 460) 370 Franchise (Special) 371 Tax levy (Special) 372 Sewer improvement (Special) 373 Franchise (Special) 374 Tax levy (Special) 375 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 376 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 377 Bond issue (Special) 378 Bond issue (Special) 379 Street improvement (Special) 380 Street improvement (Special) 381 Street improvement (Special) 382 Street improvement (Special) 383 Street improvement (Special) 384 Street improvement (Special) 385 Street improvement (Special) 386 Sewer improvement (Special) 387 Miscellaneous (Special) 388 Tax levy (Special) 389 Street improvement (Special) 390 Bond issue (Special) 391 Street improvement (Special) 392 Tax levy (Special) 393 Street improvement (Special) 394 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 395 Bond issue (Special) 396 Sewer improvement (Special) 397 (Repealed by 398) 399 Street improvement (Special) 400 Sewer improvement (Special) 401 Tax levy (Special) 402 Bond issue (Special) 403 Bond issue (Special) 404 Street improvement (Special) 405 Street improvement (Special) 406 Bond issue (Special) 407 Bond issue (Special) 408 Miscellaneous (Special) 409 Miscellaneous (Special) 410 Street improvement (Special) 411 (Repealed by 284) 412 Public ways (Special) 413 Public ways (Special) 414 Public ways (Special) 415 Sewer improvement (Special) 416 Tax levy (Special) 417 Street improvement (Special) 418 Street improvement (Special) 419 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 420 Miscellaneous (Special) 421 Sewer improvement (Special) 422 Street improvement (Special) 423 Bond issue (Special) 424 Street improvement (Special) 425 Miscellaneous (Special) 426 Street improvement (Special) 427 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 428 Miscellaneous (Special) 429 Street improvement (Special) 430 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 431 Tax levy (Special) 432 Street improvement (Special) 433 Street improvement (Special) 434 (Repealed by 296) 435 Miscellaneous (Special) 436 Public ways (Special) 437 Sewer improvement (Special) 438 (Repealed by 318) 439 Election (Special) 440 Street improvement (Special) 441 Sewer improvement (Special) 442 Sewer improvement (Special) 443 Tax levy (Special) 444 Street improvement (Special) 445 (Repealed by 5310) 446 Bond issue (Special) 447 Miscellaneous (Special) 448 Miscellaneous (Special) 449 Tax levy (Special) 450 Street improvement (Special) 451 (Repealed by 318) 452 Street improvement (Special) 453 Miscellaneous (Special) 454 Bond issue (Special) 455 Tax levy (Special) 456 Miscellaneous (Special) 457 Tax levy (Special) 458 (Repealed by 560) 459 Tax levy (Special) 460 (Repealed by 893) 461 Election (Special) 462 Bond issue (Special) 463 (Repealed by 560) 464 Sewer improvement (Special) 465 Tax levy (Special) 466 Miscellaneous (Special) 468 Sewer improvement (Special) 469 Tax levy (Special) 470 Miscellaneous (Special) 471 Election (Special) 472 Franchise (Special) 473 Bond issue (Special) 474 Street improvement (Special) 475 Franchise (Special) 476 Election (Special) 477 Street improvement (Special) 478 Election (Special) 479 Tax levy (Special) 480 Street improvement (Special) 481 (Repealed by 484) 482 Miscellaneous (Special) 485 Election (Special) 486 Annexation (Special) 487 Sewer improvement (Special) 488 Election (Special) 489 Election (Special) 490 (Repealed by 705) 491 Street improvement (Special) 492 Election (Special) 493 Miscellaneous (Special) 494 Election (Special) 495 Sewer improvement (Special) 496 Miscellaneous (Special) 497 Bond issue (Special) 498 Street improvement (Special) 499 Street improvement (Special) 500 Street improvement (Special) 501 Election (Special) 502 Miscellaneous (Special) 503 Miscellaneous (Special) 504 Bond issue (Special) 505 Miscellaneous (Special) 506 Annexation (Special) 507 Annexation (Special) 508 Public ways (Special) 509 Street improvement (Special) 510 Street improvement (Special) 511 Sewer improvement (Special) 512 Election (Special) 513 Street improvement (Special) 514 Bond issue (Special) 515 Bond issue (Special) 516 Tax levy (Special) 517 Miscellaneous (Special) 518 Street improvement (Special) 519 Street improvement (Special) 520 Street improvement (Special) 521 Street improvement (Special) 522 Bond issue (Special) 523 Bond issue (Special) 524 Public ways (Special) 525 Annexation (Special) 526 Annexation (Special) 527 Election (Special) 528 Annexation (Special) 529 Street improvement (Special) 530 Street improvement (Special) 531 (Repealed by 302) 532 Annexation (Special) 533 Election (Special) 534 (Repealed by 560) 535 Election (Special) 536 Election (Special) 537 Election (Special) 538 Tax levy (Special) 539 Sewer improvement (Special) 540 Election (Special) 541 Bond issue (Special) 542 Bond issue (Special) 543 Bond issue (Special) 544 Street improvement (Special) 545 Street improvement (Special) 546 Street improvement (Special) 547 Street improvement (Special) 548 Bond issue (Special) 549 Bond issue (Special) 550 Bond issue (Special) 551 Sewer improvement (Special) 552 Miscellaneous (Special) 553 (Repealed by 1048) 554 Annexation (Special) 555 Sewer improvement (Special) 556 Franchise (Special) 557 Tax levy (Special) 558 Miscellaneous (Special) 559 Street improvement (Special) 560 (Repealed by 303, 329) 561 Election (Special) 562 (Repealed by 705) 563 Miscellaneous (Special) 564 Public ways (Special) 565 Public ways (Special) 566 Miscellaneous (Special) 567 Sewer improvement (Special) 568 Sewer improvement (Special) 569 Miscellaneous (Special) 570 Public ways (Special) 571 Public ways (Special) 572 Bond issue (Special) 573 Bond issue (Special) 574 Street improvement (Special) 575 Bond issue (Special) 576 Bond issue (Special) 577 Election (Special) 578 Election (Special) 579 Sewer improvement (Special) 580 Street improvement (Special) 581 Election (Special) 582 Tax levy (Special) 583 Miscellaneous (Special) 584 Bond issue (Special) 585 Sewer improvement (Special) 586 Miscellaneous (Special) 587 Public ways (Special) 588 Miscellaneous (Special) 589 Street improvement (Special) 590 Street improvement (Special) 591 Street improvement (Special) 592 Street improvement (Special) 593 Public ways (Special) 594 Public ways (Special) 595 Election (Special) 596 Street improvement (Special) 597 Election (Special) 598 Sewer improvement (Special) 599 Bond issue (Special) 600 Sewer improvement (Special) 601 Public ways (Special) 602 Sewer improvement (Special) 603 Tax levy (Special) 604 Election (Special) 605 Miscellaneous (Special) 606 Bond issue (Special) 607 Street improvement (Special) 608 Sewer improvement (Special) 609 Street improvement (Special) 610 Franchise (Special) 611 Bond issue (Special) 612 Election (Special) 613 Street improvement (Special) 614 Sewer improvement (Special) 615 Tax levy (Special) 616 Miscellaneous (Special) 617 Sewer improvement (Special) 618 (Repealed by 329) 619 Street improvement (Special) 620 Sewer improvement (Special) 621 Bond issue (Special) 622 Bond issue (Special) 623 Street improvement (Special) 624 Miscellaneous (Special) 625 Street improvement (Special) 626 (Repealed by 1307) 627 Street improvement (Special) 628 Election (Special) 629 Election (Special) 630 Election (Special) 631 Election (Special) 632 Tax levy (Special) 633 Miscellaneous (Special) 634 Street improvement (Special) 635 Bond issue (Special) 636 Miscellaneous (Special) 637 (Repealed by 760) 638 Election (Special) 639 Election (Special) 640 Street improvement (Special) 641 Election (Special) 642 Tax levy (Special) 643 Miscellaneous (Special) 644 Sewer improvement (Special) 645 Annexation (Special) 646 Annexation (Special) 647 Public ways (Special) 648 Public ways (Special) 649 Bond issue (Special) 650 Street improvement (Special) 651 Tax levy (Special) 652 Miscellaneous (Special) 653 Street improvement (Special) 654 Sewer improvement (Special) 655 Miscellaneous (Special) 656 Public ways (Special) 657 Annexation (Special) 658 Annexation (Special) 659 Sidewalk improvement (Special) 660 Public ways (Special) 661 Annexation (Special) 662 Sewer improvement (Special) 663 Street improvement (Special) 664 Annexation (Special) 665 Public ways (Special) 666 Rezone (Special) 667 Public ways (Special) 668 Miscellaneous (Special) 669 Rezone (Special) 670 Bond issue (Special) 671 Franchise (Special) 672 Miscellaneous (Special) 673 Tax levy (Special) 674 Miscellaneous (Special) 675 Annexation (Special) 676 Annexation (Special) 677 Annexation (Special) 678 Annexation (Special) 679 Election (Special) 680 Miscellaneous (Special) 681 (Number not used) 682 Miscellaneous (Special) 683 Miscellaneous (Special) 684 Miscellaneous (Special) 685 Bond issue (Special) 686 Bond issue (Special) 687 (Number not used) 688 Public ways (Special) 689 Street improvement (Special) 690 Sewer improvement (Special) 691 Tax levy (Special) 692 Miscellaneous (Special) 693 Miscellaneous (Special) 694 Sewer improvement (Special) 695 Sewer improvement (Special) 696 Sewer improvement (Special) 697 Street improvement (Special) 698 Bond issue (Special) 699 Bond issue (Special) 700 Miscellaneous (Special) 701 Street improvement (Special) 702 Public ways (Special) 703 Miscellaneous (Special) 704 Tax levy (Special) 705 (Repealer) 706 (Repealer) 707 (Repealed by 949) 708 (Repealed by 984) 709 (Repealed by 950) 710 Miscellaneous (Special) 711 Miscellaneous (Special) 712 Miscellaneous (Special) 713 (Repealed by 1307) 714 Sewer improvement (Special) 715 Miscellaneous (Special) 716 Street improvement (Special) 717 (Repealed by 954, 1119) 718 (Repealed by 1119) 719 Annexation (Special) 720 Annexation (Special) 721 (Repealed by 760) 722 Miscellaneous (Special) 723 Miscellaneous (Special) 724 (Repealed by 941) 725 (Repealed by 949) 726 Bond issue (Special) 727 (Repealed by 728) 728 (Repealer) 729 Annexation (Special) 730 Miscellaneous (Special) 731 Annexation (Special) 732 Bond issue (Special) 733 (Repealed by 856) 734 (Repealer) 735 Miscellaneous (Special) 736 (Superseded by 833) 737 Rezone (Special) 738 Rezone (Special) 739 (Repealed by 764) 740 (Repealed by 1184) 741 (Repealed by 1119) 742 Miscellaneous (Special) 743 Street improvement (Special) 744 (Superseded by 833) 745 Miscellaneous (Special) 746 Street improvement (Special) 747 Miscellaneous (Special) 748 (Repealed by 760) 749 Rezone (Special) 750 (Repealed by 952) 751 (Repealed by 752) 752 Franchise (Special) 753 Refuse collection and disposal; repeals Ord. 314, garbage (8.04) 754 Franchise (Special) 755 Street improvement (Special) 756 Miscellaneous (Special) 757 Street improvement (Special) 758 Street improvement (Special) 759 (Repealed by 760) 760 (Repealed by 938) 761 Street improvement (Special) 762 Public improvement procedures (3.12) 763 Franchise (Special) 764 Franchise (Special) 765 Street improvement (Special) 766 Street improvement (Special) 767 (Superseded by 846) 768 Franchise (Special) 769 Street improvement (Special) 770 Franchise (Special) 771 Miscellaneous (Special) 772 Miscellaneous (Special) 773 Adds §§ 19 and 20 to Ord. 762, public improvement procedures (3.12) 774 (Repealed by 1138) 775 Street improvement (Special) 776 Street improvement (Special) 777 Street improvement (Special) 778 Street improvement (Special) 779 Street improvement (Special) 780 Miscellaneous (Special) 781 Miscellaneous (Special) 782 Bond issue (Special) 783 Sewer service extensions (Repealed by 1403) 784 Miscellaneous (Special) 785 (Repealed by 949) 786 Election (Special) 787 Election (Special) 788 (Superseded by 833) 789 Annexation (Special) 790 Annexation (Special) 791 Street improvement (Special) 792 Street improvement (Special) 793 Street improvement (Special) 794 Annexation (Special) 795 Election (Special) 796 Miscellaneous (Special) 797 (Repealed by 941) 798 (Repealed by 1307) 799 (Superseded by 833) 800 Annexation (Special) 801 Annexation (Special) 802 (Repealed by 1067) 803 Franchise (Special) 804 (Repealed by 1048) 805 Election (Special) 806 Franchise (Expired) 807 (Repealed by 938) 808 (Repealed by 1270, 1307) 809 (Repealed by 832) 810 (Repealed by 1119) 811 (Repealed by 941) 812 Adds § A to Ord. 762, public improvement procedures (3.12) 813 Miscellaneous (Special) 814 02-16-70 (Superseded by 833) 814 04-06-70 Election (Special) 815 (Repealed by 1048) 816 (Repealed by 949) 817 (Repealed by 886) 818 Miscellaneous (Special) 819 Election (Special) 820 Tax levy (Special) 821 (Repealed by 1048) 822 (Superseded by 833) 823 Election (Special) 824 (Number not used) 825 Street improvement (Special) 826 Street improvement (Special) 827 (Repealed by 949) 828 Annexation (Special) 829 Bond issue (Special) 830 (Repealed by 851) 832 Miscellaneous (Special) 833 (Repealed by 918) 834 Election (Special) 835 Tax levy (Special) 836 Annexation (Special) 837 Annexation (Special) 838 Miscellaneous (Special) 839 (Repealed by 918) 840 Annexation (Special) 841 Public ways (Special) 842 Miscellaneous (Special) 843 Annexation (Special) 844 (Repealed by 1048) 845 (Repealed by 941) 846 (Repealed by 938) 847 (Repealed by 938) 848 Miscellaneous (Special) 849 Harvest of crops on street right-of-way (12.08) 850 Street improvement (Special) 851 (Repealed by 1307) 852 Sewer improvement (Special) 853 Bond issue (Special) 854 Election (Special) 855 Election (Special) 856 (Repealed by 949) 857 (Superseded by 1152) 858 (Repealed by 941) 859 Public ways (Special) 860 Tax levy (Special) 861 (Repealed by 918) 862 Water supply protection (13.20) 863 (Repealed by 949) 864 (Repealed by 949) 865 Street improvement (Special) 866 Street improvement (Special) 867 12-04-72 Amends Ord. 873, sewer service extensions (Repealed by 1403) 867 01-15-73 (Repealed by 1169) 868 (Number not used) 869 Annexation (Special) 870 Annexation (Special) 871 Miscellaneous (Special) 872 Sanitary sewage disposal at construction sites (Repealed by 1403) 873 Annexation (Special) 874 (Repealed by 966) 875 Sewer and drainage connections (Repealed by 1403) 876 (Repealed by 950) 877 (Repealer) 878 Annexation (Special) 879 Tax levy (Special) 880 Tax levy (Special) 881 Real property lien searches (3.16) 882 (Repealed by 938) 883 (Repealed by 918) 884 (Repealed by 938) 885 (Repealed by 918) 886 (Repealed by 949) 887 (Repealed by 918) 888 (Repealed by 966) 889 Real property sale charges (3.04) 890 Annexation (Special) 891 (Repealed by 1307) 892 Annexation (Special) 893 (Repealed by 938) 894 Sewer improvement (Special) 895 Tax levy (Special) 896 Franchise (Expired) 897 (Repealed by 918) 898 Tax levy (Special) 899 Annexation (Special) 900 (Repealed by 966) 901 (Repealed by 966) 902 Zoning variance (Special) 903 (Repealed by 938) 904 (Repealed by 1119) 905 (Repealed by 949) 906 Election (Special) 907 Mayor and council election notice (1.08) 908 Street improvement (Special) 909 Street improvement (Special) 910 Assessment payments (3.12) 911 (Repealed by 913) 912 Tax levy (Special) 913 (Repealed by 914) 914 Bond issue (Special) 915 Tax levy (Special) 916 Franchise (Special) 917 Public ways (Special) 918 (Repealed by 958) 919 (Repealed by 949, 1119) 920 Extension of water service (Repealed by 1295) 921 Annexation (Special) 922 Franchise (Special) 923 Annexation (Special) 924 Library board; repeals Ord. 358 (2.08) 925 Planning commission (Title 17) 926 Franchise (Special) 927 Public ways (Special) 928 Public ways (Special) 929 Amends §§ 3 and 7 of Ord. 762, public improvement procedures (3.12) 930 Amends § 10 of Ord. 321, street trees; § 2 of Ord. 87, boarding moving trains; § 4 of Ord. 239, fowl; § 4 of Ord. 849, harvest of crops on street right-of-way; § 7 of Ord. 862, water supply protection; § 16 of Ord. 295, peddlers; § 10 of Ord. 713, fire and closing-out sales (6.04, 10.08, 12.08, 12.16, 13.20) 931 (Repealed by 952) 932 Annexation (Special) 933 Annexation (Special) 934 (Repealed by 1119) 935 Tax levy (Special) 936 Cable television franchise (Repealed by 1373) 937 Tax levy (Special) 938 (Repealer) 939 (Repealed by 940) 940 Tax levy (Special) 941 (Repealed by 1225A) 942 (Repealed by 1119) 943 (Repealed by 1119) 944 (Repealed by 1307) 945 Municipal court fines; repeals §§ 6, 7 and 8 of Ord. 930 (2.04) 946 Amends Ord. 5-321, street trees (12.16) 947 Amends § 13 of Ord. 762, public improvement procedures (3.12) 948 (Number not used) 949 (Repealed by 1296) 950 Nuisances; repeals Ords. 75, 335, 709 and 876 (8.08) 951 Amends § 1 of Ord. 87, boarding moving trains (Not codified) 952 (Repealed by 1307) 953 (Number not used) 954 (Repealer) 955 Amends § 1 of Ord. 264, vehicle wrecking businesses (5.20) 956 (Repealed by 965) 957 Franchise (Expired) 958 Water system (Repealed by 1402) 959 Annexation (Special) 960 (Repealed by 1169) 961 (Number not used) 962 (Number not used) 963 (Repealed by 1043) 964 Annexation (Special) 965 Discarded vehicles; repeals Ords. 331 and 956 (8.12) 966 (Repealed by 1076) 967 (Repealed by 1277) 968 Public ways (Special) 969 Tax levy (Special) 970 (Repealed by 1119) 971 Annexation (Special) 972 Annexation (Special) 973 (Repealed by 1296) 974 Tax levy (Special) 975 (Repealed by 1143) 976 (Repealed by 1076) 977 Annexation (Special) 978 Annexation (Special) 979 Annexation (Special) 980 Annexation (Special) 981 Annexation (Special) 982 Annexation (Special) 983 Annexation (Special) 984 (Repealer) 985 Revenue sharing (Special) 986 Street vacation (Special) 987 Annexation (Special) 988 (Repealer) 989 (Repealed) 990 Annexation (Special) 991 Annexation (Special) 992 Annexation (Special) 993 Annexation (Special) 994 Annexation (Special) 995 Annexation (Special) 996 Annexation (Special) 997 Annexation (Special) 998 Annexation (Special) 999 Annexation (Special) 1000 Amends § 9 of Ord. 936, cable television franchise (Special) 1001 Revenue sharing (Special) 1002 Budget election (Special) 1003 Charter amendment (Special) 1004 Budget election (Special) 1005 Budget election (Special) 1006 Tax levy (Special) 1007 Annexation (Special) 1008 Annexation (Special) 1009 Annexation (Special) 1010 Annexation (Special) 1011 Street improvement (Repealed by 1402) 1012 Street improvement (Special) 1013 Revenue sharing (Special) 1014 (Repealed by 1119) 1015 (Repealed by 1252) 1016 Annexation (Special) 1017 Annexation (Special) 1018 Annexation (Special) 1019 Budget election (Special) 1020 Annexation (Special) 1021 Annexation (Special) 1022 (Number not used) 1023 Annexation (Special) 1024 Amends § 15 of Ord. 925, planning commission (Title 17) 1025 Amends § 12 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1026 Annexation (Special) 1027 Annexation (Special) 1028 Annexation (Special) 1029 Amends § 9 of Ord. 936, cable television franchise (Special) 1030 Annexation (Special) 1031 Annexation (Special) 1032 Annexation (Special) 1033 (Number not used) 1034 Annexation (Special) 1035 (Repealed by 1307) 1036 Telephone franchise (Expired) 1037 (Repealed by 1119) 1038 Annexation (Special) 1039 Annexation (Special) 1040 Annexation (Special) 1041 Annexation (Special) 1042 Annexation (Special) 1043 (Repealer) 1044 Annexation (Special) 1045 (Repealed by 1119) 1046 (Repealed by 1087, 1141) 1047 (Repealed by 1088) 1050 Assessment (Special) 1051 Assessment (Special) 1052 Street improvement (Special) 1053 Street improvement (Special) 1054 Annexation (Special) 1055 Annexation (Special) 1056 Street vacation (Special) 1057 Annexation (Special) 1058 Annexation (Special) 1059 Election (Special) 1060 Revenue sharing (Special) 1061 Street vacation (Special) 1062 (Repealed by 1119) 1063 Election (Special) 1064 (Repealed) 1065 (Repealed by 1087) 1066 (Repealed by 11190 1067 (Repealed by 1165) 1068 (Repealed by 1087) 1069 (Repealed by 1252) 1070 Amends § 11 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1071 Election (Special) 1072 Annexation (Special) 1073 Adds § 1A and amends §§ 9 and 10 of Ord. 936, cable television franchise (Repealed by 1373) 1074 (Repealed by 1150) 1075 Repeals § 12 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1076 (Repealed by 1157) 1077 (Repealed by 1118) 1078 (Repealed) 1079 (Repealed by 1119) 1080 Charter amendment (Special) 1081 Revenue sharing (Special) 1082 Election (Special) 1083 Election (Special) 1084 (Repealed by 1165) 1085 Tax levy (Special) 1086 Floodplain insurance (Repealed by 1405) 1087 (Repealed by 1154) 1088 Subdivisions; repeals Ord. 1047 (Title 17) 1089 Taxicabs (5.28) 1090 Annexation (Special) 1091 Adds § 12 to Ord. 1089, taxicabs (5.28) 1092 Annexation (Special) 1093 Amends § 11 of Ord. 762, public improvement procedures (3.12) 1094 (Repealed by 1165) 1095 (Repealed by 1307) 1096 Finance director (Special) 1097 Tax levy (Special) 1098 Revenue sharing (Special) 1099 Amends Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1100 Amends §§ 1, 1B, 9 and 10 of Ord. 936, cable television franchise (Special) 1101 Amends § 2 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1405) 1102 (Repealed by 1154) 1103 (Repealed by 1154) 1104 Fire code; repeals Ords. 322 and 342 (Repealed by 1400) 1105 Tax levy (Special) 1106 (Repealed by 1296) 1107 (Repealed by 1154) 1108 Tax levy (Special) 1109 (Repealed by 1165) 1110 (Repealed by 1154) 1111 Charter amendment (Special) 1112 Charter amendment (Special) 1113 Charter amendment (Special) 1114 Charter amendment (Special) 1115 Election (Special) 1116 Election (Special) 1117 Contract review board (3.08) 1118 (Repealed by 1165, 1177) 1119 (Repealer) 1120 (Repealed by 1307) 1121 Amends § 3 of Ord. 881, real property lien searches (Repealed by 1429) 1122 (Repealed by 1138) 1123 (Repealed by 1307) 1124 Assessment (Special) 1125 Dogs; repeals Ord. 327 (6.08) 1126 Amends § 2 of Ord. 862, water supply protection (13.20) 1127 (Repealed by 1296) 1128 Amends §§ 46 and 50 of Ord. 950, nuisances (8.08) 1129 (Repealed by 1307) 1130 Amends §§ 8, 9 and 10 of Ord. 965, discarded vehicles (8.12) 1131 Bond issue (Special) 1132 (Repealed by 1308) 1133 Off-road vehicles in Sturdivant Park (12.20) 1134 (Repealed by 1160) 1135 Tax levy (Special) 1136 Amends § 1 of Ord. 713, fire and closing-out sales (Repealed by 1307) 1137 (Number not used) 1138 Sidewalks; repeals Ord. 774 (12.12) 1139 Sewer rates and charges (Repealed by 1403) 1140 Revenue sharing (Special) 1141 Zoning; repeals Ord. 1046 (Title 17) 1142 Tax levy (Special) 1143 (Repealer) 1144 Amends subsection 4 of § 12 of Ord. 965, discarded vehicles (8.12) 1145 Records retention and disposal; repeals Ord. 306 (2.12) 1146 Amends §§ 9 and 10 of Ord. 1138, sidewalks (12.12) 1147 Amends § 5 of Ord. 1139, sewer rates and charges (Repealed by 1403) 1148 (Repealed by 1307) 1149 (Number not used) 1150 Gambling; repeals Ord. 1074 (5.24) 1151 Amusement devices; repeals Ord. 236 (5.08) 1152 Signs (Repealed by 1405) 1153 (Repealed by 1307) 1154 Amends §§ 3.200, 3.700 and 3.900 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1155 Amends § 11 of Ord. 762, public improvement procedures (3.12) 1156 (Repealed) 1157 (Repealed by 1309) 1158 Amends §§ 2, 15, 21 and 22 of Ord. 925, planning commission (Title 17) 1159 Amends § 5.300 and repeals §§ 3.100 and 4.100 of Ord. 1086, floodplain insurance (Repealed by 1405) 1160 (Repealed by 1165) 1161 Amends § 2 of Ord. 1139, sewer rates and charges (Repealed by 1403) 1162 (Repealed) 1163 (Repealed by 1296) 1163A Amends §§ 1 and 3 of Ord. 295, peddlers (Repealed by 1346) 1164 Assessment (Special) 1165 Adopts personnel manual; repeals Ord. 1067 (Repealed by 1391) 1166 Assessment (Special) 1167 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1168 Street vacation (Special) 1169 (Repealer) 1170 Repeals § 3.506 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Not codified) 1171 Amends subsection 4 of § 3.900 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1172 Amends § 20 and subsection 1 of § 22 of Ord. 925, planning commission (Title 17) 1173 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1174 Amends § 5 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1175 Tax levy (Special) 1176 Amends subsection 1 of § 4 of Ord. 1150, gambling (5.24) 1177 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1178 Amends subsection 2 of § 1 of Ord. 1151, amusement devices (5.08) 1179 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1180 Garage sales (5.12) 1181 Amends subsection 1 of § 3.200 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1182 Tax levy (Special) 1183 Revenue sharing (Special) 1184 Adds § 33 to Ord. 950, nuisances (8.08) 1185 Election (Special) 1186 Election (Special) 1187 (Repealed by 1226) 1188 (Repealed by 1226) 1189 Amends comprehensive plan (Special) 1190 (Repealed by 1307) 1191 Amends comprehensive plan (Special) 1192 Assessment (Special) 1193 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1194 Revenue sharing (Special) 1195 Annexation (Special) 1196 Tax levy (Special) 1197 Tax levy (Special) 1198 Vacation (Special) 1199 Adds §§ 1C and 4 to Ord. 936, cable television franchise (Special) 1200 Adds §§ 19, 20 and 21 to Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1201 Amends § 1 of Ord. 1133, off-road vehicles in Sturdivant Park (12.20) 1202 (Repealed) 1203 Property transfer (Special) 1204 Assessment (Special) 1205 Tax levy (Special) 1206 Tax base election (Special) 1207 Property transfer (Special) 1208 Revenue sharing (Special) 1209 Dangerous buildings; repeals Ords. 1162 and 1202 (Repealed by 1400) 1210 Tax levy (Special) 1211 Adds § 22 and amends subsection (A) of § 11 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1212 Systems development charge (13.24) 1213 Amends subsection 2 of § 3.300 and § 4.700 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1214 Amends §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. 1104, fire code (Repealed by 1400) 1215 Amends comprehensive plan (Special) 1215A Amends § 3.501 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1216 Election (Special) 1217 Charter amendment (Special) 1218 Tax levy (Special) 1219 (Repealed by 1296) 1220 (Repealed by 1252) 1221 (Number not used) 1222 Adds § 1D to Ord. 936, cable television franchise (Repealed by 1373) 1223 Annexation (Special) 1224 Amends subsection (A) of § 11 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1225 Amends subsection (3) of § 49 of Ord. 950, nuisances (8.08) 1225A Traffic (Repealed by 1375) 1226 Floodplain insurance (15.48) 1227 Amends subsection (4) of § 4 of Ord. 1150, gambling (5.24) 1228 Tax levy (Special) 1229 (Repealed by 1307) 1230 Amends Ord. 1225A, traffic (Repealed by 1375) 1231 Annexation (Special) 1232 Revenue sharing (Special) 1233 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1234 Adds subsection (j) to § 1; amends § 2 and subsection (a) of § 11 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1235 Skateboards (Repealed by 1375) 1236 Urban renewal agency (Repealed by 1383) 1237 Charter amendment (Special) 1238 Water service extensions (Not sent) 1239 Revenue sharing (Special) 1240 Water service extensions (Not codified) 1241 Amends § 10 of Ord. 936, cable television franchise (Repealed by 1373) 1242 Assessment (Special) 1243 Parks (Repealed by 1367) 1244 (Repealed by 1296) 1245 Comprehensive plan final periodic review order (Special) 1246 Annexation (Special) 1247 Annexation (Special) 1248 Assessment (Special) 1249 Repeals § 12 of Ord. 1150, gambling (Repealer) 1250 Repeals § 3 of Ord. 1225A, traffic (Repealed by 1375) 1251 Revenue sharing (Special) 1252 Garbage collection franchise (Repealed by 1393) 1253 Amends § 31 and subsections (2) and (5) of § 34 of Ord. 1225A, traffic (Repealed by 1375) 1254 Assessment (Special) 1255 Bond issue (Special) 1256 Bond issue (Special) 1257 Reinstates § 3 Ord. 1225A, traffic (Repealed by 1375) 1258 Amends § 6.000 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1259 (Repealed by 1307) 1260 (Repealed) 1261 Annexation (Special) 1262 Annexation (Special) 1263 Annexation (Special) 1264 Annexation (Special) 1265 Grants franchise to Pacific Power and Light Company (Appendix) 1266 Annexation (Special) 1267 Amends § 1.200 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1268 Amends § 3 of Ord. 1252, garbage collection franchise (Special) 1269 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1270 (Repealed) 1271 Amends § 7 of Ord. 1036, telephone franchise (Expired) 1272 Revenue sharing (Special) 1273 Amends §§ 16, 17, 21 and subsection (1) of § 22 of Ord. 925, planning commission (Title 17) 1274 Adds subsection (7) to § 3.000 and amends § 1.200 and subsection (1) of § 3.000 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1275 Amends subsection (2) of § 3.100 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1276 Business registration (5.04) 1277 Sewer connections and sewage disposal; repeals Ord. 967 (Repealed by 1403) 1278 Adds subsection (k) to § 1 and subsection (c) to § 2 of Ord. 1139, sewer rates and charges (Repealed by 1403) 1279 Amends § 1.200 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1280 Adds § 13, amends §§ 6 and 9 and repeals § 12 of Ord. 1089, taxicabs (5.28) 1281 (Number not used) 1282 Amends subsections (a) and (c) of § 3 of Ord. 1089, taxicabs (5.28) 1283 Amends Ord. 1139 § 2, sewer rates (Repealed by 1403) 1283A Sewer system development charge (Repealed by 1403) 1284 Amends subsection (A) of § 11 and § 14 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1285 Revenue sharing (Special) 1286 Repeals § 4 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1287 Amends § 3 of Ord. 1151, amusement devices (5.08) 1288 Repeals § 6 of Ord. 1139, sewer rates and charges (Repealed by 1403) 1289 (Number not used) 1290 Amends subsection (a) of § 2 of Ord. 1139, sewer rates and charges (Repealed by 1403) 1291 Street vacation (Special) 1292 (Repealed by 1293) 1293 Amends § 3 of Ord. 1252, garbage collection franchise (Special) 1294 Amends subsection (7) of § 3.000 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1295 Water service extensions (Repealed by 1402) 1296 Offenses (9.04, 9.08, 9.12, 9.20) 1297 Abandoned personal property; repeals Ord. 290 (2.16) 1298 Water and sewer connections (Repealed by 1402) 1299 Amends subsections 3 and 4 of § 3.501 and § 3.505 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1300 Amends § 1 and subsection (3) of § 2 of Ord. 1150, gambling (5.24) 1301 Amends § 1 of Ord. 264, vehicle wrecking businesses (5.20) 1302 Amends subsection (2) of § 34 of Ord. 1225A, traffic (Repealed by 1375) 1303 Amends § 8 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1304 Amends subsection (2) of § 11 of Ord. 1138, sidewalks (12.12) 1305 Amends § 1 of Ord. 1117, contract review board (3.08) 1306 Amends Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1307 (Repealer) 1308 Contract review board rules; repeals Ord. 1132 (3.08) 1309 Oregon Building Code standards implementation; repeals Ord. 1157 (Repealed by 1400) 1310 Repeals § 5 of Ord. 295, peddlers (Repealed by 1346) 1311 Amends comprehensive plan (Special) 1312 Annexation (Special) 1313 Amends subsection (7) of § 3.100 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1314 Street name (Special) 1315 (Number not used) 1316 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1316A Amends § 1.200, subsection (2) of § 3.000 and § 4.700 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1317 Amends comprehensive plan (Special) 1318 Annexation (Special) 1319 Amusement device license fee moratorium (Expired) 1320 Street name (Special) 1321 Annexation (Special) 1322 Annexation (Special) 1323 State revenue sharing funds (Special) 1324 Amends § 2 of Ord. 1139, sewer rates and charges (Repealed by 1327) 1325 Annexation (Special) 1326 Adds § 14 and amends § 3 of Ord. 1252, garbage collection franchise (Appendix) 1327 Amends § 2 of Ord. 1139, sewer rates and charges (Repealed by 1405) 1328 Annexation (Special) 1329 Amends § 3 of Ord. 1252, garbage collection franchise (Appendix) 1330 Canopy installation (15.44) 1331 Loan acceptance (Repealed by 1334) 1332 Amends subsection (5) of § 3.000 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1333 Annexation (Special) 1334 Loan authorization; repeals Ord. 1331 (Special) 1335 Annexation (Special) 1336 Annexation (Special) 1337 Amends subsection (1) of § 3.100 and subsection (2) of § 3.200 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1338 Amends subsections (a) and (b) of § 2 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1339 Sidewalk obstructions in commercially zoned areas (12.04) 1340 Oregon Building Code standards implementation; amends §§ 1 and 5 of Ord. 1309 (Repealed by 1400) 1341 Amends subsection (1) of § 3.100 and subsection (1) of § 3.200 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1342 State revenue sharing funds (Special) 1343 Repeals § 15 of Ord. 958, water system (Repealed by 1402) 1344 Street vacation (Special) 1345 Amends § 3 of Ord. 1252, garbage collection franchise (Appendix) 1346 Itinerant merchants; repeals Ord. 295 (5.16) 1347 Street vacation (Special) 1348 Amends subsection (1) of § 3.200 and subsection (2) of § 4.800 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1349 Alley vacation (Special) 1350 Alley vacation (Special) 1351 Annexation (Special) 1351A Amends subsections 5.2-1 and 5.2-3 of Ord. 1226, floodplain insurance (15.48) 1351B Amends § 3 of Ord. 1151, amusement devices (5.08) 1352 Street vacation (Special) 1353 State revenue sharing funds (Special) 1354 Annexation (Special) 1355 Parks (12.20) 1356 Amends subsection 2 of § 3.200 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1357 Amends Ord. 1165, personnel manual (Repealed by 1391) 1358 Annexation (Special) 1359 Annexation (Special) 1360 Annexation (Special) 1361 Amends § 1 of Ord. 1309, Oregon Building Code standards implementation (Repealed by 1400) 1362 Annexation (Special) 1363 Amends subsection (7) of § 3.000 of Ord. 1141, zoning (Not codified) 1364 State revenue sharing funds (Special) 1365 State revenue sharing funds (Special) 1366 Amends § 4 of Ord. 1252, garbage collection franchise (Repealed by 1393) 1367 Repeals Ord. 1243, parks (Repealer) 1368 Street vacation (Special) 1369 Amends §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of Ord. 1277, sewer connections and sewage disposal (Repealed by 1405) 1370 State revenue sharing funds (Special) 1371 Assessment levy (Special) 1372 Adds §§ 3A and 3B; amends §§ 1 and 3 of Ord. 924, library board (2.08) 1373 Cable television franchise; repeals Ord. 936 (Appendix) 1374 Amends Ord. 925, planning commission (Title 17) 1375 Traffic; repeals Ords. 1225A and 1235 (10.04, 10.08, 10.12, 10.20, 12.24) 1376 Crime property (9.16) 1377 Jurisdiction and regulatory control of public rights-of-way (12.04) 1378 Amends §§ 1 and 5 of Ord. 1309, Oregon Building Code standards implementation (Repealed by 1400) 1379 State revenue sharing funds (Special) 1380 Amends §§ 4 and 13; repeals § 17 of Ord. 1150, gambling (5.24) 1381 Amends §§ 11 and 13 of Ord. 1355, parks (12.20) 1382 Assessment (Special) 1383 Urban renewal agency; repeals Ord. 1236 (Special) 1384 Towing and impounding of illegal vehicles (10.16) 1385 Amends subsections 1 and 2 of § 32 of Ord. 1375, traffic (10.12) 1386 State revenue sharing funds (Special) 1387 Street vacation (Special) 1388 Adopts urban renewal plan (Special) 1389 Amends Ord. 1388, urban renewal plan (Repealed by 1394) 1390 Street vacation (Special) 1391 Repeals Ords. 1165, 1167, 1173, 1177, 1193, 1233, 1269, 1316 and 1357 (Repealer) 1392 Election to receive state revenues 1999-2000 (Special) 1393 Garbage disposal franchise; repeals Ords. 1252 and 1366 (Appendix) 1394 Amends Ord. 1388, urban renewal plan; repeals Ord. 1389 (Special) 1395 Telephone franchise (Repealed by 1398) 1396 Amends Ord. 1141, zoning (Title 17) 1397 Intergovernmental agreement to establish a regional fiber consortium for fiber optic system (Special) 1398 Repeals Ord. 1395 (Repealer) 1399 Cross connections in water system (13.16) 1400 Buildings and construction; repeals Ords. 1104, 1209, 1214, 1309, 1340, 1361 and 1378 (15.04, 15.08, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20, 15.24, 15.28, 15.32, 15.36, 15.40) 1401 General administrative fees and rate (3.04) 1402 Water system; repeals Ords. 958, 1011, 1025, 1070, 1099, 1174, 1200, 1211, 1224, 1234, 1284, 1286, 1295, 1298, 1303, 1306, 1338 and 1343 (13.04, 13.12) 1403 Sewer system; repeals Ords. 209, 783, 867, 872, 875, 1139, 1147, 1161, 1277, 1278, 1283A, 1288, 1290, 1324 and 1327 (13.08) 1404 Amends Ord. 1355 § 1.6, parks (12.20) 1405 Repeals Ords. 295, 1086, 1089 § 2(a), 1101, 1152, 1159, 1165, 1327 and 1369 (Repealer) 1406 Repeals Ord. 1089 § 2(a) (5.28) 1407 Amends Ord. 965 §§ 8(1), 9(1) and 10(1), discarded vehicles (8.12) 1408 Amends Ord. 4-87 § 1, boarding moving trains (10.08) 1409 Adds § 7(6) to Ord. 1296; amends Ord. 1296 §§ 2, 5, 7(5), offenses (9.08, 9.20) 1410 Amends Ord. 1141, zoning and amends comprehensive plan zoning map (Not codified) 1411 Amends Ord. 1400, buildings and construction (15.24) 1412 Election to receive state revenues 2000-2001 (Special) 1413 Amends Ord. 1308 § 1, contracts and purchasing (3.08) 1414 Franchise grant to GTE Northwest, Inc., general communications business (Special) 1415 Code adoption (1.01) 1416 Amends § 13.04.060(A) and (B), water service system (Repealed by 1453) 1417 Procedure for submitting claims under Ballot Measure 7 (Repealed by 1418) 1418 Repeals Ord. 1417 (Repealer) 1419 Amends §§ 15.44.010, 15.44.020 and 15.44.040, installation of canopies above street rights-of-way (15.44) 1420 Amends § 3.08.020, local contract review board (3.08) 1421 Amends § 3.16.030(B), lien searches (Repealed by 1429) 1422 Amends §§ 12 and 13(a) of Ord. 1402, water rates (13.04) 1423 Amends § 7(a) of Ord. 1402, water meter reading and billing (Repealed by 1453) 1424 Amends comprehensive plan and rezone (Special) 1425 Amends comprehensive plan (Special) 1426 Amends comprehensive plan (Special) 1427 Elects to receive state revenues (Special) 1428 Street vacation (Special) 1429 Repeals Ords. 1421, 1121 and 881 § 3, certificate fees for real property lien searches (Repealer) 1430 Adds §§ 6.08.080 and 6.08.090; amends § 6.08.010, dogs (6.08) 1431 Repeals Ch. 5.08, amusement devices (Repealer) 1432 Amends § 13.04.110, sprinkling rates (13.04) 1433 Amends § 13.04.110, summer sprinkling rates (13.04) 1434 Amends § 13.04.020(E), application for water service (13.04) 1435 Revenue sharing (Special) 1436 Grants franchise to Northwest Natural Gas Company (Appendix) 1437 Amends § 13.04.060, meter reading and billing (Repealed by 1453) 1438 Amends Title 17, planning and zoning (Title 17) 1439 Zoning (Not codified) 1440 Vacation approval (Special) 1441 Elects to receive state revenues (Special) 1442 Amends § 13.04.010(2)(7), definitions (13.04) 1443 Amends §§ 13.08.010 and 13.08.100(B), sewer service system (13.08) 1444 Amends §§ 13.04.010, 13.04.060 and 13.04.110, water service system (13.04) 1445 Amends § 13.04.110(A)(1), summer sprinkler rates (13.04) 1446 Amends § 13.08.010, definitions (13.08) 1447 Authorizes declaration of the state of emergency (Special) 1448 Amends § 13.04.060, water service system (Repealed by 1453) 1449 Amends § 13.08.100, sewer service system (13.08) 1450 Election to receive state revenues 2004-2005 (Special) 1451 Amends Ch. 10.20, bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, scooters and motorized scooters (10.20) 1452 Real property compensation ordinance (Special) 1453 Repeals and replaces § 13.04.060, water service system (13.04) 1454 Amends § 15.04.010, general provisions (15.04) 1455 Annexation (Special) 1456 Election to receive state revenues 2005-2006 (Special) 1457 Rezone (Special) 1458 Annexation (Special) 1459 Annexation (Special) 1460 Election to receive state revenues 2006-2007 (Special) 1461 Adds § 13.04.180, water service system (13.04) 1462 Adds Ch. 5.26, motor vehicle fuel dealer's business license (5.26) 1463 Election to receive state revenues 2007-2008 (Special) 1464 Grants a nonexclusive franchise and right to construct, operate and maintain a fiber-based service facility (Appendix) 1465 Rezone (Special) 1466 Adds Ch. 2.14, criminal history records check (2.14) 1467 Election to receive state revenues 2008-2009 (Special) 1468 Amends § 10.12.030, stopping, standing and parking (10.12) 1469 Amend comprehensive plan (Special) 1470 Amends zoning map (Not codified) 1471 Amends T. 17, planning and zoning (17.01, 17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.36, 17.40, 17.44, 17.48, 17.52, 17.54, 17.56, 17.60, 17.64, 17.68, 17.72, 17.76, 17.80, 17.84, 17.88, 17.92, 17.96, 17.100, 17.104, 17.108, 17.112, 17.116, 17.120, 17.124) 1472 Rezone (Special)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Coquille, Oregon, beginning with Supplement No. 9, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 1473  4- 1-09 Amends various sections of Ch. 17.46, floodplain management; and adds § 17.46.020, definitions 1       Added 17.46.020 17.46.040 B. 17.46.050 D.4.a. 17.46.070 A.5., B.1.a., B.3.       Added 17.46.070 B.4. 1474  6-17-09 Declares city's election to receive state revenues Omitted 1475  7- 6-09 Amends § 17.46.040, general provisions 1 17.46.040 B. 1476  7- 6-09 Grants franchise for garbage disposal 1 Franchises 1479 12- 7-09 Granting an electric utility franchise and general utility easement to PacifiCorp 1-19       Added Franchises 1480  6-14-2010 Declaring city's election to receive state revenues 1 Omitted 1481  3- 7-2011 Authorizing the issuance of sewer revenue bonds to finance construction and improvements to the sewer system 1-4 Omitted 1482  5- 2-2011 Declaring the city's election to receive state revenues 1 Omitted 1483 11- 7-2011 Application for water service       Added 13.04.020 
H. 1484  8- 6-2012 Systems development charges       Rpld Ch. 13.24, 
13.24.010- 
13.24.090       Added Ch. 13.24, 
13.24.010- 
13.24.210 1485 11- 5-2012 Granting franchise to Lightspeed Networks, Inc. dba "LS Networks" 1-24       Added Franchises 1486  5-20-2013 Granting Falcon Cable Systems franchise agreement 1(Exh. A) Franchises 2       Rpld Franchise Ord. 1373 1487  7-31-2013 Amends comprehensive plan Omitted 1488  7- 1-2013 Riverfront mixed use (RMU) overlay district Art. 1(Exh. A)       Added 17.55.010- 
17.55.140 1489 10- 7-2013 Truck routes Art. 1(Exh. A)       Added 10.08.015 1490  3- 3-2014 Floodplain management 1 17.46.040 B. 1491  4- 7-2014 Meter reading and billing 13.04.060 1492  4-14-2014 Moratorium on medical marijuana facilities Omitted 1493 10- 2-2014 Tax on sale of marijuana and marijuana-infused products 1       Added Ch. 3.09, 
3.09.010-3.09.140 1493 B  4- 6-2015 Regulation of drainage Art. 1 13.08.080 Deposits in sewers Art. 2 
      Added 13.08.090 A.17. 1494  5-18-2015 Transient lodging tax       Added Ch. 5.30, 
5.30.010-5.30.170 1495 Not used Omitted 1496 10- 5-2015 Granting franchise to ComSpan 1-18 Franchises 1497 10- 5-2015 Licensing of telecommunications providers 1-3       Added Ch. 5.27, 
5.27.010-5.27.260 1498 10- 5-2015 Granting electric utility franchise and general utility easement to PacifiCorp 1-19 Franchises 1499 11- 2-2015 Amending Ord. No. 1436 to amend franchise fee of franchise with Northwest Natural Gas Company 1(Exh. A), 2 Franchises 1500  3- 7-2016 Annexation of property Omitted 1501  5-16-2016 Animals generally 6.04.010-6.04.040 1502  5-16-2016 Nuisances 8.08.030 Animals at large       Rpld 8.08.060 8.08.070 (intro. ¶)       Added 8.08.070 J. 8.08.200 1503  5-16-2016 Public peace and welfare-General provisions       Dltd 9.04.010-9.04.060       Added 9.04.001-9.04.190 Offenses against public peace and decency       Added 9.08.060-9.08.130 Open cellar doors or grates       Rpld 9.12.010 Animals on sidewalks       Rpld 9.12.040 1504  8- 1-2016 Weeds and noxious vegetation 8.08.170       Added 8.08.240 1505 10- 3-2016 Annexation Omitted 1506 12-19-2016 Comprehensive Plan Omitted 1507  6-18-2018 National Fire Code-Fire Inspections 15.12.060(a) 1508 10- 1-2018 Pigeons and Wild Birds       Added Ch. 6.05  
