CITY OF CANBY, OREGON
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2020 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 1523, passed 5-6-2020
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1200
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A REVISED CODE OF THE CITY OF CANBY ENTITLED THE
“CANBY MUNICIPAL CODE” AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   THE CITY OF CANBY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
   Section 1.   Adoption of Canby Municipal Code.
   (A)   The provisions of the document marked and designated as the “Canby
Municipal Code” (hereinafter referred to as Code”) are hereby enacted as a
general and permanent law of the City of Canby.
   Section 2.   Code Provisions as Law.  The provisions of this Ordinance and
the Code adopted in Section 1 of this Ordinance are the laws of the City of
Canby and not merely prima facie evidence of the law.
   Section 3.   Effective Date of Code.  The provisions of this Ordinance and
the Code adopted in Section 1 will take effect on February 15, 2006.
   Section 4.   General Savings Provision.
   (A)   This Ordinance and the Code adopted in Section 1 shall not affect
rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred and proceedings
that were begun before the effective date in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
   (B)   The repealing provision of the Canby Code 1988 shall not affect or
impair any act done, offense committed or liability, penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred before the effective date in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
   Section 5.   Continuity of Existing Provisions.
   (A)   The provisions of the Code that are the same in substance as Code or
Ordinance provisions that are in effect immediately before this code becomes
effective are construed as restatements and continuations of the prior
provisions.
   (B)   For purposes of adoption of the Code, the members of all city boards,
committees, or commissions created under a Code or Ordinance provision repealed
by this Ordinance shall continue to hold office for the period of time
specified in the repealed provision.
   (C)   A person who holds a license, permit, right or privilege granted under
a prior code provision repealed by this Ordinance may continue to operate under
and use such license, permit, right or privilege until expiration thereof
according to the terms of a code provision under the license, permit, right or
privilege was issued, unless the same is revoked sooner by the city.
   Section 6.   Emergency Clause.  This Ordinance being enacted by the Council
in the exercise of its police power and for the purpose of meeting an
emergency, and being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is hereby declared to exist and this
Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the Council
and approval by the Mayor.
   SUBMITTED to the Canby City Council and read the first time at a regular
meeting thereof on Wednesday, February 1, 2006, and ordered posted in three (3)
public and conspicuous places in the City of Canby as specified in the Canby
City Charter and to come before the City Council for final reading and action
at a regular meeting thereof on Wednesday, February 15, 2006, commencing at the
hour of 7:30 p.m. in the Council Meeting Chambers at Canby City Hall in Canby,
Oregon.
   Kimberly Scheafer                          /s/   
   Kimberly Scheafer, City Recorder Pro Tem
   PASSED on second and final reading by the Canby City Council at a regular
meeting thereof on the 15th day of February, 2006, by the following vote:
   YEAS   5           NAYS   0 
   Melody Thompson    /s/   
   Melody Thompson, Mayor
   ATTEST:
   Kimberly Scheafer                    /s/         
   Kimberly Scheafer, City Recorder Pro Tem
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CANBY
A CHARTER
   To provide for the government of the City of Canby, Clackamas County,
Oregon; and to repeal all Charter provisions of the City enacted prior to the
time that this Charter takes effect.
   BE IT ENACTED by the people of the City of Canby, Clackamas County, Oregon:
CHAPTER I
NAMES AND BOUNDARIES
   Section 1.   TITLE OF ENACTMENT. This enactment may be referred to as the
City of Canby Charter of 1983, and as revised on July 1, 2009.
   Section 2.   NAME OF CITY. The municipality of Canby, Clackamas County,
Oregon, shall continue to be a municipal corporation with the name "City of
Canby".
   Section 3.   BOUNDARIES. The corporate limits of the City shall include all
territory encompassed by its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are
modified by a majority of the voters.  Unless mandated by law, annexations,
delayed or otherwise, to the City of Canby, may only be approved by a majority
vote among the electorate.    The Recorder shall keep at the City Hall at least
two copies of this Charter in each of which shall be maintained an accurate,
up-to-date description of the boundaries. The copies and descriptions shall be
available for public inspection at anytime during regular office hours of the
Recorder.
(Amendment passed at election November 4, 1997)
CHAPTER II
POWERS
   Section 1.   POWERS OF THE CITY. The City shall have all powers which the
Constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and of this State
expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities, as fully as though this
Charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.
   Section 2.   CONSTRUCTION OF CHARTER. In this Charter no mention of a
particular power shall be construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of
the powers which the City would have if this particular power were not
mentioned. The Charter shall be liberally construed to the end that the City
may have all powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal
affairs, including all powers that cities may assume pursuant to State laws and
the municipal home rule provisions of the State Constitution.
   Section 3.   POWER TO LICENSE, TAX AND REGULATE. The City Council shall have
power to license, tax and regulate for the purpose of City revenue, all
businesses, callings, trades, employments and professions as the Council may
require to be licensed, and which are not prohibited by the laws of the State
of Oregon.
   Section 4.   IINITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM POWERS. The power to enact or amend
the Charter of the City of Canby and all other rights guaranteed to the people
of this City under the Initiative and Referendum Provisions of Section 1-a,
Article IV of the Constitution of the State of Oregon are hereby reserved and
guaranteed to the people of the City of Canby by this Charter, and the Council
shall provide the method of carrying into effect the initiative and referendum
power of the people.
CHAPTER III
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
   Section 1.   WHERE POWERS VESTED. Except as this Charter provides otherwise,
all powers of the City shall be vested in the Council.
   Section 2.   COUNCIL. The Council shall be composed of six Councilmembers
elected from the City at large.
   Section 3.   COUNCILMEMBERS. The Councilmembers in office at the time this
Charter takes effect shall continue in office, until the end of their term as
fixed by the Charter of the City in effect at the time this Charter is adopted.
At each biennial general election after this Charter takes effect, three
Councilmembers shall be elected, each for a term of four years; and at each
biennial general election the number of Councilmembers required to fill
vacancies pursuant to Chapter VII, Section 2, of this Chapter shall also be
elected.
   Section 4.   MAYOR. At each biennial general election a Mayor shall be
elected for a term of two years.
   Section 5.   ADMINISTRATOR, JUDGE, CITY ATTORNEY, AND OTHER OFFICERS.
Additional officers of the City shall be a City Administrator, Municipal Judge,
and City Attorney, each of whom the Council shall appoint, and such other
officers as the Council deems necessary. Appointed officers shall hold their
office during the pleasure of the Council or until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Appointed officers are subject to removal at any time
by the Council with or without cause and may be suspended in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter V, Section 2(c)(3). The duties of all officers not
defined in this Chapter may be prescribed by the Council. The Council may
combine any two or more appointive offices.
   Section 6.   SALARIES. The compensation for the services of each City
officer and employee shall be the amount fixed by the Council.
   Section 7.   QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS. No person shall be eligible for an
elective office of the City unless at the time of election such person is a
qualified elector within the meaning of the State Constitution and has resided
in the City during the 12 months immediately preceding the election. The
Council shall be final judge of the qualifications and election of its own
members.
CHAPTER IV
COUNCIL
   Section 1.   MEETINGS. The Council shall hold a regular meeting in the City
at least once each month at a time and place which it designates. It shall
adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings. The Mayor may,
or at the request of three members of the Council shall, by giving notice
thereof to all members of the Council then in the City and public notice to all
interested persons, call a special meeting of the Council for a time not
earlier than twenty-four nor later than forty-eight hours after the notice is
given. Special meetings of the Council may also be held at any time by the
common consent of all the members of the Council and after twenty-four hours
reasonable notice to the public. Emergency meetings of the Council may be
called by the Mayor, or the President of the Council in the absence of the
Mayor, for an actual emergency, and notice thereof shall be given by telephone
calls to the press and interested persons.
   Section 2.   QUORUM AND CONTROL OF CONDUCT. A majority of the members of the
Council shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a smaller number may
meet and compel the attendance of absent members in the manner provided by
Ordinance. The Council may reprimand any member for disorderly conduct at any
meeting or for refusing or neglecting to attend any regular meeting without
sufficient excuse therefor, and may, by unanimous vote of allother Council
members, expel a member for good cause.
   Section 3.   RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS. The Council shall cause a record of its
proceedings to be kept. Upon the request of any of its members, the ayes and
nays upon any question before it shall be taken and entered in the record.
   Section 4.   PROCEEDINGS TO BE PUBLIC. No action by the Council shall have
legal effect unless the motion for the action and the vote by which it is
disposed of take place at proceedings open to the public.
   Section 5.   MAYOR'S FUNCTIONS AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The Mayor shall be
chairperson of the Council and preside over its deliberations and shall have no
vote on any questions before it except in the case of tie. The Mayor shall have
authority to preserve order, enforce the rules of the Council and determine the
order of business under the rules of the Council.
   Section 6.   PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL. At its first meeting after this
Charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered
year, the Council by vote shall elect a President from its membership. In the
Mayor's absence from a Council meeting, the President shall preside over it.
Whenever the Mayor is unable to perform the functions of the office, the
President shall act as Mayor.
   Section 7.   VOTE REQUIRED. Except as this Charter otherwise provides, the
concurrence of a majority of the members of the Council present at a Council
meeting at which a quorum is present shall be necessary to decide any question
before the Council.
   Section 8.   SUPERVISION OF CITY EMPLOYEES. Neither the Council nor any of
its members shall give orders or directives to any subordinate or City
employee, other than officers of the City, either publicly or privately, except
to and through the City Administrator.
CHAPTER V
POWERS AND DUTIES OF
OFFICERS AND PROFESSIONAL
CONTRACTORS
   Section 1.   MAYOR. The Mayor shall appoint the committees provided by the
rules of the Council; and shall sign all records of proceedings approved by the
Council. The Mayor shall have no veto power. In the Mayor's absence, the
President of the Council shall sign all Ordinances passed by the Council within
five days after their passage. After the Council approves a bond of a City
officer or a bond for a license, contract or proposal, the Mayor shall endorse
the bond.
   Section 2.   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. (a) Qualifications. The City Administrator
shall be the administrative head of the government of the City and shall be
appointed by the Council without regard to political considerations and solely
with reference to executive and administrative qualifications. A City
Administrator need not be a resident of the City of Canby or the State at the
time of appointment, but promptly thereafter shall become and remain a resident
of the City during the term of the office. Before taking office, the City
Administrator shall give a bond in such amount and with such surety as may be
approved by the Council. The premiums on such bond shall be paid by the City.
   (b)   Term. The Administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite term and
may be removed at the pleasure of the Council.
   (c)   Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the Administrator shall be
as follows:
   (1)   Devote full time to the discharge of official duties, attend all
meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom by the Council or the Mayor,
keep the Council advised at all times of the affairs and needs of the City, and
make reports annually, or more frequently if requested by the Council, of all
the affairs and departments of the City.
   (2)   See that all Ordinances are enforced and that the provisions of all
franchises leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the City are
observed.
   (3)   Hire or remove all City employees and have general supervision and
control over them and their work, with power to transfer an employee from one
department to another. The Administrator shall supervise the departments to the
end of obtaining the utmost efficiency in each of them. He shall have the power
to suspend an appointed City Officer pending review and final action of the
Council.
   (4)   Act as purchasing agent for all departments of the City.
   (5)   Be responsible for preparing and submitting to the Budget Committee
the annual budget estimates and such reports as that body requests.
   (6)   Supervise the operation of all public utilities owned and operated by
the City excepting the electric utility department for which the Canby Utility
Board has exclusive jurisdiction, control and management as provided in the
following Chapter X. The City Administrator shall have general supervision over
all City property.
   (7)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed from time to time by
the Council.
   Section 3.   MUNICIPAL JUDGE. The Municipal Judge shall hold within the City
a court known as the Municipal Court for the City of Canby, Clackamas County,
Oregon. All areas within the City shall be within the territorial jurisdiction
of the Court. The Municipal Judge shall exercise original and exclusive
jurisdiction of all offenses defined and made punishable by the Ordinances of
the City and of all actions brought to recover or enforce forfeitures or
penalties defined or authorized by Ordinances of the City. The Municipal Judge
shall have authority to issue process for the arrest of any person accused of
an offense against the Ordinances of the City, to commit any such person to
jail or admit to bail pending trial, to issue subpoenas, to compel witnesses to
appear and testify in Court on the trial of any cause, to compel obedience to
such subpoenas, to issue any process necessary to carry into effect the
judgments of the Court, and to punish witnesses and others for contempt of
Court. When not governed by Ordinances or this Charter, all proceedings in the
Municipal Court for the violation of a City ordinance shall be governed by the
applicable general laws of the State governing Justices of the Peace and
Justice Courts, except that the Municipal Court shall not exercise any civil
jurisdiction.
   Section 4.   CITY ATTORNEY. The City Attorney is a legal adviser of the
officials of the City of Canby and shall be retained by the Council. It shall
be the duty of such Attorney to attend all regular Council meetings and such
special meetings as may be required unless excused therefrom by the Council.
The City Attorney shall represent and defend the City in all suits, actions at
law and all matters and things in which the City of Canby may be legally
interested. The City Attorney, or a deputy appointed by him, shall also
represent the City in the Municipal Court including violations of any City
Ordinances or for the violation of all other laws under which the Municipal
Court has jurisdiction.
   Section 5.   AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. The Council
shall have authority to contract for the professional services of those whose
professional skills, training and knowledge may be required at any time or from
time to time for the administration of City affairs and municipal government.
CHAPTER VI
ELECTIONS
   Section 1.   STATE LAW.  City elections must conform to state law except as
this charter or ordinances provide otherwise.  All elections for City offices
must be nonpartisan.
   Section 2.   QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   The Mayor and each Council Member must be a qualified elector under
state law, and reside within the City for at least one year immediately before
election or appointment to office.
   (b)   No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one
City office.
   (c)   Neither the Mayor nor a Council Member may be employed by the City.
   (d)   The Council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of
its members.
   Section 3.   NOMINATIONS. The Council must adopt an ordinance prescribing
the manner for a person to be nominated to run for Mayor or a City Council
Member position.
   Section 4.   TIE VOTES. In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an
elective office, the successful candidate shall be determined by a public
drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the Council.
   Section 5.   TERMS. The term of a person elected at a general election
begins immediately after the first regular council meeting after the first of
the year following the election, and continues until the successor qualifies
and assumes the office.
   Section 6.   OATH OF OFFICE. Before entering upon the duties of the office,
each officer shall take an oath or shall affirm support of the Constitutions
and Laws of the United States, the State of Oregon and the City of Canby and to
faithfully perform the duties of the office.
CHAPTER VII
VACANCIES IN OFFICE
   Section 1.   WHAT CREATES VACANCY. An office shall be deemed vacant upon the
incumbent's death, adjudicated incompetence, conviction of a felony or other
offense pertaining to the office, unlawful destruction of public records,
resignation, recall from office, ceasing to possess the qualifications for the
office, failure of a person elected or appointed to an office to qualify
therefor within ten days after the term of office commences, or in the case of
a Mayor or Councilmember, upon their absence from the City for 30 days without
the consent of the Council or because of absence from meetings of the Council
for 60 days without like consent, and upon a declaration by the Council of the
vacancy.
   Section 2.   FILLING OF VACANCIES. Vacant elective offices in the City shall
be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the Council. The appointee's
term shall begin immediately upon the appointment and shall continue until the
beginning of the year following the next general biennial election and until a
successor is elected and qualified. The successor for the unexpired term shall
be elected at the next general biennial election after said appointment. During
the temporary disability of any elected officer or during their absence
temporarily from the City for any cause, the offices may be filled pro tem in
the manner provided for the filling of vacancies in office permanently.
CHAPTER VIII
ORDINANCES
   Section 1.   ENACTING CLAUSE. The enacting clause of all ordinances
hereafter enacted by the Council shall be: "THE CITY OF CANBY ORDAINS AS
FOLLOWS:".
   Section 2.   MODE OF ENACTMENT. All ordinances shall be read at two meetings
of the Council. If approved by the Council the first reading may be by title
only and a brief outline covering the purpose of the ordinance. The second
reading may be by title only unless any person present requests to have the
ordinance or any part thereof read in full. Immediately following the first
reading of a proposed ordinance, it shall be signed and published by the
Recorder at least once at full length in a newspaper published in Canby;
provided, however, that the Council may order instead that the proposed
ordinance be posted in three public and conspicuous places in said City for a
period of 5 days prior to the passage of said ordinance. Whenever the Council
proposes to take final action on any proposed ordinance at a special meeting,
notice thereof, giving the time of such meeting, shall be published or posted
along with the ordinance. In any event, before final action has been taken on
any proposed ordinance, there shall be filed by or with the Recorder proof by
affidavit of the publication or posting of the proposed ordinance.
   Section 3.   REQUIREMENT TO PASS ORDINANCES. It shall require the majority
vote of all members of the Council as then constituted to pass an ordinance on
its final reading.
   Section 4.   WHEN ORDINANCES TAKE EFFECT. An Ordinance enacted by the
Council shall take effect on the 30th day after its enactment; however, when
the Council deems it advisable, an ordinance may provide a different time for
it to take effect, and, in case of emergency, it may take effect immediately.
   Section 5.   RECORDING VOTE AND SIGNING ORDINANCE. Upon the final vote on an
ordinance, the ayes and nays of the Councilmembers shall be taken and entered
in the record of the proceedings and also on the ordinance. Upon enactment of
the ordinance, the Mayor shall sign it with the date of its final passage and
it shall be attested by the signature of the Recorder.
CHAPTER IX
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
   Section 1.   CONDEMNATION. Any necessity of taking property for the City by
condemnation shall be determined by the Council and declared by a Resolution of
the Council describing the property and stating the uses to which it shall be
devoted.  Taking of property for the City by condemnation shall be in
accordance with provisions of the Oregon Constitution and Oregon Law.
   Section 2.   IMPROVEMENTS. The procedure for making, altering, repairing,
vacating or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general
ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by the applicable general laws of
the State. Action on any proposed public improvement, except a sidewalk or
other improvement unanimously declared by the Council to be needed at once
because of an emergency, shall be suspended for six months upon a remonstrance
thereto by the owners of the land to be specially assessed therefor. The number
of owners necessary to suspend the action will be determined by ordinance.  In
this Section, "owner" shall mean the record holder of legal title, or where
land is being purchased under a recorded land sale contract verified to the
Recorder in writing by the record holder of legal title to the land, the
purchaser shall be deemed the "owner".
   Section 3.   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS. The procedure for levying, collecting and
enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or other
services to be charged against real property shall be governed by general
ordinances.
   Section 4.   BIDS. Public contracting shall be done in compliance with the
provisions of Oregon's Public Contracting Code, the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder and with all local contracting rules established by the
City.
   Section 5.   MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM. The City shall continue to own and
operate a municipal sewer system and in addition to the other methods provided
by Charter, the Council may, when in its discretion it is deemed advisable,
provide by Ordinance for the construction or reconstruction either by contract
or City construction method or the combination of both and for the maintenance,
extension, operation or enlargement of sewers, sewer systems, pumping stations,
sewage treatment or disposal plant, together with all appurtenances necessary,
useful or convenient for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage and
for such purposes may acquire by gift, purchase, grant or condemnation, the
necessary lands and rights of way therefor, either within or without the
corporate limits of the City of Canby, all or any part of the foregoing being
hereinafter referred to as the facilities. The City Council may construct or
reconstruct that part of the foregoing facilities consisting of a treatment
plant, outfall sewers, trunk sewers, main sewers and pumping plants as an
entire unit or as separate units in order to continue to provide the City of
Canby with a basic sanitary sewage system; and the Council may provide that the
same or that part so constructed will be paid for by all of the residents of
the City or property owners therein regardless of whether their property is to
be actually connected with or presently served by said systems or units.
CHAPTER X
UTILITIES
   Section 1.   UTILITY DEPARTMENTS: There is hereby created a utility
department of electric service of the City of Canby and a utility department of
water service of the City of Canby. Each department shall be responsible for
the development, production, purchase and distribution of all water or electric
revenue producing utilities of the City.
   Section 2.   WATER DEPARTMENT. The City Council shall have jurisdiction,
control and management of the Water Department and all of its operations and
facilities. The City Council shall have all the powers and duties necessary to
construct, acquire, expand and operate the water system, and to do any and all
acts or things that are necessary, convenient or desirable in order to operate,
maintain, enlarge, extend, preserve and promote an orderly, economical and
businesslike administration of the Water Department. The City Council may
assign or delegate all or a portion of its powers and duties over the Water
Department to the Canby Utility Board; provided, however, that the City Council
shall retain ultimate jurisdiction, control and management of the Water
Department and its operations and facilities.
   Section 3.   UTILITY BOARD. There is hereby created the Canby Utility Board
of the City (hereinafter referred to as the Board), which shall have exclusive
jurisdiction, control and management of the Electric Department and all its
operations and facilities. The Board shall have all the powers and duties
possessed by the City to construct, acquire, expand and operate the electric
system, and to do any and all acts or things that are necessary, convenient or
desirable in order to operate, maintain, enlarge, extend, preserve and promote
an orderly, economical and businesslike administration of the electric system.
The Board shall operate as a separate unit of City government and except as
provided in this Charter, both the Board and the Electric Department shall be
free from the jurisdiction, direction and control of other City Officers and of
the City Council. The Board may sue and be sued in its own name. All damage
claims arising from the operation of the Board and the Electric Department
shall be the responsibility of and be liquidated by the Board.
   Section 4.   ORGANIZATION OF THE CANBY UTILITY BOARD.   (a)   Number and
Qualification of Board Members. There shall be five (5) members of the Canby
Utility Board appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority of the Canby
City Council. They shall hold office until their successors are appointed and
qualified. They are subject to removal at any time by the Mayor and with the
approval of a majority of the Council members with or without cause and with or
without notice. At the first Council meeting after the first of the next month
after this Charter takes effect, two (2) Board members shall be appointed to
serve terms of three years, two (2) Board members shall be appointed to serve
terms of two years, and one (1) Board member shall be appointed to serve a term
of one year. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years. No
Board member may serve more than two successive terms. No person shall be
eligible for appointment as a Board member or entitled to hold such office
unless at the time of appointment and continuing thereafter, such person is a
qualified elector within the meaning of the State Constitution and has resided
in the City of Canby during the six months immediately preceding appointment
and continues to reside in the City for the term of the appointment. The City
Council shall be the final judge of the qualifications and appointment of Board
members, but no Councilmember or Mayor (during their term of office) shall be
eligible to appointment as a member of that Board.
   (b)   Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
Council. No vacancy in the Board shall impair the right of remaining Board
members to exercise all the powers of the Board to transact its business.
   (c)   Compensation. The compensation for the services of each Board member
shall be whatever amount the Board fixes.
   (d)   Organization of the Board. Within ten (10) days after their
appointment and at its first meeting in January each year thereafter, the Board
members shall elect one of their number as Chairman. If the Chairman is absent
at any meeting, a pro-tem shall be appointed by the members present. The
Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the Board and in doing so, shall,
so far as possible, follow Roberts Rules of Order. The Chairman shall, with the
approval of the Board, sign all Resolutions and Orders of the Board and all
notes, contracts, deeds, mortgages, bonds, and other agreements of the Board.
No action shall be taken by the Board except by the affirmative vote of the
majority of the members.
   (e)   Quorum. Three (3) Board members shall constitute a quorum.
   (f)   Secretary-Clerk. The Board shall appoint and fix the comensation of a
Secretary-Clerk who is not a member of the Board and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board and is subject to removal at any time and for any reason.
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Secretary-Clerk shall post a
bond in such amount and with such surety or sureties as the Board may approve
and to assure the faithful performance of duties. The Secretary-Clerk shall
attend all meetings of the Board unless excused therefrom by the Board, keep an
accurate record of its proceedings in a book provided for that purpose, sign
the approved minutes of its meetings and may, with approval of the Board, sign
or cosign checks for disbursement of funds.
   (g)   Meetings. The Board shall hold a regular meeting at least once a month
at a time and place to be fixed by the Board. Special meetings may be called by
the Chairman of the Board, or by two members of the Board. Notice of all
meetings shall be given by the Secretary-Clerk in the manner and for the time
required for public meetings by ORS 192.640. All regular or special meetings of
the Board shall be open to the public.
   Section 5.   ORGANIZATION OF THE ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT.   (a)   Employees. The
Canby Utility Board shall have the authority to employ a General Manager and
such supervisors, bookkeepers, attorneys, laborers, mechanics and other
employees, as may be determined, and fix compensation thereof, and discharge
the same at pleasure, and for any reason.
   (b)   Compensation. The Board shall have the authority to fix compensation
of the Clerk and other employees of the Board and change the same from time to
time.
   Section 6.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CANBY UTILITY BOARD.   (a)   Real
Estate and Contracts.  The Board, in the efficient and economical operation of
the Electric Department, both inside and outside the City limits, may:
   (1)   purchase and sell electric power and energy and services to public and
private corporations and to other consumers;
   (2)   construct plants, transmission lines and other facilities:
   (3)   purchase real estate and franchises in its name; and
   (4)   enter into all contracts, leases and agreements in furtherance
thereof.
   (b)   Extension of Services. The Board may adopt regulations governing
extension of services of the Electric Department both inside and outside the
City limits. The regulations shall provide the conditions under which the
extensions shall be made to render them compensatory and shall provide that
each extension project shall, when completed, become the property of the
Electric Department whether on public or private property. The Board may
provide for the form of refunds where advances by the persons benefited are
necessary to make extensions compensatory.
   (c)   Joint Operations with Others. The Board may contract with any public
or private corporation or any individual, both inside and outside the City
limits:
   (1)   for the joint use of poles and other property belonging either to the
Electric Department or to the other contracting party or jointly to both
parties;
   (2)   for the joint acquisition of real property and franchises and the
joint financing, construction and operation of plants, transmission lines and
other facilities, whereby any property acquired may become the property of both
the Electric Department and the other contracting party; and
   (3)   for the purchase of energy.
   (d)   Eminent Domain. The Board may enter upon any land or water for the
purpose of making surveys and may exercise the right of eminent domain on
behalf of the City whenever public necessity or convenience requires.
   (e)   Use of Thoroughfares for Utility Installations. Canby Utility may use
the ground over, under or along any road, railroad, highway, street, sidewalk,
thoroughfare or alley in the operation of the Electric Department, but shall in
all cases and subject to the applicable general regulation of the City, cause
the surface of the public way to be restored in its usual condition.
   (f)   Rates. The Board shall fix rates to be charged for electricity sold
and services rendered by the Electric Department. Rates shall be fair,
reasonable and compensatory and shall be uniform for all consumers within the
same class, but different rate schedules may be applied to different classes of
consumers as determined by the Board. Rates shall be sufficient to pay all
operating and maintenance costs of the Electric Department and its operations
and all bond interest and bond redemption costs. The Board may require
reasonable deposits for security for payment of charges for electric services
and may provide for the return of deposits when satisfactory consumer credit
has been established. Any proposed change in rates and the notice of a public
hearing thereon shall be advertised once a week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Canby. Such notice shall
state the proposed rate change, the reasons therefor and the time and place of
the public hearing which shall be held within ten (10) days after the last
publication of such notice. At the public hearing the Board shall discuss the
matter and consider any objections or recommendations. The Board is not bound,
however, by any public remonstrances or objections to its proposed rate change.
   (g)   Authority for Expenditures. No money shall be drawn from the funds of
the Department nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be
incurred except as authorized by the Board. No claim against the Department
shall be paid unless evidenced by a voucher approved by the General Manager or
by some other employee designated by him.
   (h)   Bond Issues. The Board may authorize the sale and issuance of revenue
bonds necessary to finance the acquisition, construction, reconstruction,
improvements and extensions of the utility system. The Board has the power to
provide funding for the operation, maintenance or expansion of existing
facilities. A vote of the registered voters will be required for any
exploration, construction or development of energy sources over the amount of
that department's gross revenues for the preceding fiscal year.
   (i)   Short Term Loans. The Board may borrow money for periods not to exceed
five (5) years and may issue negotiable notes, payable from the revenues of the
Electric Department, as evidence of the loans. Total loans outstanding at any
one time for the Electric Department shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
that department's gross revenue for the preceding fiscal year.
   (j)   No Power to Tax. The Board shall have no power or authority to levy ad
valorem taxes on any taxable property; however, the City Council may, when in
its judgment it is deemed necessary or advisable, levy such taxes for the use
and benefit of said Board or for the joint use and benefit of the City and said
Board.
   Section 7.  ANNUAL ACCOUNTING AND BUDGET. The Canby Utility Board shall
prepare a budget for each fiscal year and file a copy of such budget with the
City Council prior to July 1. The Board shall make an annual accounting to show
the financial condition of the Electric Department prepared according to
generally accepted public utility accounting principles, and file a copy of the
same with the City Council each year.
   Section 8.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.   (a) Disposition of Public Utilities. The
Canby Utility Board shall have no authority to cease to operate or to sell,
lease or abandon, or in any other way dispose of the electric utility system
and department controlled by it, without the prior express written approval of
the City Council and the approving vote of a majority of the votes cast by the
registered voters of the City at a general or special election called by the
Council and held for that purpose.
   (b)   Existing Obligation. Contracts, obligations and bond issues relating
to the electric utility system of the City legally incurred, approved or
authorized prior to the taking effect of this Charter provision shall not be
impaired and shall be binding upon the Board insofar as they apply to the
Electric Utility Department.
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   Section 1.   DEBT LIMIT. City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits
imposed by state law.  A charter amendment is not required to authorize City
indebtedness.
   Section 2.   TORTS.  Tort liability of the City of Canby shall be set by
limits imposed under Oregon law and shall follow all procedures set forth
thereunder.
   Section 3.   EXISTING ORDINANCES CONTINUED. All ordinances of the City
consistent with this Charter and in force when it takes effect shall remain in
effect until amended or repealed.
   Section 4.   CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS.  Except gifts of money to the City for
specified purposes, expenditures of sums not budgeted and expenditures of
budgeted funds for a single purchase or contract in excess of $50,000.00 shall
be authorized by an ordinance; and the City shall not be bound by any such
contract in excess of $50,000.00, unless the same is in writing and signed by
the Mayor or City Administrator and attested to by the Recorder on behalf of
the City.
   Section 5.   REPEAL OF PREVIOUSLY ENACTED PROVISIONS. All Charter provisions
of the City enacted prior to the time that this Charter takes effect are hereby
repealed.
   Section 6.   SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS. The Sections and Subsections of
this Charter are declared to be separable; and in the event that any one or
more Sections, Subsections or parts of this Charter are declared
unconstitutional, it shall not affect the validity of other provisions of the
Charter.
   Section 7.  TIME OF EFFECT OF CHARTER. This Charter shall take effect July
1, 2009.
TITLE 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
1.01   CODE ADOPTION
      
1.04   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
1.08   GENERAL PENALTY
      
1.16   JURY TRIAL
CHAPTER 1.01:  CODE ADOPTION
Section
   
1.01.010   Adoption.
   
1.01.020   Title; citation, reference.
   
1.01.030   Contents.
   
1.01.040   Reference applies to all amendments.
   
1.01.050   Title, chapter and section headings.
   
1.01.060   Reference to specific ordinances.
   
1.01.070   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
   
1.01.080   Constitutionality.
§ 1.01.010   Adoption.
   There is adopted the Canby Code of Ordinances, as published by American
Legal Publishing in conjunction with the League of Oregon Cities Codification
Program.
§ 1.01.020   Title; citation, reference.
   This code shall be known as the Canby Municipal Code and it shall be
sufficient to refer to the code as the Canby Municipal Code or this code in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at
law or equity.  It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Canby Municipal Code. 
Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and divisions of
the Canby Municipal Code, and the references shall apply to that numbered
title, chapter, section or division as it appears in the code.
§ 1.01.030   Contents.
   This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of the City of Canby, Oregon.
§ 1.01.040   Reference applies to all amendments.
   Whenever a reference is made to this code or to any portion thereof, or to
any ordinance of the City of Canby, Oregon, the reference shall apply to all
amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.
§ 1.01.050   Title, chapter and section headings.
   Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or
intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code.
§ 1.01.060   Reference to specific ordinances.
   The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
the code, but the reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within the code.
§ 1.01.070   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
   Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner
affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were
committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the
effective date due and unpaid under the ordinances, nor be construed as
affecting any of the provisions of the ordinances relating to the collection of
any license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions of any bond or cash
deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to
any ordinance; and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 1.01.080   Constitutionality.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, that decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code.  The Council declares that
it would have passed this code, and each section, division, sentence, clause
and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any 1 or more sections,
divisions, sentences, clauses or phrases has been declared invalid or
unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or
unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full
force and effect.
CHAPTER 1.04:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1.04.010   Definitions.
   
1.04.020   Title of office.
   
1.04.030   Interpretation of language.
   
1.04.040   Grammatical interpretation.
   
1.04.050   Acts by agents.
   
1.04.060   Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
   
1.04.070   Computation of time.
   
1.04.080   Construction.
   
1.04.090   Repeal shall not revive any ordinance.
§ 1.04.010   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, wherever used in the ordinances of the City
of Canby, Oregon, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the
context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is
specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of the words or
phrases:
   City and Town each mean the City of Canby, Oregon, or the area within the
corporate limits of the City of Canby, Oregon, and that territory outside of
the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any
constitutional or statutory provision.
   City Administrator means the City Administrator of the city.
   Council means the City Council of the city.  “All its members” or “all
councilors” means the total number of councilors holding office.
   County means the County of Clackamas.
   Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the
State of Oregon, the ordinances of the City of Canby and, when appropriate, any
and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
   May is permissive.
   Month means a calendar month.
   Must means the action referred to is mandatory.
   Oath includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law,
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in these cases the words
“swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
   Owner, applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part
of the building or land.
   Person includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
   Personal Property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and
evidence of debt.
   Preceding and Following mean next before and next after, respectively.
   Property includes real and personal property.
   Real Property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   Shall means the action referred to is mandatory.
   Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   State means the State of Oregon.
   Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or other public property so
designated in any law of this state.
   Tenant and Occupant, applied to a building or land, include any person who
occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   Written includes printed, typewritten mimeographed, multi-graphed or
otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
   Year means a calendar year.
§ 1.04.020   Title of office.
   Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission
means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city.
§ 1.04.030   Interpretation of language.
   All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be
construed and understood according to that peculiar and appropriate meaning.
§ 1.04.040     Grammatical interpretation.
   The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city
unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is
intended:
   A.   Gender.  Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
   B.   Singular and Plural.  The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   C.   Tenses.  Words used in the present tense include the past and the
future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
§ 1.04.050   Acts by agents.
   When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be
done as well by an agent as by the principal, that requirement shall be
construed to include all acts performed by an authorized agent.
§ 1.04.060   Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
   Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful,
it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, siding, abetting, suffering or
concealing the fact of the act or omission.
§ 1.04.070   Computation of time.
   Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to
be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last
day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be
excluded.
§ 1.04.080   Construction.
   A.   The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under
them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote
justice. 
   B.   The rules of statutory construction contained in O.R.S. Chapter 174 are
adopted and by this reference made a part of this code.
§ 1.04.090   Repeal shall not revive any ordinance.
   The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby.
CHAPTER 1.08:  GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
1.08.010   Designated.
   
1.08.020   Separate offenses.
§ 1.08.010   Designated.
   Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions or
failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of any ordinance of
the city is guilty of a violation.  Except where a different punishment is
prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a violation
under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500.
§ 1.08.020   Separate offenses.
   Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of
the city is committed, continued or permitted by the person, and he or she is
punishable accordingly.
CHAPTER 1.16:  JURY TRIAL
Section
   
1.16.010   Right to jury trial.
   
1.16.020   Trial jury defined.
   
1.16.030   Qualifications of jurors
   
1.16.040   Making of preliminary jury list.
   
1.16.050   Determination of jury panel.
   
1.16.060   Selection of trial jury.
   
1.16.070   Excuse of person from service as juror.
   
1.16.080   Inadequate number of people in jury panel.
   
1.16.090   Trial procedure.
   
1.16.100   Jury verdict.
   
1.16.110   Failure of jurors to attend Municipal Court.
   
1.16.120   Privilege, power and duties of Municipal Court.
§ 1.16.010   Right to jury trial.
   A person charged with an offense defined and made punishable by the City
Charter or an ordinance of the city shall have the right to trial by jury when
the alleged offense is the same as those offenses which entitle a person to
trial by jury as guaranteed by the Constitution of the state.
§ 1.16.020   Trial jury defined.
   The trial jury in a Municipal Court shall consist of 6 persons, duly sworn
to try and determine a question of fact for which they are called.
§ 1.16.030   Qualifications of jurors.
   In order to act as a juror in the Municipal Court in the city, a person
must:
   A.  Meet the qualifications prescribed in O.R.S. Chapter 10; and
   B.  Be a qualified elector of the city.
§ 1.16.040   Making of preliminary jury list.
   On the first judicial day of each January and July, the City Recorder or
Mayor, at the request of the Municipal Judge, shall prepare a jury list made by
selecting by lot names from the latest tax roll and voter’s registration list
used at the last preceding city election.  The jury list shall contain the
names of not less than 100 persons who shall comprise the jury list for the 6
months in which they are selected.  The Municipal Judge or Mayor shall reject
the names of persons selected for the jury list whom they know or believe to be
unqualified as jurors because of mental or physical disability, or not
otherwise possessing those qualifications for a juror as prescribed by the laws
of this state.  The jury list, when completed, shall contain the Christian
name, surname, place of residence and occupation of each person named and the
list shall be kept on file in the municipal court office.  After the jury list
has been completed, a card shall be prepared separately for each juror, and the
cards when prepared shall be deposited in the office of the Municipal Judge in
a sufficient box carefully secured, which shall be known as the jury box.  If
for any reason the preliminary jury list is not prepared within the aforesaid
time, it may be prepared at a later time without affecting the validity
thereof.
§ 1.16.050   Determination of jury panel.
   A.   The Municipal Judge shall draw from the jury box 12 cards, or any
greater number if he or she deems it necessary or if requested by the parties,
until the names of 12 persons who are deemed able to attend at the time and
place required are obtained.  The Municipal Judge shall then make and sign a
list of the 12 names thus drawn to be the jury panel.
   B.   If it appears to the Municipal Judge that a person whose name is drawn
is deceased or resides outside the city, the card must be destroyed.  If it
appears to the Municipal Judge or if he or she has good reason to believe that
a person whose name is drawn is temporarily absent from the city or is unwell
or so engaged as to be unable to attend at the time and place required without
great inconvenience, the card must be laid aside without the name thereon being
entered on the list drawn and returned to the jury box when the drawing is
completed.
   C.   When the drawing of the 12 names is completed, the Municipal Judge
shall direct the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, to summon the persons
whose names were drawn to appear for jury duty at a prescribed time and place,
and the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall forthwith deliver to each
of the persons whose name is drawn, or cause to be mailed by regular mail, an
appropriate order signed by the Municipal Judge, which shall direct the person
to appear as a juror before the Municipal Court at the designated time and
place.  The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall return immediately to
the Municipal Judge a record of the persons to whom the summons for jury duty
was served or mailed, and if, after a diligent search, the Chief of Police or
his or her designee is unable to locate and serve any person with a summons for
jury duty, the Municipal Judge shall draw another card from the jury box and
issue an appropriate order for jury duty, and direct to the Chief of Police for
service, and this process shall be continued until 12 persons have been
selected from the jury box and service on them has been made requiring them to
appear for duty in the cause then pending before the municipal court.  Each
trial juror shall be paid a fee of $10.
§ 1.16.060   Selection of trial jury.
   At the time of trial, the trial jury shall be selected from the 12 members
of the jury panel, and each party may take challenges for cause on which the
court shall make its ruling.  Each party is entitled to 3 peremptory challenges
as to any of the 6 jurors and no more.
§ 1.16.070   Excuse of person from service as juror.
   The Court shall excuse any person from services as a juror if the person is
entitled to and requests exemption for any reason specified in O.R.S. 10.050. 
The Ccourt may also excuse any person from service as a juror either by removal
of his or her name from the jury panel or by excuse for a particular time for
reason of illness, disability or undue hardship.  No person shall be required
to serve as a trial juror at more than 3 trials during his or her term of
service. No challenge shall be made or allowed to the panel or to the
preliminary jury list, and substantial compliance with the requirements of the
ordinance shall be sufficient.  If at any time the court deems the number of
qualified and unexcused jurors on the panel to be insufficient, the Court may
cause additional names to be chosen in the aforesaid manner from the
preliminary jury list and added to the panel.
§ 1.16.080   Inadequate number of people in jury panel.
   If, at the time of any jury trial, the jury panel present for the trial
becomes exhausted, or whenever, in the opinion of the Municipal Judge, the
panel is likely to be exhausted due to nonappearance of prospective jurors or
challenges by each party, the Court may order the Chief of Police of the city
to summon forthwith from the body of the city persons whose names are upon the
tax roll or registration books and who have the qualifications of jurors to
serve in the Court.
§ 1.16.090   Trial procedure.
   Trials shall be conducted as trials in district courts, and rules of
evidence shall be the same as in state courts and shall include the applicable
statutes of the state regarding the introduction or admission of evidence.
§ 1.16.100   Jury verdict.
   A.   If a person summoned to serve as a juror in a circuit court fails to
attend as required, the court shall order the person to appear forthwith and
show cause for that failure. If the person fails to appear pursuant to the
order or appears and fails to show good cause, the person may be punished for
contempt.
   B.   A juror summoned to a court who fails to give attention in court, or
who leaves without permission while the court is in session or otherwise fails
to complete required jury service without permission, may be punished for
contempt of the court.
§ 1.16.110   Failure of jurors to attend Municipal Court.
   If a person duly summoned to attend Canby Municipal Court as a juror fails
to attend as required or to give a valid excuse therefor, he or she may be
fined by the Municipal Judge in a sum not exceeding $25.
§ 1.16.120   Privilege, power and duties of Municipal court.
   The Municipal Court shall possess and exercise within the city all the
privileges, powers, duties and jurisdiction, civil and criminal, of a justice
of the peace of the county, and be subject to all the general laws prescribing
the duties of such, and perform other duties as may be required by the state,
the City Council or this chapter.
TITLE 2:  ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
   Chapter
      
2.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS
      
2.05   PETITIONS
      
2.10   CANDIDATE NOMINATIONS FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE
      
2.16   CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD
      
2.20   PUBLIC LIBRARY
      
2.28   EVIDENTIARY HEARING PROCEDURES
      
2.32   COMPENSATION FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      
2.36   SEARCH AND CERTIFICATION SERVICES INCIDENT TO CITY LIEN DOCKET
      
2.40   ANNEXATION AND BOUNDARY CHANGE FEES AND CHARGES
      
2.48   CANBY ADULT CENTER
      
2.52   EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
      
2.56   CANBY PARKS AND RECREATION
      
2.64   BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN COMMITTEE
      
2.68   URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
      
2.70   NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS
      
2.80   PUBLIC ART MURAL PROGRAM
      
2.90   (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 2.04:  COUNCIL MEETINGS
Section
   
2.04.010   Regular meetings.
   
2.04.020   Special meetings.
§ 2.04.010   Regular meetings.
   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third
Wednesdays of every month at 7:00 p.m. in the council chambers of the City
Hall.  In the event that the first or third Wednesday of the month is a
holiday, the Council meeting shall be held on the following day.
(Am. Ord. 1474, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 2.04.020   Special meetings.
   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or at the request
of any 3 members of the Council on 24 hours’ reasonable notice to the public
and at least 24 hours’ actual notice to the Council members.
CHAPTER 2.05: PETITIONS
Section
   
2.05.010   Filing deadline for initiative petitions.
   
2.05.020   Chief petitioners for initiative, referendum, or recall petitions to
be electors of the City of Canby.
§ 2.05.010   Filing deadline for initiative petitions.
   No later than the 180 days after the initiative is approved for circulation,
an initiative petition relating to a city measure or Charter amendment shall be
deposited with the City Recorder for signature verification. All other
procedures for an initiative shall follow the requirements set forth in the
State of Oregon election laws.
(Ord. 1303, passed 2-4-2009)
§ 2.05.020   Chief petitioners for initiative, referendum, or recall petitions
to be electors of the City of Canby.
   No petition for initiative, referendum, or recall filed with the city shall
be valid unless all Chief Petitioners are electors of the city at the time of
filing and remain electors of the city through the entire initiative,
referendum, or recall process, including the election.
(Ord. 1303, passed 2-4-2009)
CHAPTER 2.10:  CANDIDATE NOMINATIONS FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE
Section
   
2.10.010   Nominations.
   
2.10.020   Authorization to submit explanatory statements relating to municipal
legislation referred or initiated by petition.
§ 2.10.010 Nominations.
   A.   A petition nominating a qualified elector to be a candidate for
election to the Canby City Council or to the office of Mayor shall be signed by
not fewer than 50 electors. No elector shall sign more than 1 nomination
petition for each office to be filled. No elector shall sign more than 1
nomination petition for the office of Mayor. If an elector signs more
nomination petitions than permitted by this division, the elector’s signature
shall be valid only on the first petition filed for the office.
   B.   The form of petition for nomination for all candidates for elective
positions within the city shall be submitted on forms provided by the Secretary
of State.  The City Recorder shall approve completed forms prior ot the
candidate obtaining elector signatures.
   C.   Once candidates have obtained the required number of signatures, they
shall submit the signature sheets to the Clackamas County Elections Official to
be verified.  Once the required number of verified signatures have been
obtained, all pages comprising a petition for nomination shall be assembled and
filed with the City Recorder as 1 instrument in the manner provided by the
Secretary of State not less than 75 days before the election.
   D.   Within 5 days after the filing, the City Recorder shall notify the
candidate whether or not the petition is valid. If it is found insufficient,
the City Recorder shall return it immediately to the candidate with a statement
certifying that the petition for nomination is insufficient and stating the
reason(s).
   E.   Within the time allowed for the filing of petitions for nomination, an
insufficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a
different petition may be filed for the same candidate.
   F.   The City Recorder shall notify any qualified candidate of their valid
petition. Within 5 days of notification, the candidate shall complete an
acceptance of nomination form.
   G.   The City Recorder shall notify Clackamas County Elections of those
candidates successfully completing the nomination process, causing their names
to appear on the ballot.
   H.   Election records shall be kept for the required retention period as
required by the Secretary of State, Archives Division City General Retention
Schedule.
(Ord. 1312, passed 7-15-2009; Am. Ord. 1434, passed 3-2-2016)
§ 2.10.020   Authorization to submit explanatory statements relating to
municipal legislation referred or initiated by petition.
   When directed by the City Council, the City Attorney is required to prepare
an impartial explanatory statement for the Clackamas County Voters Pamphlet for
matters relating to municipal legislation referred or initiated by petition.
(Ord. 1355, passed 5-2-2012)
CHAPTER 2.16:  CONTRACT REVIEW  BOARD
Section
   
2.16.010   Established.
   
2.16.020   Temporary rules.
   
2.16.030   Conduct of business.
§ 2.16.010   Established.
   Pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 279, the City Council is hereby designated as the
City Contract Review Board.  Relative to contract concerns of the city, the
Contract Review Board shall have all the powers granted by Oregon law under the
Oregon Attorney General’s Public Contracting Manual.
(Ord. 1170, passed 2-16-2005)
§ 2.16.020   Temporary rules.
   There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing
temporary rules governing public contracts in the city, the Model Rules of the
Oregon Attorney General for Public Contracting to be effective on March 1,
2005.  These temporary rules shall remain in effect until the time that the
City Contract Review Board adopts, by resolution, rules to supersede any
portion or all of the temporary rules.
(Ord. 1170, passed 2-16-2005)
§ 2.16.030   Conduct of business.
   The City Council acting as the City Contract Review Board shall conduct its
business in a manner consistent with the requirements of this chapter and in
the same manner as it conducts other Council business.  The requirements of
this section may be modified at the time that the Board adopts rules to
supersede the Board’s temporary rules adopted by §
2.16.020.
(Ord. 1170, passed 2-16-2005)
CHAPTER 2.20:  PUBLIC LIBRARY
Section
   
2.20.010   Establishment.
   
2.20.020   Governing body.
   
2.20.030   Library Board.
   
2.20.040   Term of office; vacancies.
   
2.20.050   Officers.
   
2.20.060   Powers and duties.
   
2.20.070   Gifts and bequests.
   
2.20.080   Library Director.
   
2.20.090   Meeting place and time.
   
2.20.100   Library property.
§ 2.20.010   Establishment.
   The Canby Public Library is established for the purpose of maintaining a
free public library in accordance with O.R.S. 357.400-621.
(Am. Ord. 1433, passed 3-2-2016)
§ 2.20.020   Governing body.
   The city’s public library as established by §
2.20.010 shall be governed by the City Council.  A Library Board shall be
appointed to serve in an advisory role to the Council.
§ 2.20.030   Library Board.
   The Library Board shall consist of 7 voting members appointed by the City
Council upon recommendation of the Board Chairperson and the City Council
liaison to the Library Board.  The Mayor may vote only to break a tie, if
necessary. An additional non-voting member shall be a high school student,
residing within the Canby School District boundary. In accordance with the IGA,
the city shall provide fair representation of unincorporated residents equal to
the share of unincorporated patrons served by the Canby Public Library.
Therefore, 2 of the 7 voting members  must reside outside the Canby city
limits. The other 5 members shall be residents of the city. No member of the
Library Board shall have any financial interest, either directly or indirectly,
in any contracts to which the library is a party, nor shall any member receive
a salary or any payment for any materials or for any services rendered the
Board.  Board members may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
(Am. Ord. 1137, passed 4-21-2004; Am. Ord. 1498, passed 12-5-2018)
§ 2.20.040   Term of office; vacancies.
   Appointees shall hold office for 4-year terms from July 1 in the year of
their appointment.  At the expiration of the term of a Board member, the City
Council shall appoint a new member or may reappoint a member for a term of 4
years.  Members shall be limited to 2 consecutive terms. The High School
Student’s term shall end upon graduation. If a vacancy occurs, the City Council
shall appoint a new member to complete the unexpired term. Procedure for all
appointments by the City Council shall follow §
2.20.030 above.  Any Board member failing to attend 3 consecutive Board
meetings without approval of the Board chairperson may be removed by the City
Council and a new member appointed to complete the unexpired term.  Library
Board members serve at the pleasure of the City Council and are subject to
removal at any time by the Council with or without cause.
(Am. Ord. 1137, passed 4-21-2004; Am. Ord. 1433, passed 3-2-2016; Am. Ord.
1498, passed 12-5-2018)
§ 2.20.050   Officers.
   At the first meeting of each fiscal year, the Board shall elect a
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson who shall serve for a term of 1 year.  The
Library Director or their designee shall serve as Secretary to the Board and
keep the record of its action.  Three members of the Board shall comprise a
quorum.  The Board shall have authority to make and alter rules, with approval
of the City Council, for its government and procedures.
(Am. Ord. 1433, passed 3-2-2016)
§ 2.20.060   Powers and duties.
   The duties of the Library Board shall include:
   A.   Keeping informed about current trends in the library services and
administration;
   B.   Studying library growth and needs in the city and its vicinity;
   C.   Developing long-range plans for library service and facilities,
consistent with city priorities and with state, regional and national goals
pertinent to libraries;
   D.   Recommending types of library service for the city and its vicinity;
   E.   Investigating sources of funding for library service and facilities;
   F.   Recommending policies for the acceptance and use of gifts for library
purposes;
   G.   Participating in the annual budgetary process of the city as that
process pertains to the library;
   H.   Recommending policies and procedures conducive to efficient and
effective operation of the library;
   I.   Reviewing and recommending terms for contracts and working
relationships with other public agencies regarding library service;
   J.   Encouraging widespread public support and use of the library;
   K.   Submitting an annual report to the City Council and the state library;
and
   L.   Performing other duties as authorized by the City Council.
§ 2.20.070   Gifts and bequests.
   The Board may solicit and receive gifts and bequests and real or personal
property or funds (other than fees and fines) to benefit the library. Gifts are
subject to Council acceptance. All property or funds shall be held in the name
of the city, and each donation shall be administered in accordance with its
terms.  Funds donated to the library shall be turned over to the City Treasurer
immediately upon receipt and expended only in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the bequest.
(Am. Ord. 1433, passed 3-2-2016; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 4-20-2016)
§ 2.20.080   Library Director.
   The Library Director shall be appointed as per the Charter of the City of
Canby.
(Am. Ord. 1433, passed 3-2-2016)
§ 2.20.090   Meeting place and time.
   Unless and until another place is assigned to it by the City Council, the
Library Board shall maintain its office, hold its meetings, transact its
business and keep its records at the library.  The Library Board shall meet at
least once every other month.
§ 2.20.100   Library property.
   The library operates best when all patrons cooperate for the timely checkout
and return of items.  Depending on the preference noted on the patron's
account, patrons will receive an email, phone call, or written notification via
the U.S. Postal Service from the LINCC system, 5 days after an item is due and
then again 30 days after the due date.  Bills for lost items are sent via the
U.S. Postal Service 45 days after an item is due.  Fines begin accruing the day
after the material is due.  In accordance with LINCC policies, fines remaining
on an account after 30 days will be deemed "uncollectible".  The library may
impose fines or charges as provided in O.R.S. 357.975 and as set forth by the
City of Canby's fee schedule adopted annually by the City Council in the event
that a person willfully refuses to return library items.
(Am. Ord. 1433, passed 3-2-2016)
CHAPTER 2.28:  EVIDENTIARY HEARING  PROCEDURES
Section
   
2.28.010   Procedures.
§ 2.28.010   Procedures.
   In all evidentiary hearings before the City Council, Planning Commission,
Design Review Board or other board, commission, committee or city agency, the
following procedures for the conduct of the hearings are prescribed:
   A.   All interested persons in attendance shall be heard on the matter for
hearing, and this fact shall be communicated to those in attendance;
   B.   A summary of the application or other matter for hearing shall be given
by the presiding officer or someone appointed by him or her;
   C.   The staff report, if any shall be made;
   D.   Questions, if any, by the hearing body of the staff;
   E.   Testimony shall be received in the following order:
      1.   Applicant;
      2.   Proponents;
      3.   Opponents;
      4.   Rebuttal by proponents; and
      5.   Others.
   F.   Close public hearing;
   G.   Questions, if any, by the hearing body;
   H.   Discussion by the hearing body;
   I.   A decision shall be made by the hearing body; except, however, that
further discussion and/or decision by the hearing body may be postponed to
another meeting, the time, date and place of which shall be announced before
adjournment;
   J.   All persons who speak at a hearing shall identify themselves by name,
address and interest in the matter.  Attorneys or others shall be allowed to
speak on behalf of proponents or opponents;
   K.   Written briefs by any interested party if filed with the secretary or
clerk of the hearing body at least 5 days prior to the hearing; and
   L.   A record made at any prior evidentiary hearing may be accepted,
considered and used by the hearing body at any subsequent hearing; and the body
by majority vote of a quorum present may deny to accept or hear any repetitious
matter.
CHAPTER 2.32:  COMPENSATION FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Section
   
2.32.010   Amounts designated.
   
2.32.020   Time of payments.
   
2.32.030   No payment for attendance at committee meetings.
§ 2.32.010   Amounts designated.
   The duly elected and qualified Mayor for the city shall be paid from funds
of the city budgeted for those purposes the sum of $200 per month, and each
duly elected and qualified Council member shall also be paid from those funds
the sum of $100 per month.
(Ord. 989, passed 4-1-1998)
§ 2.32.020   Time of payments.
   The payments to be made to the Mayor and Council members as authorized by §
2.32.010 shall commence May 1, 1998, and continue thereafter until changed by
ordinance.  These payments shall be made monthly in the regular course of
business and no further order, authorization or approval for the payments shall
be required.
(Ord. 989, passed 4-1-1998)
§ 2.32.030   No payment for attendance at committee meetings.
   Neither the Mayor nor any Council member shall be paid for attendance at any
committee meeting or other meeting of the city’s officials, except as noted in
§
2.32.010.
(Ord. 989, passed 4-1-1998)
CHAPTER 2.36:  SEARCH AND CERTIFICATION SERVICES INCIDENT TO CITY LIEN DOCKET
Section
   
2.36.010   Fee for lien search.
   
2.36.020   Deposit of fees.
§ 2.36.010   Fee for lien search.
   For each certificate of lien or non-lien of the city requested by anyone and
issued by the City Recorder, after first searching the city’s lien docket to
determine whether or not a lot, tract or parcel of real property located within
the city is subject to any city lien, there shall be paid to the City Recorder
a fee in an amount to be established by Council resolution.  This fee shall
accompany the request to the City Recorder for the lien search or, at the
discretion of the City Recorder, shall be invoiced to the person, firm or
corporation requesting the lien search upon delivery to the requesting party of
the lien or non-lien certificate.
(Am. Ord. 1093, passed 3-20-2002)
§ 2.36.020   Deposit of fees.
   All fees received by the City Recorder under the provisions of §
2.36.010 shall be deposited in the General Fund of the city.
CHAPTER 2.40:  ANNEXATION AND BOUNDARY CHANGE FEES AND CHARGES
Section
   
2.40.010   Definitions.
   
2.40.020   Administrative cost to be paid.
   
2.40.030   Boundary change deposit fee.
   
2.40.040   Payment required notwithstanding boundary change action.
   
2.40.050   Exclusions.
   
2.40.090   Enforcement.
   
2.40.110   Public service and utility priority.
§ 2.40.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Application includes a petition or any other  form of initiatory action for
an annexation or boundary change.
   Boundary Change means a major or minor boundary change.
   Boundary Change Procedure means the procedure defined and required by O.R.S.
199.460 to 199.534 inclusive.
   Boundary Commission or Commission refers to the local boundary commission
created in accordance with  O.R.S. 199.430.
§ 2.40.020   Administrative cost to be paid.
   Any applicant for a boundary change for the city, including proposed
annexations, shall assume and pay or cause to be paid, the city’s actual costs
of the boundary change procedure, including though not exclusively the costs of
title reports, maps, aerial photos, engineering studies and surveys, if
required by the city, filing fees assessed by the Boundary Commission,
publication costs for required notices, attorney fees and legal expenses, and
the city’s costs of any appeal from any final order of the Boundary Commission.
§ 2.40.030   Boundary change deposit fee.
   Each applicant for a boundary change shall pay to the City Recorder with the
filing of the application a minimum fee in an amount set by Council resolution
and any additional amount which the City Council may determine reasonably
necessary to fully pay all the costs.  Upon the conclusion of the matter and
prior to the entry of the final order by the Boundary Commission, the balance,
if any, of the costs shall be paid in full without interest.
§ 2.40.040   Payment required notwithstanding  boundary  change action.
   The city’s costs for boundary change shall be assumed and paid by the
applicant, and notwithstanding the fact that the application is withdrawn by
the applicant, denied by the Council, the Boundary Commission or a court on
appeals.
§ 2.40.050   Exclusions.
   The provisions of this chapter relating to the deposit for costs, as
required by §
2.40.030, shall not apply to boundary changes initiated by the Boundary
Commission, the City Planning Commission, or on the Council’s own motion.
§ 2.40.090   Enforcement.
   A.   The Recorder of the city may use those means of collection as may be
provided by the laws of the state or permitted by the Charter and ordinances of
the city, and including though not exclusively a suit to foreclose liens as 
provided by O.R.S. Chapter 88.
   B.   If a court suit or action is instituted to collect the city’s
administrative costs or the boundary change deposit fee, the city shall be
entitled to collect, in addition to costs and disbursements as provided by
statutes, those additional sums as any court, including any appellate court,
may adjudge reasonable as attorneys’ fees in the suit or action.
§ 2.40.110   Public service and utility priority.
   If at any time the city’s ability to provide services is limited for any
reason, priority for available service shall be given to developments having
the legal and financial ability to connect to existing city service facilities.
CHAPTER 2.48:  CANBY ADULT CENTER
Section
   
2.48.010   Established.
   
2.48.020   Purpose.
   
2.48.030   Goal statements.
   
2.48.090   User fees.
§ 2.48.010   Established.
   An adult center in and for the city is established and its location shall be
at 1250 South Ivy Street, Canby, Oregon.  It shall be known as the Canby Adult
Center (CAC).  The City Council proposes to finance the CAC by annual tax
levies in an amount necessary for the maintenance of the CAC.
§ 2.48.020   Purpose.
   The CAC is organized to responsibly involve all interested citizens of the
area in ways that dignify the aging process and enhance the community.
(Am. Ord. 992, passed 5-6-1998)
§ 2.48.030     Goal statements.
   The goals of the CAC are:
   A.   To create an atmosphere and provide an opportunity for seniors and
disabled persons to get together with their peers;
   B.   To allow persons the option of choice by providing them with realistic
alternatives;
   C.   To help seniors live independently and with dignity as long as
possible;
   D.   To provide senior and disabled persons socially enriching experiences
which would help preserve their dignity as human beings and enhance their
feelings of self-worth; and
   E.   To function for all senior and disabled persons in the community, not
simply the participants at the center.
(Am. Ord. 992, passed 5-6-1998)
§ 2.48.090   User fees.
   Any fees assessed and collected by the city from the rental of the CAC shall
be placed in a budget line item to provide for future maintenance and repairs
of the center and its equipment.
(Am. Ord. 992, passed 5-6-1998)
CHAPTER 2.52:  EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Section
   
2.52.010   Title.
   
2.52.020   Purpose.
   
2.52.030   Definition of emergency.
   
2.52.040   Authority of city.
   
2.52.050   Declaration of emergency.
   
2.52.060   Succession of authority.
   
2.52.070   Regulation and control.
   
2.52.080   Acquisition of resources.
   
2.52.090   Penalty.
   
2.52.100   Responsibility for  emergency program management.
§ 2.52.010   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the emergency ordinance and may be so cited
and pleaded and is referred to herein as this chapter.
§ 2.52.020   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to define the authority and responsibility
for emergency planning, to provide a procedure to minimize injury to persons
and property and to preserve the established civil authority in the event a
statement of emergency exists within the city.
§ 2.52.030   Definition of emergency.
   For the purposes of this chapter, Emergency means any manmade or natural
event or circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or
property, human suffering or financial loss to the extent that extraordinary
measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.  These
events shall include but not be limited to fire, explosion, flood, severe
weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills of oil or other
hazardous substances, disease, blight, infestation, utility or transportation
service disruptions, civil disturbance, riot, sabotage and war.
§ 2.52.040   Authority of city.
   Under the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 401, the authority and responsibility
to organize for and respond to emergency situations is vested in each political
subdivision of the state.  O.R.S. 401 further authorizes the governing body or
executive officer of each city to establish an emergency management agency to
perform emergency program management functions, to include but is not limited
to program development, fiscal management, coordination with nongovernmental
agencies and organizations, public information, personnel training and
development and implementation of exercises to test the system.
§ 2.52.050   Declaration of emergency.
   A.   When, in the judgment of the City Council, a state of emergency exists,
it shall declare in writing and publicize the existence of same.  If
circumstances prohibit the timely action of the City Council, the Mayor may
declare the state of emergency, provided that the approval of a majority of the
City Council is sought and obtained at the first available opportunity.
   B.   Upon the declaration, the Mayor is empowered to assume centralized
control of and have authority over all departments, divisions and offices of
the city in order to implement the provisions of this chapter.  The state of
emergency declared pursuant to this section shall specify the area(s) which
warrant the exercise of emergency controls.  The Mayor shall terminate the
state of emergency when the emergency no longer exists or the threat of an
emergency has passed.
§ 2.52.060   Succession of authority.
   A.   In the event that the Mayor is unavailable or unable to perform his or
her duties under this chapter, the duties shall be performed by:
      1.   Council President;
      2.   City Administrator; and
      3.   Chief of Police.
   B.   All references to the Mayor in this chapter shall be deemed to refer to
the successor referred to in this section.
§ 2.52.070   Regulation and control.
   A.   Whenever a state of emergency has been declared to exist within the
city, the City Council is empowered to order and enforce the measures listed in
this section.  However, if circumstances prohibit the timely action of the City
Council, the Mayor may order the following measures, provided that approval
from a majority of the City Council is sought and obtained at the first
available opportunity, or the Mayor’s order will become null and void.
   B.   1.   Establish a curfew for the area designated as an emergency area
which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized
personnel may not be upon the public streets or other public places;
      2.   Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate
upon any public street, public place or any outdoor place within the area
designated as an emergency area;
      3.   Barricade streets and roads, as well as access points onto streets
and roads, and prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or restrict as an
emergency area for a distance or degree of regulation as may be deemed
necessary under the circumstances;
      4.   Evacuate persons from the area designated as an emergency area;
      5.   Close taverns or bars and prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages
throughout the city or a portion thereof;
      6.   Commit to mutual aid agreements;
      7.   Suspend standard procurement procedures to obtain necessary services
and/or equipment;
      8.   Redirect funds for emergency use; and
      9.   Order any other measures as are found to be immediately necessary
for the protection of life and/or property.
§ 2.52.080   Acquisition of resources.
   A.   Under this section, the City Council is authorized to extend government
authority to nongovernmental resources (i.e., personnel and equipment) which
may support regular government forces during an emergency and may enter into
agreements with other public and private agencies for use of resources.  When
real or personal property is taken under power granted by this section, the
owner of the property shall be entitled to reasonable compensation.
   B.   Under the provisions of O.R.S. 401, state resources are available when
the appropriate response to an emergency is beyond the capability of the city
and county in which it occurs, the city or county fails to act, or the
emergency involves 2 or more counties and the governor determines that lack of
coordination is hampering the effectiveness of response to the emergency.
   C.   Whenever a state of emergency has been declared to exist within the
city, county re sources also must be committed prior to the governor declaring
a state of emergency by proclamation at the request of the county governing
body.
§ 2.52.090   Penalty.
   A.   Any person, firm, corporation, association or entity who violates any
emergency measure  taken by the City Council under authority of this chapter
shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $1,000 per
offense.
   B.   Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense for purposes
of imposition of penalty.
   C.   Where the Oregon Revised Statutes provide for a penalty for the act,
commission or omission, the penalty prescribed in this chapter shall be no
greater than prescribed by the Oregon Revised Statutes.
§ 2.52.100   Responsibility for emergency program management.
   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall be
responsible for managing the city’s emergency program. 
   B.   Specific duties shall include but not be limited to the following:
      1.   To develop, update and revise the city’s basic emergency operation
plan;
      2.   To coordinate the activities of city departments and other agencies
with emergency services capabilities in the development of individual
operational annexes to the basic plan;
      3.   To provide for the coordination of emergency plans, programs and
operations with the county, neighboring jurisdictions and other public and
private agencies with emergency services responsibilities;
      4.   To develop working agreements with the county, neighboring
jurisdictions and service districts to assure coordinated response to an
emergency in the city;
      5.   To provide for the procurement of personnel, equipment, materials
and supplies from higher authority, and for the accounting thereof for use in
the event of a declared emergency;
      6.   To provide for coordinated operations under simulated emergency
conditions; and
      7.   To recommend to the Council any ordinances, policies or procedures
which would assist the Council and other city officers in the performance of
their duties in preparing for, responding to and recovering from an emergency.
CHAPTER 2.56:  CANBY PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
2.56.010   Swim center established.
   
2.56.020   Governing body; advisory role.
   
2.56.030   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
   
2.56.040   Terms of office; vacancies.
   
2.56.050   Officers; procedures.
   
2.56.060   Duties and powers.
   
2.56.070   Location of meetings.
   
2.56.080   Fees and charges.
§ 2.56.010   Swim center established.
   A municipal swim center in and for the city is established and its location
shall be at 1150 South Ivy Street, Canby.  It shall be known as the Canby Swim
Center.  The Council proposes to finance the swim center by an annual tax levy,
in the amount necessary to provide for the swim center.
§ 2.56.020   Governing body; advisory role.
   The city’s swim center, as established by §
2.56.010, shall be governed by the City Council.  A Parks and Recreation Board
shall be appointed to serve in an advisory role to the Council.
(Am. Ord. 1133, passed 2-18-2004)
§ 2.56.030   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of 9 members appointed
by the City Council upon recommendation of the Board Chairperson and the City
Council Parks liaison.  The Mayor may vote only to break a tie, if necessary. 
Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council.  No member of
the Board shall have any financial interest, either directly or indirectly, in
any contract to which the swim center or Parks Department is a party, nor shall
any member receive a salary or any payment for materials or for any services
rendered the Board.  Board members may be reimbursed by the city for expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Am. Ord. 1133, passed 2-18-2004; Am. Ord. 1471, passed 3-21-2018)
§ 2.56.040   Terms of office; vacancies.
   Terms of office shall be for 3 years from July 1 in the year of their
appointment.  At the expiration of the term of any Board member, the Council
shall appoint a new member or reappoint an existing member for a term of 3
years.  If a vacancy occurs, the Council shall appoint a new member to complete
that unexpired term.  All new members shall be appointed by the Council upon
the recommendation of the Board Chairperson and Council liaison.  Any Board
member failing to attend 3 consecutive meetings without approval of the Board
Chairperson may be removed by the Council and a new member appointed to
complete the unexpired term.
(Am. Ord. 1133, passed 2-18-2004)
§ 2.56.050   Officers; procedures.
   At the first meeting of each year, the Board shall elect a Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary who shall serve for a term of 1 year.  A
majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.  The Board
shall have authority to make and alter rules, with approval of the Council, for
its government and procedures.
(Am. Ord. 1133, passed 2-18-2004; Am. Ord. 1471, passed 3-21-2018)
§ 2.56.060   Duties and powers.
   The duties of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall include:
   A.   Keeping informed about current trends in parks and recreation services
and administration;
   B.   Studying growth and needs in the city and its vicinity for parks and
recreation services;
   C.   Developing long-range plans for parks and recreation services and
facilities, consistent with city priorities;
   D.   Recommending types of parks and recreation services for the city and
its vicinity, including marketing of those services;
   E.   Investigating sources of funding for parks and recreation services and
facilities;
   F.   Recommending policies for the acceptance and use of gifts for parks and
recreation purposes;
   G.   Participating in the annual budgetary process of the city as that
process pertains to parks and recreation services;
   H.   Recommending policies and procedures conducive to efficient and
effective operation of parks and recreation services;
   I.   Reviewing and recommending terms of contracts and working relationships
with other public agencies regarding parks and recreation services;
   J.   Encouraging widespread public support and use of park and recreation
services and facilities;
   K.   Submitting an annual report to the City Council;
   L.   Advising the Planning Department regarding park land dedication and
other park planning issues to meet the public needs identified in the park
master plan and park acquisition plan; and
   M.   Performing other duties as authorized by the City Council.
(Am. Ord. 1133, passed 2-18-2004)
§ 2.56.070   Location of meetings.
   Unless and until another place is assigned to it by the City Council, the
Board shall maintain its office, hold its meetings, transact its business and
keep its records at City Hall.  The Board shall meet at least once every other
month.  Advisory Board meetings are subject to public meeting law and shall be
open to the public.
(Am. Ord. 1133, passed 2-18-2004)
§ 2.56.080   Fees and charges.
   Fees and other parks and recreation charges shall be determined by the City
Council with consideration given to recommendations from the Board.  Current
fees and lists of charges shall be set by Council resolution and conspicuously
displayed at each facility.
(Am. Ord. 1133, passed 2-18-2004)
CHAPTER 2.64:  BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN COMMITTEE
Section
   
2.64.010   Established.
   
2.64.020   Bicycle and Pedestrian Committee.
   
2.64.030   Terms of office; vacancies.
   
2.64.040   Officers; procedures.
   
2.64.050   Duties and powers.
   
2.64.060   Location of meetings.
§ 2.64.010   Established.
   A  Bicycle  and Pedestrian Advisory Committee shall be appointed to serve in
an advisory role to the Council.
§ 2.64.020   Bicycle and Pedestrian Committee.
   The Bicycle and Pedestrian Committee shall consist of 7 members appointed by
the City Council upon recommendation of the Committee Chairperson and the City
Council liaison to the Committee.  The Mayor may vote only to break a tie, if
necessary.  No member of the Committee shall receive a salary or any payment
for any services rendered by the Committee. Committee members may be reimbursed
by the city for expenses incurred and pre-approved in the performance of their
duties.
(Am. Ord. 1136, passed 4-21-2004; Am. Ord. 1426, passed 11-4-2015)
§ 2.64.030   Terms of office; vacancies.
   Appointees shall hold office for 3-year terms from July 1 in the year of
their appointment.  At the expiration of the term of a Committee member, the
City Council shall appoint a new member or may reappoint a member for a term of
3 years.  If a vacancy occurs, the City Council shall appoint a new member to
complete the unexpired term.  Procedure for all appointments by the City
Council shall follow §
2.64.020 above.  Any Committee member failing to attend 3 consecutive Committee
meetings without approval of the Committee Chairperson may be removed by the
City Council and a new member appointed to complete the unexpired term. 
Bicycle and Pedestrian Committee members serve at the pleasure of the City
Council and are subject to removal at any time by the Council with or without
cause.
(Am. Ord. 1136, passed 4-21-2004)
§ 2.64.040   Officers; procedures.
   At the first meeting of each year, the Committee will elect a Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson who shall serve for a term of 1 year.  Three members of
the Committee shall comprise a quorum.  The Committee shall have authority to
make and alter rules, with approval of the City Council, for its own governance
and procedures.
§ 2.64.050   Duties and powers.
   The duties of the Committee shall include:
   A.   Recommending policies and procedures conducive to efficient and
effective operation of the bicycle and pedestrian transportation system;
   B.   Keeping informed about current trends in  bicycle and pedestrian
services and administration;
   C.   Studying growth and needs in the city and its vicinity for bicycle and
pedestrian facilities;
   D.   Developing long-range plans for bicycle and pedestrian services and
facilities, consistent with city priorities;
   E.   Investigating sources of funding for bicycle and pedestrian services
and facilities;
   F.   Recommending  policies for the acceptance and use of gifts for bicycle
and pedestrian purposes;
   G.   Participating in the annual budgetary process of the city as that
process pertains to the bicycle and pedestrian facilities and services;
   H.   Reviewing and recommending terms of contracts and working relationships
with other public agencies regarding bicycle and pedestrian facilities and
services;
   I.   Encouraging  widespread  public support and use of bicycle and
pedestrian facilities and services; and
   J.   Performing other duties as authorized by the City Council.
(Am. Ord. 1372, passed 3-20-2013)
§ 2.64.060   Location of meetings.
   Meetings shall be held at least once a quarter, and more if necessary, at a
location open to the public within the city limits.
CHAPTER 2.68:  URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
Section
   
2.68.010   Blighted areas.
   
2.68.020   Urban Renewal Agency.
   
2.68.030   Powers and duties.
   
2.68.040   Name.
   
2.68.050   Terms of office.
§ 2.68.010   Blighted areas.
   Based on the Findings of Blight within Urban Renewal Area, marked Exhibit
“A,” attached to Ord. 1032 and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth
herein, the City Council for the City of Canby, Oregon, hereinafter referred to
as the city, hereby finds and declares that blighted areas, as defined in
O.R.S. 457.010, exist within the city.
(Ord. 1032, passed 10-6-1999)
§ 2.68.020   Urban Renewal Agency.
   The City Council hereby declares and recognizes that there is a need for an
Urban Renewal Agency to function within the city.
(Ord. 1032, passed 10-6-1999)
§ 2.68.030   Powers and duties.
   The City Council further declares, pursuant to O.R.S. 457.045(3), that all
rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted to and vested in an
Urban Renewal Agency by the laws of the State of Oregon shall be exercised by
and vested in the City Council of the city; provided, however, that any act of
the governing body acting as the Urban Renewal Agency shall be considered the
act of the Urban Renewal Agency only and not of the City Council.
(Ord. 1032, passed 10-6-1999)
§ 2.68.040   Name.
   The corporate name of the agency provided by ordinance shall be, and that
agency shall be known as “The Urban Renewal Agency of the City of Canby.”
(Ord. 1032, passed 10-6-1999)
§ 2.68.050   Terms of office.
   The term of office of each member of the Urban Renewal Agency shall be
concurrent with each member’s individual term of office as a member of the City
Council of the city.
(Ord. 1032, passed 10-6-1999)
CHAPTER 2.70:  NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS
Section
   
2.70.010   Purpose.
   
2.70.020   Neighborhood association defined.
   
2.70.030   Standards.
   
2.70.040   Responsibility of city.
   
2.70.050   Appeals.
§ 2.70.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of these sections is to establish a means for formally
recognizing neighborhood associations and to provide for neighborhood
association communication with the city.  This is an additional form of
communication, and is not intended to inhibit other citizens or groups from
communication with the city.
(Ord. 1109, passed 11-20-2002)
§ 2.70.020   Neighborhood association defined.
   A Neighborhood Association means any group of people organized within a
geographical area for the purpose of acting on issues affecting neighborhood
and community livability.  A recognized Neighborhood Association is one that
satisfies the standards of §
2.70.030.
(Ord. 1109, passed 11-20-2002)
§ 2.70.030   Standards.
   A.   In order to be recognized by the city, neighborhood associations must
satisfy the standards as listed herein.  The City Council is authorized to
determine when an association has met these standards.
   B.   1.   Membership.  The membership of a neighborhood association shall
not be limited by race, creed, color, sex, age, heritage, national origin or
income.  Any resident, business owner or owner’s representative, nonprofit
organization’s representative or property owner who resides, owns property or
maintains a business within the recognized boundary of a neighborhood
association shall be entitled to membership.
      2. Boundaries.  The boundaries of a neighborhood association shall be
drawn by the association membership.  These boundaries must be mutually
exclusive of other formally recognized associations and must remain within or
coincide with the boundaries of a single neighborhood district, if necessary to
avoid creation of an area that is excluded from neighborhood association
representation.
      3.   Bylaws.  In order to be considered for recognition by the city, a
neighborhood association must first adopt written bylaws that provide for the
following:
         a.   That the officers be elected on a regular schedule, at least
every 2 years;
         b.   That meetings be conducted in conformance with public meetings
law when the association meets to act in an advisory capacity of the city. 
Advisory capacity exists when the city requests or the association on its own
accord seeks to act in an advisory capacity to the city.  That written minutes
as required by open meetings law also be required to show minority opinions and
a list of all those voting, and that copies of approved minutes and sign-in
lists be available to the city for public review.
         c.   That a current map of the association boundaries and a current
list of the association officers and their addresses be provided to the city
annually;
         d.   That a minimum of 1 general neighborhood association meeting be
held each calendar year, and the time, place and purpose be well publicized
throughout the neighborhood prior to the meeting;
         e.   That the association provide for representatives to its
neighborhood district if one exists;
         f.   That the city be informed of any updates or amendments to the
neighborhood association’s bylaws; and
         g.   That procedures are developed describing the number of members
required for a quorum, how notes are taken and recorded, and the action
necessary to file an appeal.
(Ord. 1109, passed 11-20-2002)
§ 2.70.040   Responsibility of city.
   The city shall provide recognized neighborhood associations with the
following:
   A.   Timely notification of meetings of the Council, the Planning
Commission, and upon request, any Council advisory board or commission whose
decisions may affect the neighborhood; and
   B.   General information regarding city services and activities.
(Ord. 1109, passed 11-20-2002)
§ 2.70.050   Appeals.
   A.   Formally recognized neighborhood associations may appeal a land-use
decision made by the Planning Director or Planning Commission to the
appropriate bodies without cost if the Planning Director finds:
      1.   Canby Planning and Development Code Appeal Procedures §
16.89.030 through
16.89.050 are followed;
      2.   The association submits a copy of the membership minutes and vote
taken supporting the appeal; and
      3.   The neighborhood association appeal is related to the property
within the association’s recognized boundaries.
   B.   In addition, an association may appeal without cost on behalf of an
individual or group with standing who is not represented by a recognized
association if divisions A.1. and 2. above are met and the neighborhood
association finds the issue(s) are of city-wide concern related to the Canby
Comprehensive Plan or the Canby Planning and Development Code.
(Ord. 1109, passed 11-20-2002)
CHAPTER 2.80:  PUBLIC ART MURAL PROGRAM
Section
   
2.80.010   Purpose.
   
2.80.020   Definitions.
   
2.80.030   Guidelines.
   
2.80.040   Ownership.
   
2.80.050   Implementation.
§ 2.80.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this Title and the policy of the City of Canby are to permit
and encourage Public Art Murals located within Canby's Urban Renewal District
for acquisition by the Urban Renewal Agency. Public Art Murals are to be placed
on public wall space and paid for in full or in part with Urban Renewal Funds
administered by Canby's Urban Renewal Director.  The City Council recognizes
that public murals can increase community identity and foster a sense of place
and enclosure if they are located at heights and scales visible to pedestrians,
are retained for longer periods of time and include a neighborhood process for
discussion.
(Ord. 1341, passed 3-2-2011)
§ 2.80.020   Definitions.
   A public art mural means an original, two- dimensional work of visual art
comprised of paint, executed by hand directly upon an exterior wall of a
building, which is accessible to the public, and which has been approved by the
Canby Urban Renewal Agency Director upon recommendation by the Pubic Mural
Advisory Committee (PMAC).
   Public Art Mural Advisory Committee (PMAC) means a group responsible for
reviewing proposed public art murals and making recommendations to the Canby
Urban Renewal Agency Director on the selection of Public Art Murals.  Committee
membership shall include artists, art advocates and professionals, business
owners, city staff, and a representative from Canby's Main Street Design
Committee.
(Ord. 1341, passed 3-2-2011)
§ 2.80.030   Guidelines.
   The Canby Urban Renewal Agency Director in consultation with the Public
Mural Advisory Committee and staff shall adopt guidelines to:
   A.   Provide for annual reporting to the Agency;
   B.   Provide a method for the appointment of representatives to the Public
Mural Advisory Committee;
   C.   Determine a method or methods of selecting and contracting with artists
for the design, execution and siting of Public Art Murals;
   D.   Determine a process for the ongoing care, maintenance and conservation
of public art murals;
   E.   Determine a process to deaccession public art murals;
   F.   Set forth any other matter appropriate to the administration of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 1341, passed 3-2-2011)
§ 2.80.040   Ownership.
   All Public Art Murals acquired pursuant to this Chapter shall be acquired in
the name of the City of Canby Urban Renewal Agency, and title shall vest in the
City of Canby Urban Renewal Agency.
(Ord. 1341, passed 3-2-2011)
§ 2.80.050   Implementation.
   The Canby Urban Renewal Agency Director in consultation with the Public
Mural Advisory Committee and Mural Program Staff shall implement the provisions
of this Chapter, in cooperation with all participating city departments.
(Ord. 1341, passed 3-2-2011)
CHAPTER 2.90:  (REPEALED)
(Ord. 1393, passed 2-5-2014; Repealed by Ord. 1467, passed 9-20-2017)
TITLE 3:  REVENUE AND FINANCE
   Chapter
      
3.08   DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY
      
3.12   GENERAL AND SPECIAL FUNDS
      
3.16   (REPEALED)
      
3.20   CONSTRUCTION EXCISE TAX
      
3.24   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION PAYROLL AND SELF- EMPLOYMENT TAX
      
3.30   STREET MAINTENANCE PROGRAM
      
3.35   PARK MAINTENANCE PROGRAM
      
3.40   MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL TAX
      
3.50   TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
      
3.60   MARIJUANA TAX
CHAPTER 3.08:  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY
Section
   
3.08.010   Definitions.
   
3.08.020   Personal property in possession of Police Department.
   
3.08.030   Storage of abandoned property.
   
3.08.040   Duty to notify owner of abandoned property.
   
3.08.050   Publication of notice of abandoned property.
   
3.08.060   Claims of ownership.
   
3.08.070   Sale of abandoned property.
   
3.08.080   Proceeds of sale.
   
3.08.090   Certificate of sale.
   
3.08.100   Delivery of property to purchaser.
   
3.08.110   Owner entitled to balance of proceeds.
§ 3.08.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Abandoned means any personal property which has been left upon any street,
alley, park, sidewalk or other real property owned by the city in the city
without the owner or person having possession of the personal property having
first obtained the permission of the City Police Department to leave the
personal property in that place; or where the personal property shall have been
left in any of the places in the city with the permission of the City Police
Department, but the owner or person entitled to possession thereof has refused
to move the personal property, after having been given 10 days’ notice by the
City Police Department to remove the same.
   Costs means the expense of removing, storing or selling abandoned personal
property.
   Owner means any individual, firm or corporation, or unincorporated
association with a claim, either individually or jointly; ownership; or any
interest, legal or equitable, in the personal property.
   Personal Property means any movable property or chattels except an abandoned
vehicle, as regulated under Chapter 10.08 of this Code.
§ 3.08.020   Personal property in possession of Police Department.
   If any personal property shall come into the possession of the City Police
Department by reason of arrest, confiscation or in any other manner, and the
owner thereof is not then known, the personal property shall be considered
abandoned property, as defined by this chapter, and disposed of as provided in
this chapter.
§ 3.08.030   Storage of abandoned property.
   It shall be the duty of the City Police Department to take possession of all
abandoned property which comes to the knowledge of the Police Department and
safely keep the same in some suitable storage place to be designated by the
Police Department, pending investigation concerning the ownership of the
property.
§ 3.08.040   Duty to notify owner of abandoned property.
   If any personal property shall be abandoned within the city for more than 15
days, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to use all reasonable means
to ascertain the owner of the property and to notify the owner in writing as
follows:
   A.   A brief description of the personal property abandoned, including any
serial numbers or other numbers identifying the property;
   B.   The location where the personal property was found abandoned;
   C.   The storage place of the personal property; and
   D.   That the city may, after 60 days from the date of the mailing of the
notice, proceed to sell the personal property for cash to the highest and best
bidder, and from the proceeds of the sale retain a sum sufficient to pay the
costs of the sale.
§ 3.08.050   Publication of notice of abandoned property.
   If the owner of any abandoned property cannot be found after due diligence,
or if the owner of the property so notified shall fail to claim and remove the
property within 10 days from the date of the notice, the Chief of Police shall
cause to be published in the Canby Herald a notice, which shall contain a brief
description of the personal property involved, the location where the personal
property was found abandoned in the city, the name of the owner thereof if
known, and the time, day and place where the personal property will be sold for
cash to the highest bidder.  The notice shall be published 2 times, and first
publication shall be made not less than 10 days preceding the date of the sale.
§ 3.08.060   Claims of ownership.
   If the owner of the abandoned property shall apply to the City Chief of
Police for the return of the property before the date of sale, and shall submit
satisfactory evidence of his or her title thereto, and shall tender the city’s
costs, the Chief of Police, upon being satisfied that the claim of ownership is
rightful, shall surrender the property to the claimant.
§ 3.08.070   Sale of abandoned property.
   If no claim shall have been made to the abandoned property before the time
set for sale thereof, the sale shall be held at the time and place appointed
therefor and within view of the personal property.  The Chief of Police or an
agent he or she shall appoint, shall conduct the sale; and the personal
property shall be sold to the highest and best bidder for cash.  The city shall
have the right to enter a bid for the personal property, but not exceeding the
amount of the city’s actual costs.
§ 3.08.080   Proceeds of sale.
   The proceeds of the sale shall be applied first to the payment of the city’s
costs; and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the Treasurer of the city to
be credited to the General Fund.
§ 3.08.090   Certificate of sale.
   At the time of the payment of the purchase price at any such sale, the Chief
of Police shall cause to be executed a certificate of sale in duplicate, the
original of which shall be delivered to the purchaser, and a copy thereof filed
with the Recorder of the city.  The certificate shall be in a form provided by
City Hall.
§ 3.08.100   Delivery of property to purchaser.
   Upon any sale being completed, the Chief of Police or his or her duly
authorized agent shall deliver the possession of the personal property to the
purchaser thereof.  This sale and conveyance shall be without right of
redemption.
§ 3.08.110   Owner entitled to balance of proceeds.
   At any time within 1 year after the date of any sale of abandoned property,
the owner of the property sold as provided for in this chapter shall be
entitled to have the balance of the proceeds of the sale paid to him or her out
of the General Fund of the city, upon making application therefor to the City
Council and presenting satisfactory proof of ownership.
CHAPTER 3.12:  GENERAL AND SPECIAL FUNDS
Section
   
3.12.005   Created.
   
3.12.008   Custodian.
   
3.12.010   Expenditures
§ 3.12.005   Created.
   A.   General Fund.  There is created a general fund for the general
operation of the city. All revenues accruing to the city, other than those
designated for special funds as provided for in Chapter 3.12(B), shall be paid
into and credited to the general fund.
   B.   Additional Funds.  The City Council may create or eliminate other
funds, as follows by resolution as required by the state or federal government,
or when it is in the best interests of the City of Canby.
      1.   Special Revenue Funds;
      2.   Internal Service Funds;
      3.   Debt Service Funds;
      4.   Capital Reserve Funds;
      5.   Enterprise Funds.
§ 3.12.008   Custodian.
   A.   The City Treasurer is appointed official custodian for the care,
custody and control of all public funds for the city.
   B.   The City Treasurer shall be bonded in the amount of not less than
$100,000.
§ 3.12.010   Expenditures.
   Checks or warrants may be drawn on said fund for the general operation of
the city in accordance with the annual budget or budgets. The accounts of the
city shall be so kept that they shall show the departments and the respective
amounts for which the check or warrant is issued and paid.
CHAPTER 3.16:  (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 3.20:  CONSTRUCTION EXCISE TAX
Section
   
3.20.010   Short title.
   
3.20.020   Construction.
   
3.20.030   Definitions.
   
3.20.040   Exemptions.
   
3.20.050   Rules and regulations promulgation.
   
3.20.060   Administration and enforcement authority.
   
3.20.070   Rate.
   
3.20.080   Statement of entire floor area required.
   
3.20.090   Rebates.
   
3.20.100   Refunds.
   
3.20.110   Failure to pay.
   
3.20.120   Occupation of improvement without payment unlawful.
   
3.20.130   Enforcement by civil action.
   
3.20.140   Appeals.
   
3.20.150   Failure to pay; penalty.
   
3.20.160   Violation; penalty.
§ 3.20.010   Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the construction excise tax ordinance and may
be so pleaded.
§ 3.20.020   Construction.
   The construction excise tax ordinance and all amendments hereinafter made
thereto shall be referred to herein as this chapter.
§ 3.20.030   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Building Official means any person charged by a municipality with
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of a building code.
   Building Permit means a permit issued in accordance with the most recent
State of Oregon Structural and Specialty Code or the State of Oregon One and
Two Family Dwelling Specialty Code.
   Construction means any activity for which a building permit is required.
   Contractor means any person who performs construction for compensation.
   Improvement means the habitable living space of any newly constructed
structure, modification of any existing structure to include additional
habitable living space or manufactured housing for which a building permit or
installation permit is required.  Improvement does not include such things as
decks, storage sheds, garages used for parking of cars, unfinished basements
and attics, and other like additions which are not intended to be inhabited by
the occupants.
   Installation Permit means a permit issued in accordance with the most recent
State of Oregon Administrative Rules regarding standards for manufactured
dwellings.
   Manufactured Dwelling means any building or structure designed to be used as
a residence that is subject to regulations pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 446, as
further defined in O.R.S. 446.003(26).
   Nonprofit Corporation means those corporations developing housing projects
directed at low-to- moderate income range residents.
   Person means and includes individuals, domestic and foreign corporations,
societies, joint ventures, associations, firms, partnerships, joint stock
companies, clubs or any legal entity whatsoever.
§ 3.20.040   Exemptions.
   A.   No obligation to pay the tax imposed by §
3.20.070 shall arise from the construction of any improvement that is owned by
any government entity whether federal, state or local, or upon any commercial
construction that is intended for any occupancy other than residential.
   B.   The City Administrator shall, pursuant to §§
3.20.050 and
3.20.060, exempt from the duty to pay the tax imposed by §
3.20.070 any person who would be entitled to rebate pursuant to §
3.20.090.
§ 3.20.050   Rules and regulations promulgation.
   The City Council may promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
§ 3.20.060   Administration and enforcement authority.
   A.   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   In order to carry out the duties imposed by this chapter, the City
Administrator shall have the authority to do the following acts, which
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive, namely: administer oaths;
certify to all official acts; to subpoena and require attendance of witnesses
before the Municipal Court to determine compliance with this chapter, rules and
regulations; to require production of relevant documents at court hearings; and
take testimony of any person by deposition.
§ 3.20.070   Rate.
   A.   An excise tax is imposed on every person who engages in the
construction or installation of any improvement, including manufactured
dwellings located within the corporate city limits.  These rates shall be set
by resolution.
   B.   The total tax shall be calculated upon the square footage of the
improvement that appears on the building permit or installation permit.
   C.   In the case of multi-family structures such as duplexes, triplexes and
apartment complexes, the tax shall be calculated on the square footage of each
single unit (not the overall square footage of the building).  The amount
calculated for each single unit shall then be added together to calculate the
total tax for the complex.
   D.   The tax shall be due and payable from the issuance of any building
permit or installation permit for the improvement by any building authority. 
Liability for this tax shall be imposed upon every contractor or person who
constructs or installs any improvement; provided, however, that only 1 tax must
be paid on the construction or installation of any 1 improvement.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 3.20.080   Statement of entire floor area required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to state or to misstate the full
floor area of any improvement or manufactured dwelling.  When any person pays
the tax within the time provided for payment of the tax, there shall be a
conclusive presumption, for purposes of computation of the tax, that the floor
area of the improvement or manufactured dwelling is the floor area as
determined by the Building Official at the time of issuance of the building
permit or installation permit.
§ 3.20.090   Rebates.
   A.   The City Administrator shall rebate to any person who has paid a tax
the amount of tax actually paid, upon the person establishing that:
      1.   The tax was paid for the construction of a single-family residence
that was sold to its original occupant for a price less than $100,000; provided
that the maximum amount that may be refunded for any 1 residence is $125;
      2.   The person who paid the tax is a corporation exempt from federal
income taxation pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 501(c)(3), or a limited partnership, the
sole general partner of which is a corporation exempt from federal income
taxation pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 501(c)(3), the construction is used for
residential purposes and the property is restricted to being occupied by
persons with income less than 50% of the median income for a period of 30 years
or longer; or
      3.   The person who paid the tax is exempt from federal income taxation
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 501(c)(3) and the construction is dedicated for use for
the purpose of providing charitable services to persons with incomes less than
50% of the median income.
§ 3.20.100   Refunds.
   A.   Upon written request, the City Administrator shall refund any tax paid,
upon the person who paid the tax establishing that construction was not
commenced and that any building permit issued has been canceled as provided by
law.
   B.   The City Administrator shall either refund all amounts due under this
section within 30 days of a complete application for the refund or give written
notice of the reasons why the application has been denied.  Any denial of any
application may be appealed as provided for in § 3.20.114.
§ 3.20.110   Failure to pay.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay all or any portion of the
tax imposed by this chapter.
§ 3.20.120   Occupation of improvement without payment unlawful.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any improvement unless the
payment of the tax imposed by this chapter has been provided as stated in §
3.20.070 of this chapter.
§ 3.20.130   Enforcement by civil action.
   The tax and any penalty imposed by this chapter constitutes a debt of the
person liable for the tax as set forth in §
3.20.070 of this chapter and may be collected by the city in an action at law. 
If litigation is necessary to collect the tax and any penalty, the prevailing
party shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys’ fees at trial or on appeal. 
The City Attorney is authorized to prosecute any action needed to enforce this
chapter as requested by the City Administrator.
§ 3.20.140   Appeals.
   Any person who is aggrieved by any determination of the City Administrator
regarding liability for payment of the tax, the amount of tax owed, or the
amount of tax that is subject to refund or rebate may appeal the determination
to the Canby City Council.  All appeals must be in writing and must be filed
within 10 days of the determination by the City Administrator.  No appeal may
be made unless the person has first paid the tax due as determined by the City
Administrator.
§ 3.20.150   Failure to pay; penalty.
   In addition to any other fine or penalty provided by this chapter, failure
to pay the tax within 15 days of the date of issuance of any building permit
for any improvement or installation permit for any manufactured dwelling shall
result in a penalty equal to the amount of tax owed or $50, whichever is
greater.
§ 3.20.160   Violation; penalty.
   In addition to any other civil enforcement provided herein, violation of
this chapter shall be a violation and shall be punishable, upon conviction, by
a fine of not more than $500.
CHAPTER 3.24:  PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION PAYROLL AND SELF-EMPLOYMENT TAX
Section
   
3.24.010   Definitions.
   
3.24.020   Application; doing business in the city.
   
3.24.030   Payroll and self-employment tax imposed.
   
3.24.040   Apportionment of tax.
   
3.24.050   Alternate method of apportioning tax.
   
3.24.060   Fixed percentage.
   
3.24.070   Employer located outside of local transit area.
   
3.24.080   Exceptions.
   
3.24.090   Nature of the tax.
   
3.24.100   Date due, returns, payments, prepayments and extensions.
   
3.24.110   Rebates.
   
3.24.120   Collector’s duties.
   
3.24.130   Penalties, interest and fees.
   
3.24.140   Failure to file, failure to pay, underpayment.
   
3.24.150   Tax as debt; termination of taxable period and immediate assessment
of tax.
   
3.24.160   Warrant for collection of taxes.
   
3.24.170   Discontinuing business in the local transit district.
   
3.24.180   Refunds.
   
3.24.190   Sale or other transfer of business.
   
3.24.200   Receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, guardians,
conservators and others.
   
3.24.210   Right of privacy.
   
3.24.220   Computer records of taxpayers.
   
3.24.240   False information, failure to file; penalty.
   
3.24.250   Appeal from Collector.
   
3.24.260   Record keeping requirements.
§ 3.24.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Association means any club, group or organization, whether organized for
business purposes, civic purposes, religious purposes or other purposes.
   Business Entity means any sole proprietorship, self-employed person,
partnership, limited partnership, corporation including nonprofit corporations
engaged in any business enterprise, and any firm, association or entity of any
kind engaged in business.  This term shall also include any personal
representative or assignee of any Business Entity.
   City means the City of Canby.
   Collector means the tax Collector of the city. This may be an employee of
the city or a contract agent or agency as the City Council shall from time to
time determine.  The City Finance Director shall have supervisory
responsibilities over the Collector.
   Commission Merchant or Commission Employee means any person who engages in
the sale of goods for compensation in the form of a commission only and is
subject to withholding under O.R.S. Chapter
316.  This also includes any person who buys and resells goods if the person
does not maintain a retail store or wholesale sales floor and does not store
goods except during a short period before transportation to the buyer.
   Corporation means any business corporation and any nonprofit corporation
organized under the laws of this state, or under the laws of any jurisdiction.
   Employee means any individual employed by another, for wages.  This also
includes all real estate salespeople employed by a real estate broker and paid
on a commission basis, and all mechanics who perform services for customers of
an auto repair shop and who are paid by the owner of the auto shop for each
repair or maintenance job done, provided that the remuneration is subject to
withholding under O.R.S. Chapter 316.
   Employer has the meaning prescribed by O.R.S. 267.380.
   Firm means any sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture,
limited partnership or other form of organization formed for the purpose of
doing business.
   Individual means a natural person.
   Local Transit Area means designated areas within the city and the Canby
Urban Growth Boundary which will receive benefits of operation, management or
delivery of a transit system.
   Net Earnings from Self-Employment has the definition as prescribed by O.R.S.
267.380.
   Payroll Expense means the wages paid by any employer to any employee. 
Payroll Expenses also include the commission received by a commission merchant
or a commission employee, if that person is subject to withholding under O.R.S.
Chapter 316.
   Personal Representative means any trustee, receiver, executor,
administrator, guardian, conservator or similar Personal Representative of any
person, firm, association or corporation.
   Taxpayer means any person, firm, corporation or association required by this
chapter to file a return or to pay a payroll and/or self-employment tax.
   Wages has the meaning prescribed by O.R.S. 267.380.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.020   Application; doing business in the city.
   A.   The payroll and self-employment tax shall apply only to persons, firms,
corporations and associations doing business within the local transit area.
   B.   A person, firm, corporation or association is doing business within the
boundaries of the local transit area if the entity does any of the following:
      1.   Employs 1 or more employees, commission merchants or commission
employees to work in the local transit area;
      2.   Maintains a place of business in the local transit area;
      3.   Owns, manages or leases property in the local transit area. 
Managing rental property owned by the entity or by others is included;
      4.   Solicits any business within the local transit area, provided that
solicitation is by mail or telephone contacts only, and solicitation by
advertising only shall not subject any entity to the payroll and self-
employment tax;
      5.   Uses the streets within the local transit area for any reason in
connection with the work of any employee, commission merchant or commission
employee;
      6.   Maintains any place of business in the city, provided that any
employer not maintaining a place of business in the city, but doing any of the
acts described in divisions B.1. through B.5. of this section shall be subject
to the payroll and self-employment tax;
      7.   Conducts business in a residence within the local transit area; or
      8.   Received taxable income due to business activity in the local
transit area.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.030   Payroll and self-employment tax imposed.
   To carry out the purposes set forth herein, an excise tax is hereby imposed
and levied on every person, firm, corporation or association doing business
within the boundaries of the local transit area, which employs 1 or more
employees, or contracts orally or in writing with any commission merchant or
commission employee. For the same purposes, a tax is imposed on each
individual’s net earnings from self-employment and hereinafter shall be
included when there is a reference to payroll and self-employment tax.  The
amount of the tax shall be 0.6% of the total payroll expense of each taxpayer
or of the individual’s net earnings from self-employment, as the case may be. 
The payroll and self-employment tax shall be in full force and effect from and
after January 1, 2002, and shall apply to payroll expense and net earnings from
self-employment incurred after that date.  This tax is imposed for the
provision of public transportation services within the local transit area in
order to provide for the business community to carry a share of the costs of
local government in return for the benefits and opportunities available because
of the city government and services.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 3.24.040   Apportionment of tax.
   A.   The payroll and self-employment tax applies to the gross taxable
payrolls of employees paid for work performed within the local transit area. 
If an employer employs or pays some individuals within the local transit area
and employs or pays some individuals outside of the local transit area who are
subject to Tri-Met tax or a like tax, then the tax shall apply only to the
payroll covering employees working or being paid within the local transit
area. 
   B.   If any employee spends part of his or her working hours within the
local transit area and part outside of the local transit area, the fraction or
percentage of the payroll of that employee to be taxed shall be determined as
follows:
      1.   If the employee’s compensation depends on the amount of sales or
volume of repair work or other services done, only the payroll attributable to
sales made or services done in the local transit area shall be subject to the
payroll tax.
      2.   If the employee is paid on any other basis, the fraction or
percentage of the payroll concerning that employee to be taxed shall equal the
fraction or percentage of the employee’s working hours spent in the local
transit area.  The same apportionment is applicable to net earnings from self-
employment if any of the earnings are subject to the Tri-Met payroll and self-
employment tax or any like tax.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.050   Alternate method of apportioning tax.
   Any taxpayer may, at the taxpayer’s sole option, propose an alternate method
to the methods of apportioning the payroll tax set out in the preceding section
of this chapter.  If, due to the circumstances of the taxpayer’s business, the
methods set out in the preceding section result in more of the taxpayer’s
payroll being taxed than can reasonably be attributed to the connection of the
taxpayer and the employees, commission merchants or commission employees within
the local transit district, and if the proposed alternate method does provide
for a reasonably accurate proportion of the taxpayer’s payroll to be subject to
the tax, the Collector may approve the alternate method and the amount of
payroll and self-employment tax owed by the taxpayer shall be the amount
determined by the alternate method.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.060   Fixed percentage.
   If the Collector finds that the percentage of any taxpayer’s payroll
required to be apportioned to business done in the local transit area remains
stable with little variation, the Collector may notify the taxpayer that a
fixed percentage has been established and that the percentage does not have to
be calculated when each return is filed. If the taxpayer objects within 30 days
of receiving the notice, the fixed percentage shall not be put into effect and
the percentage shall continue to be determined as before. If the taxpayer does
not object, the fixed percentage shall remain in effect until changed by action
of the Collector, or changed by the taxpayer as follows:  At any time the use
of the fixed percentage may be discontinued, at the sole option of the
taxpayer, by the taxpayer giving 30 days’ written notice to the Collector. 
Each taxpayer whose payroll tax is determined by use of a fixed percentage
under this section has a continuing duty to notify the Collector immediately of
any significant change in conditions which would change the proportion of the
payroll reasonably attributable to business done or work done in the local
transit district.  The Collector may change or discontinue the use of a fixed
percentage at any time.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.070   Employer located outside of local transit area.
   Employers located outside of the local transit area are subject to the
payroll and self-employment tax if any employee, commission merchant or
commission employee of the employer does business in the local transit area in
any way designated in §
3.24.020 of this chapter.  Each employer shall contact the city Collector to
obtain forms and shall file all returns required by this chapter.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.080   Exceptions.
   A.   Wages which are excluded as remuneration paid under O.R.S. 267.380.
   B.   Any payroll of any employer subject to the Tri-Met payroll or self-
employment tax or any like tax.  Refer to §
3.24.040.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.090   Nature of the tax.
   The tax imposed by this chapter is a tax on persons, firms, corporations and
associations doing business in the local transit area.  It is not a tax on
employees.  The payroll and self-employment tax shall not be withheld by the
employer from the employee’s compensation.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 3.24.100   Date due, returns, payments, prepayments and extensions.
   A.   Taxpayers shall comply with the following requirements concerning
returns, payments, pre-payments and extensions.
   B.   Taxes shall be determined for:
      1.   Payroll: each quarter of the calendar year, and the tax due for each
quarter of the calendar year shall be paid on or before April 30, July 31,
October 31 and January 31.
      2.   Annual payroll: The Collector may authorize annual payroll tax
reporting for a taxpayer whose reporting history indicates the business does
occasional work within the local transit area resulting in tax due of $120 or
less per year, or an average of $30 or less per quarter. The tax due for each
calendar year shall be paid on or before January 31 of the following year.  It
is the responsibility of the taxpayer to notify the Collector and increase the
reporting frequency to quarterly when the tax due exceeds the maximum limits
for the annual reporting frequency. Failure to do so may be deemed negligence
or evasion, and penalties may apply. Failure to file returns timely, without
good cause shown to the satisfaction of the Collector, is sufficient cause for
the Collector to deny future annual filings by the taxpayer.
      3.   Self-employment: annually the tax due for each calendar year shall
be paid on or before April 15.
   C.   Each taxpayer shall file a return, on a form to be furnished by the
Collector, and file the same along with payment of the tax, on or before the
date payment is due. Taxpayers are required to file a zero tax due return if no
tax is owed.
   D.   Extensions for filing may be granted by the Collector for good and
sufficient cause shown, such as events outside the control of the taxpayer and
which could not have been avoided by prudent business practices.  To be
eligible for an extension, requests must be received in writing prior to the
tax payment due date.  These extensions shall be for not more than 30 days for
quarterly and annual payroll taxpayers or 6 months for self-employment
taxpayers.  Extensions are for more time to file a return only. A payment must
be made based on an estimated return by the original due date to avoid penalty
and interest charges.  If the Collector grants an extension under this section,
the taxpayer shall pay interest at the rate of 1.5% per month on the balance of
any unpaid payroll and self-employment tax due and shall pay no other penalty
if filed and account made current by the extension deadline; otherwise
penalties, fees and interest could be accrued from the original filing
deadline. 
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.110   Rebates.
   A.   The Collector may request approval from the City Council to grant tax
rebates or credits based on the financial performance of the transportation
fund, giving due consideration to projected operating expenses and prudent
reserves.
   B.   Rebates will be returned to taxpayers on a pro-rata basis less costs of
administration of the rebates and any incentive charges.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.120    Collector’s duties.
   The Collector shall have the following duties in connection with the payroll
and self-employment tax:
   A.   Keep accurate records of all returns and of all sums received for
payroll and self-employment tax. The records shall contain the names and
addresses of each taxpayer, and the dates and amounts of payments.  The nature
of installment payments shall be indicated on the records.  The Collector shall
keep the original returns on file for a period of not less than 3 years after
filing;
   B.   Enforce the provisions of this chapter;
   C.   Prepare forms and instructions for the returns and payments required by
this chapter;
   D.   Examine returns and, for any returns appearing to be incorrect, make
inquiries, investigations and adjustments in the amount of tax due;
   E.   Where necessary to determine accurate figures for determining the
amount of tax due, examine books, records and information stored in computers
of any taxpayer, provided that each city officer or employee acting under this
chapter shall identify himself or herself and request the information desired.
If the officer or employee is refused admission to any place of business or
refused access to any records or computer memory, the Collector or employee
shall leave the premises and shall seek an appropriate court order, with the
assistance of the City Attorney, to obtain access to the information needed;
   F.   The Collector may delegate duties assigned to the Collector in this
chapter to any officer or employee under the Collector’s supervision, provided
that the Collector shall approve the form of all returns and written
instructions;
   G.   The Collector shall prepare pamphlets for distribution to the public,
clearly explaining the payroll and self-employment tax and the returns and
payments required; and
   H.   The Collector shall perform all of the other duties assigned to the
Collector by this chapter.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.130   Penalties, interest and fees.
   A.   Original Delinquency.  Any taxpayer who has not been granted an
extension of time for filing a return or remittance of tax due and who fails to
remit any tax imposed by §§
3.24.030et seq. prior to delinquency, shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount
of tax due in addition to the amount of the tax unless the taxpayer shows that
the failure to file timely is due to reasonable cause not due to negligence.
   B.   Continued Delinquency.  Any taxpayer who has not been granted an
extension of time for filing a return or remittance of tax due, and who failed
to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the
date on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second
delinquency penalty of 15% of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the
tax and the 10% penalty first imposed unless the taxpayer shows that the
failure to file timely is due to reasonable cause and not due to negligence.
   C.   Fraud.  If the Collector determines that the failure to file a return
or that the nonpayment of any remittance due under §§
3.24.030et seq. is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a
penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to
the penalties stated in divisions A. and B. of this section.
   D.   Interest.  In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails
to remit a tax imposed by §§
3.24.030et seq. shall pay interest at the rate of 1.5% per month or a fraction
thereof, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.  Said interest cannot
be waived by the Collector.
   E.   Payment Submitted without Return.  A fee, set by resolution, shall be
charged should a taxpayer remit a payment without a return unless said return
is received by the Collector within 5 business days of receiving the payment.
   F.   Penalties Merged with Tax.  Every penalty and fee imposed and such
interest as accrues under provisions of this section shall be merged and become
a part of the tax herein required to be paid.  Payments shall first be applied
to penalties and fees imposed, then to interest accrued, then taxes due.
   G.   Attorney Fees.  In the event it becomes necessary for an enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter for the city to incur attorney fees’ expense and
cost, the taxpayer shall be assessed that expense and/or cost.  It shall be due
and owing upon billing and shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5% per month.
   H.   Imposition of Civil Penalties.  An imposition of any civil penalties,
interest, fees or costs by this section shall not be a bar for any prosecution
under §
3.24.240.
   I.   The Collector may waive or adjust penalties and fees imposed by
divisions A., B., C. and E. above upon a finding that:
      1.   In the past, the taxpayer has consistently filed and paid the taxes
imposed by this chapter in a timely manner;
      2.   The amount of the penalties or fees are greatly disproportionate to
the amount of the tax;
      3.   The failure of a taxpayer to file a return and/or pay any tax by the
due date was caused by any of the following circumstances:
         a.   The return was timely filed but was inadvertently forwarded to
another taxing jurisdiction.
         b.   Erroneous or insufficient information was furnished the taxpayer
by the Collector or their employee or agent.
         c.   Death or serious illness of the taxpayer, member of his immediate
family, or the preparer of the reports immediately prior to the due date.
         d.   Unavoidable absence of the taxpayer immediately prior to the due
date.
         e.   Destruction by fire or other casualty of the taxpayer's place of
business or records.
         f.   Prior to the due date, the taxpayer made application for proper
forms which could not be furnished in sufficient time to permit a timely
filing.
         g.   The taxpayer was in the process of pursuing an active protest of
the tax in question in another taxing jurisdiction at the time the tax and/or
return was due.
         h.   The taxpayer establishes through competent evidence that the
taxpayer contacted a tax advisor who is competent on the specific tax matter,
and after furnishing necessary and relevant information, the taxpayer was
incorrectly advised that no tax was owed and/or the filing of a return was not
required.
         i.   The taxpayer has never been audited by a city for the tax or on
the issue in question and relied, in good faith, on a state exemption or
interpretation.
         j.   The taxpayer can provide some public record (court case; report
in a periodical, professional journal, or publication; etc.) stating that the
transaction is not subject to tax.
         k.   The Oregon Department of Revenue, based upon the same facts and
circumstances, abated penalties for the same filing period.
      4.   A taxpayer may also request a waiver or adjustment of penalty for a
reason thought to be equally substantive to those reasons itemized above. All
requests for waiver or adjustment of penalty must be in writing and shall
contain all pertinent facts and other reliable and substantive evidence to
support the request. In all cases, the burden of proof is upon the taxpayer.
   J.   No request for waiver of penalty under division I. above may be granted
unless written request for waiver is received by the Collector within 60 days
following the imposition of penalty.  Any taxpayer aggrieved by the refusal to
grant a waiver under division I. above may appeal under the provisions of §
3.24.250 provided that a petition of appeal or request for an extension is
submitted to the Collector within 60 days of the taxpayer's receipt of notice
by the city that waiver has been denied.
   K.   For the purpose of this section, Reasonable Cause shall mean that the
taxpayer exercised ordinary business care and prudence, i.e., had a reasonable
basis for believing that the tax did not apply to the business activity in this
city.
   L.   For the purpose of this section, Negligence shall be characterized
chiefly by inadvertence, thoughtlessness, inattention, or the like, rather than
an "honest mistake." Examples of negligence include:
      1.   The taxpayer's failure to maintain records in accordance with §
3.24.260;
      2.   Repeated failures to file returns timely; or
      3.   Gross ignorance of the law.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.140   Failure to file, failure to pay, underpayment.
   The following rules apply when a taxpayer fails to file a return, fails to
pay the payroll and self-employment tax when due, or pays less than the amount
due:
   A.   If a taxpayer fails to make a return, the Collector shall prepare an
estimate of the amount of payroll and self-employment tax due from the
taxpayer, based on the best information available to the Collector.  The
Collector may make investigations to assist in making the estimate.  The
Collector may consider the number of employees, the wages or other compensation
customarily paid in the type of business, the volume of business done and
customary commissions or bonuses paid to employees in the same type of
business, and any other relevant matters. The Collector may estimate the
compensation customary in the business by comparing returns filed by other
taxpayers in the same business or similar businesses.  When the Collector
estimates the payroll and self-employment tax, the amount of the interest and
late charge provided by this chapter shall be added to the taxes due.  The
Collector shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the amount due.  The
notification shall be in writing in the form of a pre-collection notice
containing a brief description of the method and estimated figures used in
arriving at the estimated tax.  The taxpayer shall respond within 30 days of
notification of the estimated tax by:
      1.   Filing a tax return accompanied by payment of the entire balance
due, together with interest and late charge due.  The return shall be processed
like any late return, and shall establish the payroll tax liability of the
taxpayer in place of the estimated tax prepared by the Collector. The Collector
may, however, later determine that the amount shown on the return is
insufficient, so there is a deficiency, in the same manner as in the case of
other returns.
      2.   Contacting the Collector or Finance Director to set up a payment
plan.
      3.   If the taxpayer fails to respond to the notification within 30 days
a collection notice will be mailed informing said taxpayer of the estimated
balance, interest and late charges being turned over to a collection agency.
   B.   If the Collector determines, by examining available evidence that the
amount of payroll and self-employment tax paid by any taxpayer is less than the
amount required by this chapter, the Collector shall notify the taxpayer of the
deficiency.  The Collector may use any of the methods authorized by §§
3.24.010et seq. of this chapter to determine whether a deficiency exists and to
determine the amount of the deficiency.  The Collector shall thereupon notify
the taxpayer of the deficiency.  The notice shall be in writing and shall state
not only the amount of the deficiency, but also the methods and estimates used
in arriving at the amount of deficiency.  If the taxpayer does not object
within 30 days of the date of receiving the notice, the taxpayer shall be
deemed to have accepted the revised figures for payroll tax liability.  If the
taxpayer does file a written objection within the time specified, the taxpayer
shall pay the tax, together with penalties and interest, under protest, and may
thereupon, pursue administrative and judicial remedies as provided by ordinance
and by state law, to seek a refund.
   C.   If the Collector finds that any taxpayer has overpaid, the Collector
shall notify the taxpayer of the taxpayer’s overpayment and shall refund the
amount of the overpayment to the taxpayer in accordance with §
3.24.180.
   D.   When the Collector notifies any taxpayer of any estimated tax, alleged
overpayment or refund, the Collector shall include in the notice clear
instructions on how, when and where the taxpayer may protest or appeal the
decision.
   E.   If a taxpayer or any person, firm, association or corporation required
by this chapter to pay a tax or to file a return shall fail to file any return
for any year, the failure to file shall constitute a continuing offense against
the city and the Collector may proceed to estimate and collect the payroll and
self-employment tax at any time.  In all other cases, no increase shall be made
in any taxpayer’s payroll tax liability unless the first notice of the increase
is received by the taxpayer within 3 years of the time the return was first
due.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.150   Tax as debt; termination of taxable period and immediate
assessment of tax.
   A.   Every tax imposed upon employers measured by wages paid to employees
and upon self-employed persons measured by net earnings from self-employment,
and all increases, interest and penalties thereon shall become, from the time
the liability is incurred, a personal debt due the city from the person or
persons liable therefor.
   B.   If the Collector finds that the taxpayer designs to depart quickly from
the state or to remove his or her property therefrom, or to do any other act
tending to prejudice or to render wholly or partially ineffectual proceedings
to collect the tax for any past quarter or the tax quarter then current, unless
the proceedings be brought without delay, the Collector shall declare the
current taxable period for the taxpayer immediately terminated and shall cause
notice of the finding and declaration to be given the taxpayer. 
Simultaneously, the Collector, on the basis of the best information available
to it, shall assess a tax for the terminated period and for the preceding tax
quarter (if no return has been filed, whether or not the time otherwise allowed
by law for filing the return and paying the tax has expired), and shall assess
additional tax for any quarters open to assessment under provisions of the
applicable law.  The Collector shall give notice to the taxpayer of all taxes
so assessed.  The taxes shall thereupon become immediately due and payable as
soon as the notice and findings are issued to the taxpayer or mailed to his or
her last known address.  In any proceeding in court brought to enforce payment
of taxes made due and payable by virtue of the provisions of this section, the
findings of the Collector, made as provided in this section, whether made after
notice to the taxpayer or not, shall be for all purposes presumptive evidence
of the taxpayer’s design, and the certificate of the Collector if the mailing
or issuing of the notice and findings specified in this section is presumptive.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.160   Warrant for collection of taxes.
   A.   If any tax imposed upon employers by wages paid to employees or any
portion of the tax is not paid within 30 days after it becomes due (or within 5
days, in the case of the termination of the tax quarter by the Collector under
the provisions of §
3.24.150 of this chapter), and no provision is made to secure the payment of
this by bond, deposit or otherwise pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
Collector, the Collector, pursuant to O.R.S. 267.385 and/or the City Charter
and the city code, the city shall issue a warrant under its hand and official
seal directed to the sheriff of any court of the state commanding him or her to
levy upon and sell real and personal property of the taxpayer found within his
or her county, for the payment of the amount of the tax, with the added
penalties, interest and the sheriff’s cost of executing the warrant, and to
return the warrant to the Collector and pay to it the money collected by virtue
thereof by a time to be therein specified, not less than 60 days from the day
of the warrant.
   B.   The sheriff shall, within 5 days after the receipt of the warrant, file
with the Clerk of this county a copy thereof, and thereupon the Clerk shall
enter in the judgment docket, in the column for judgment debtors, the name of
the taxpayer mentioned in the warrant, and in appropriate columns the amount of
the tax proportion thereof and penalties for which the warrant is issued and
the date when the copy is filed.  Thereupon the amount of the warrant so
docketed shall become a lien upon the title to and interest in property of the
taxpayer against whom it is issued in the same manner as a judgment duly
docketed in the office of the Clerk.  The sheriff, thereupon, shall proceed
upon the same in all respects, with like effect and in the same manner
prescribed by law in respect to executions issued property upon judgment of a
court of record, and shall be entitled to the same fees for his or her services
in executing the warrant, to be added to and collected as a part of the warrant
liability.
   C.   In the discretion of the Collector a warrant of like terms, force and
effect may be issued and directed to any agent authorized to collect taxes, and
in the execution thereof the agent shall have all the powers conferred by law
upon sheriffs, but is entitled to no fee or compensation in excess of actual
expenses paid in the performance of that duty.
   D.   If a warrant is returned not satisfied in full, the Collector shall
have the same remedies to enforce the claim for taxes against the taxpayer as
if the people of the state had recovered judgment against the taxpayer for the
amount of the tax, and shall balance his or her assessment record by
transferring the unpaid deficiency to his or her delinquent record.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.170   Discontinuing business in the local transit district.
   Whenever any person, firm, corporation or association subject to the payroll
and self-employment tax ceases to do business in the local transit area, due
either to going out of business or to moving all of the business out of the
local transit area, the person, firm or corporation shall file forthwith the
payroll and/or self-employment tax return and pay the tax required by this
chapter, regardless of the time of year.  Taxes shall be due and payable only
for the actual payroll expense for the part of the year during which the
taxpayer did business in the local transit area.  Each officer, partner or
owner of any taxpayer failing to comply with the terms of this section shall be
jointly and severally liable personally for any unpaid amounts of the tax due
under this section. The personal liability provided in the preceding sentence
shall not be applied to a person solely because of ownership of a minority of
stock in a corporation or ownership of any minority interest not involving
control of the business entity.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.180   Refunds.
   A.   When any amount of any payroll and self-employment tax, penalty or
interest has been overpaid, the taxpayer who made the overpayment shall be
reimbursed under the terms of this section.  If the Collector determines that
an overpayment has been made, the Collector shall make the refund whether a
claim for the refund has been filed or not.  Any taxpayer may make a claim for
the refund by filing a statement signed by the taxpayer or by a person with
actual knowledge of the facts, stating the reasons for the claim for refund. 
The Collector shall examine each claim, and may require additional information
and evidence from the taxpayer.  The Collector may make an investigation to
determine the facts as to whether a refund is due.  The investigation may
include examining the books, records and information in computer storage of the
taxpayer.
   B.   If any sum is due from the taxpayer to the city for any reason, the
amount of the refund shall be applied first to offset the sum owed by the
taxpayer to the city.  Any sum not used for this offset shall be returned to
the taxpayer as soon as practicable.  The Collector shall notify the taxpayer
in writing of the Collector’s decision approving a claim for refund, denying
the claim or approving a refund for a smaller amount than the taxpayer
claimed.  If the Collector shall deny all or part of the refund claim, the
taxpayer may, within 30 days, file a written protest.  If the taxpayer fails to
file a written protest within 30 days, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have
waived any objections to the action of the Collector.  Any taxpayer who has
filed a written protest in accordance with this section may pursue the
administrative remedies and judicial remedies available under city ordinances
and state law, to obtain review of the decision denying all or part of the
refund.  Any action by the Collector under this section, except an action fully
approving a claim for refund, shall be accompanied by a set of clear
instructions on how to file an administrative appeal or court action and shall
make it clear that failure to file a timely administrative appeal or court
action will cause the Collector’s decision to stand.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.190   Sale or other transfer of business.
   A.   If any owner or group of owners acting together transfers a majority of
ownership interest or controlling interest in any business entity that is
subject to the payroll and self-employment tax, the seller or transferor must
furnish to the buyer or transferee a complete record of payments, accompanied
by receipts, showing past payments of the payroll expense tax for the past 3
years or the period of time since the business was subject to the tax,
whichever period is shorter. 
   B.   The buyer and seller, or transferor and transferee, must also furnish
written evidence to the Collector that the steps described in at least 1 of the
following paragraphs have been taken:
      1.   The seller has filed a payroll and self-employment tax return
covering the period up to the date of sale of the business entity, accompanied
by payment of all payroll and self-employment tax accrued to the date of sale. 
This is due not later than 10 days after the sale is closed by transfer of
ownership, regardless of the payment schedule;
      2.   The buyer or transferee has filed a written agreement with the city,
undertaking to pay all payroll taxes to become due, including those accrued
during the part of the year before the sale or transfer;
      3.   The buyer has furnished evidence to the city that the funds of the
business entity are sufficient and will be sufficient to pay all payroll and
self-employment tax anticipated to be due when the next payment is due, that
the business entity has acknowledged its responsibility to pay the taxes and
that there are no past due payroll expense taxes, penalties or interest
payments owed to the city by the business entity;
      4.   A cash deposit or bond with a corporate surety has been filed with
the Collector, sufficient to cover the amount of payroll and self-employment
tax anticipated to become due for the payroll expenses before the transfer; or
      5.   The buyer or seller has provided an alternative means of assuring
that the payroll and self-employment tax for the period before the sale will be
paid, and the alternative means is reasonably sufficient, in the judgment of
the Collector, to ensure the payment of the tax when due.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.200   Receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, guardians,
conservators and others.
   If control of any employer subject to the payroll and self-employment tax
passes to any trustee, receiver, executor, administrator, guardian, conservator
or other personal representative or fiduciary, the personal representatives or
fiduciary shall have all the duties of the employer under this chapter.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 3.24.210   Right of privacy.
   Except when disclosure is required by law or in connection with the
collecting and enforcing the payroll and self-employment tax, no city officer
or employee shall disclose to any person outside of the Collector’s office any
information learned from any return or other information filed by any taxpayer
under this chapter.  City officers and employees enforcing this chapter and
collecting taxes shall not seek information that is irrelevant to the payroll
and self-employment tax.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.220   Computer records of taxpayers.
   The following rules apply to taxpayers who have records stored in temporary
or permanent memory in any computer.
   A.   In lieu of any return or report required by this chapter, any taxpayer
may submit a printout from a computer containing all of the information
required in the return, in a format approved by the Collector.
   B.   Whenever the Collector has the authority or the duty to examine any
books and records of any taxpayer, the Collector shall also have the authority
or duty to examine relevant information stored in any computer used by the
taxpayer.  The taxpayer need not permit the Collector or any city employee to
operate the computer, but the taxpayer shall furnish to the Collector an
employee or other person authorized by the taxpayer to operate the computer,
permitting readouts and printouts as requested or determined by the Collector. 
The duties and powers of the Collector may be exercised by any person working
under the supervision of the Collector.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.240   False information, failure to file; penalty.
   A.   No person, firm, corporation or association required by this chapter to
file any return or report shall fail to file the return or report.  No person,
firm, corporation or association shall knowingly furnish any false information
to the city as all or part of any information furnished under any provision of
this chapter.  The furnishing of false information shall constitute a violation
of this section even if the person furnishing the false information could not
have profited or saved money by the deception.  If any individual officer,
employee or owner of any firm, corporation or association knowingly furnishes
false information, the individual shall also be subject to the penalty set out
in this section.  The penalty set out in this section shall be in addition to
any interest, late charge or other civil penalty provided by ordinance.
   B.   Any person, firm, corporation or association committing any violation
described in this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100,
nor more than $2,500, for each offense, and shall be subject to 1 year in
jail.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed with the filing of each
false document.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 3.24.250   Appeal from Collector.
   A.   An appeal from the determination upon the application made by the
taxpayer for refund or revision of any tax, as provided for in this chapter,
may be taken by the taxpayer to the circuit court located in Clackamas County. 
Any appeal must be within 60 days after notice of the Collector’s determination
has been received by the taxpayer, given as provided in this chapter.  If the
Collector fails to notify the taxpayer within 12 months after the claim was
filed of its determination of the claim for refund or revision of the tax, the
taxpayer may then appeal to the circuit court.
   B.   Unless otherwise ordered by the circuit court, an appeal to the
Collector or to the court from an assessment of taxes or additional taxes,
shall not stay proceedings to collect any unpaid tax if the Collector believes
that collection of the tax will be jeopardized by delay.
(Ord. 1081, passed 11-21-2001; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 3.24.260   Record keeping requirements.
   A.   It shall be the duty of every person subject to the tax imposed by this
chapter to keep and preserve suitable records and such other books and accounts
as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable under
this chapter. The books and records must contain, at a minimum, such detail and
summary information as may be required by regulation, or when records are
maintained within an electronic data processing (EDP) system, the requirements
established by the Oregon Department of Revenue for privilege tax filings will
be accepted. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve such
books and records for a period equal to the applicable limitation period for
assessment of tax, and all such books and records shall be open for inspection
by the Collector during any business day.
   B.   The Collector may direct, by letter, a specific taxpayer to keep
specific other books, records, and documents. Such letter directive shall
apply:
      1.   Only for future reporting periods and;
      2.   Only by express determination of the Collector that such specific
record keeping is necessary due to the inability of the city to conduct an
adequate examination of the past activities of the taxpayer, which inability
resulted from inaccurate or inadequate books-records, or documentation
maintained by the taxpayer.
(Ord. 1391, passed 12-4-2013)
CHAPTER 3.30:  STREET MAINTENANCE PROGRAM
Section
   
3.30.010   Definitions.
   
3.30.020   Administrative officers.
   
3.30.030   Dedication of revenues.
   
3.30.040   Annual street maintenance program report.
   
3.30.050   Street maintenance fee.
   
3.30.060   Determination of street maintenance fee.
   
3.30.070   Administration of street maintenance fee.
   
3.30.080   Waiver of street maintenance fee in case of vacancy.
   
3.30.090   Street maintenance fee appeal procedure.
   
3.30.100   Exceptions to street maintenance fee.
   
3.30.110   Severability.
§ 3.30.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
   Community Development Director. The City of Canby Community Development
Director or the Director's designee.
   Developed Property.  A parcel or portion of real property on which an
improvement exists or has been constructed. Improvement on developed property
includes, but is not limited to buildings, parking lots, landscaping and
outside storage.
   Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms designed for occupancy by 1 family and not
having more than 1 cooking facility.
   Gross Square Footage. The area of all structures, located on a developed
property, measured along the exterior walls of the structures, and including
but not limited to enclosed courtyards and stairwells, but not including fences
and parking areas which are not enclosed within a building.
   Multi-unit Residential Property. Residential property consisting of 2 or
more dwelling units. For the purposes of this chapter, condominiums, attached
single-family residences, and individual mobile home units are also classified
as multi-unit residential properties.
   Non-Residential Property. Any property that is not residential property.
   Residential Property. A property that is primarily for personal, domestic
accommodation, including single single-family, multi-unit residential property
and group homes, but not including hotels and motels.
   Responsible Party. The person or persons who by occupancy or contractual
arrangement are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to
an occupied unit. Unless another party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy
of the writing is filed with the city, the person(s) paying the sewer bill for
an occupied unit shall be deemed the responsible party as to that occupied
unit. For any occupied unit not otherwise required to pay a sewer bill,
"responsible party" shall mean the person or persons legally entitled to
occupancy of the occupied unit, unless another responsible party has agreed in
writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city. Any person who
has agreed in writing to pay is considered the responsible person if a copy of
the writing is filed with the city.
   Single Family Residential. Residential property that has only detached
dwelling units.
   Street. A public street or right-of-way within the city that is under the
jurisdiction or control of the city. For purposes of this chapter, county,
state, and federal roads are excluded.
   Street Maintenance Program. Program established by this chapter to maintain,
repair and reconstruct city streets. Activities include the administration and
collection of the street maintenance fee; preventive maintenance,
rehabilitation and reconstruction projects; design and inspection of such
projects; street condition monitoring and assessment, including inspection of
street repairs; and staff training and consultant services in support of the
above activities.
   Trip Generation. The average number of vehicle trips, as determined by
reference to the manual entitled, Trip Generation, published by the Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE) ("ITE Manual"), 7th edition.
   Use Category or Category of Use. The code number and resulting trip
generation estimate determined with reference to the ITE Manual, and applicable
to a particular developed property.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.020   Administrative officers.
   A.    Except as provided below, the Community Development Director shall be
responsible for the administration of this chapter.
   B.    The Community Development Director shall annually develop and update a
5-year street maintenance program project schedule. This schedule shall be
properly integrated into the city's capital improvement program, to ensure that
it is coordinated with other city capital projects and projects of other
agencies.
   C.   The Community Development Director shall provide an annual report on
the Street maintenance program to the City Council and Budget Committee.
   D.   The Community Development Director shall be responsible for
implementation and enforcement of steps to minimize utility cut damage to
streets.
   E.   The Finance Director shall be responsible for the administration and
collection of fees under this chapter.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.030   Dedication of revenues.
   All funds and all proceeds from funds collected pursuant to this chapter
shall be used for the street maintenance program.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.040   Annual street maintenance program report.
   A.   Each year the Community Development Director shall prepare and present
to the Budget Committee and City Council the “Annual Street Maintenance Program
Report.” This document is a public record.
   B.   The report shall include a narrative description of the overall
condition of the street network, the findings of any new condition assessments,
a detailed project schedule for the upcoming year, an updated 5-year project
schedule, the project selection criteria employed, and a report on the previous
year projects, workload impacts, and overall program progress. The report shall
include revenues received relative to revenue projections, project cost
inflation trends, and any other new developments that impact the adequacy of
the program funds to meet program goals.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.050   Street maintenance fee.
   A. A street maintenance fee is imposed and levied upon the responsible party
for all developed property within the city. The fee shall be based on the
direct and indirect use of or benefit derived from the use of public streets
generated by the developed property, to be calculated as described in §
3.30.060.
   B.   The street maintenance fee is also imposed and levied on the property
owner of the developed property in the event of non-payment by the responsible
party.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.060   Determination of street maintenance fee.
   A.   Residential fees.
      1.   Detached single family residences shall be charged $5.00 per month.
ITE Code 210.
      2.   Multi-family residences, except for senior housing, mobile home
parks, and congregate care, shall be charged $3.34 per month for each dwelling
unit. ITE Codes 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 230, 231, 232, 233.
      3.   Detached senior housing and mobile home parks will be charged $2.09
per month for each dwelling unit. ITE Codes 240, 250, 251.
      4.   Attached senior housing and congregate care facilities will be
charged $1.04 per month for each dwelling unit. ITE Codes 252, 253, 254.
   B.   Non-residential fees.
      1.   Category assignment. Each non-residential developed property in the
city shall be assigned to a category of use according to the land use type
listed in division C.
      2.   Upon request of the customer, the Community Development Director
shall review the category of use assignment. The Community Development Director
shall consider evidence provided by the customer that relates to the actual
trip generation patterns of the property in question. The determination of
category of use shall not be considered a land use decision as that term is
defined in O.R.S. 197.015.
      3.   Fee calculation. The street maintenance fee shall be calculated by
multiplying the number of units (listed in division C.) by the trip rate per
unit for that assigned category of use and then by the monthly per trip charge
of $0.522 to establish the monthly fee to be billed.
      4.   Fee minimum. The minimum monthly street maintenance fee for non-
residential accounts shall be $5.00.
   C.   Category of use.
      1.   Category 0 shall be estimated at 1.00 trip per unit. Land uses
include city park, state park, waterslide park, movie theater, military base,
wholesale market, furniture store, general heavy industrial, mini-warehouse,
high cube warehouse, utilities. ITE Codes 411, 413, 414, 444, 501, 860, 890,
120, 151, 152.
      2.   Category 1 shall be estimated at 2 trips per unit. Land uses include
county park, nursing home, discount club, light rail transit station w/
parking, all suite hotel, business hotel ITE Codes 93, 311, 312, 412, 620, 861.
      3.   Category 2 shall be estimated at 4 trips per unit. Land uses include
general aviation airport, general light industrial, industrial park,
manufacturing, warehouses, hotel, motel, resort hotel, regional park, golf
course, prison, general office, corporate headquarters, single tenant office,
office park, research center, auto care center, self-service car wash, tire
store, wholesale tire store, supermarket, discount supermarket, and toy/
children's superstore. ITE Codes 22, 110, 130, 140, 150, 310, 320, 330, 417,
430, 571, 710, 714, 715, 750, 760, 840, 947, 848, 849, 850, 854 and 864.
      4.   Category 3 shall be estimated at 8 trips per Unit. Land Uses include
water port/marine terminal, truck terminals, casino/video lottery
establishment, tennis club, racquet club, elementary school, middle/junior high
school, high school, church, hospital, business park, building materials/
lumber, specialty retail center, nursery-retail (garden center), nursery-
wholesale, shopping center, factory outlet center, quality restaurant, quick
lubrication, auto parts sales, gasoline/service station, gasoline/ service
station w/convenience market, gasoline/ service station w/convenience market
and car wash, convenience market (16 hr), home improvement superstore, and
video rental. ITE Codes 10, 30, 473, 491, 492, 520, 522, 530, 560, 610, 770,
812, 814, 817, 818, 820, 823, 931, 837, 843, 944, 945, 946, 852, 862 and 896.
      5.   Category 4 shall be estimated at 16 trips per Unit. Land Uses
include beach park, marina, junior/community college, day care center/
preschool, library, clinic, medical-dental office building, freestanding
discount superstore, free-standing discount store, hardware/paint stores, high
turnover sit-down restaurant, fast food restaurant w/drive through, new car
sales, convenience market (24 hr), electronics superstore, apparel store, bank/
savings w/walk-in, bank savings w/drive-in, bus depot, and racquetball club.
ITE Codes 415, 420, 540, 565, 590, 630, 720, 813, 815, 816, 932, 934, 841, 851,
863, 870, 911, 912.
      6.   Category 5 shall be estimated at 32 trips per unit. Land uses are
fast food restaurant w/out drive-through, convenience market w/gas pump,
pharmacy/drug store w/out drive through, and pharmacy/drug store w/drive-
through. ITE Codes 933, 853, 880, and 881.
      7.   Category 6 shall be estimated at 64 trips per unit. Land uses
include commercial airport, truck terminal, utilities, campground/recreational
vehicle, multi-purpose recreational facility, government office building, US
post office, and amusement (theme) park. ITE Codes 21, 30, 170, 416, 435, 730,
and 732.
      8.   Category 7 shall be estimated at 128 trips per Unit. Land Uses
include state motor vehicles department. ITE Codes 731.
      9.   Category 8 shall be estimated at 256 trips per Unit. Land Uses
include park and ride lot with bus service. ITE Codes 90.
   D.   Units. The unit used in calculating the non-residential street
maintenance fee shall be 1,000  square gross square feet of building area, with
the following exceptions. The unit for parks, golf courses, park and ride
facilities with bus service, cemeteries, marinas, and multi-purpose
recreational facilities shall be 1 acre. The unit for lodges shall be 1 member.
The unit for hotels or motels shall be 1 room. The unit for self-service car
washes shall be 1 wash stall. The unit for tennis courts or racquet clubs shall
be 1 court. The unit for quick lubrication vehicle stops or gas stations shall
be 1 fueling or service position. The unit for movie theaters shall be 1 seat.
   E.   Unlisted uses. In the event that a property is occupied by a use that
is not expressly listed in any of the above categories, the Community
Development Director shall determine which category the property should be
placed in, based on similarity in expected trip generation. If no category is
appropriate, the Community Development Director shall determine the trips per
unit shall be based on a transportation study, the Trip Generation Manual, or
any other method of determining trips. Any determination by the Community
Development Director under this section may be reviewed under the procedure
described in §
3.30.090B. The result of the review may be appealed to the City Council by
filing a notice of appeal within 10 days of the date notice of the result of
the review is mailed to the property owner.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.070   Administration of street maintenance fee.
   A.   The street maintenance fee shall be billed and collected with and as
part of the monthly sewer bill for those lots or parcels utilizing city sewer
and billed and collected separately for those developed properties not
utilizing city sewer. In the event of non-payment, the city may bill the
property owner or take other action as authorized by law to collect from the
responsible party.
   B.   In the event funds received from city utility billings are inadequate
to satisfy in full all of the sanitary sewer and street maintenance fees,
credit shall be given first to the street maintenance fee and second to the
sanitary sewer service charges.
   C.   Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the city may
institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to injunctive relief and collection of
charges owing. The city's enforcement rights shall be cumulative.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.080   Waiver of street maintenance fee in case of vacancy.
   A.   When any property within the city becomes vacant and utility services
are discontinued (if applicable), a waiver of the street maintenance fee may be
granted by the Finance Director upon written application of the person
responsible, including a signed statement, affirming under penalty of perjury
that the property is vacant, and upon payment of all outstanding sanitary sewer
and street maintenance charges.
   B.   For purposes of this section, "vacant" shall mean that an entire
building or utility billing unit has become vacant or continuously unoccupied
for at least 30 days. “Vacant” shall not mean that only a portion of a property
without a separate water meter has become vacant or unoccupied.
   C.   Fees shall be waived in accordance with this section only while the
property remains vacant. The person responsible shall notify the city within 5
days of the premises being occupied, partially occupied or used, regardless of
whether utility service is restored.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.090   Street maintenance fee appeal procedure.
   A.   Any owner who disputes any interpretation given by the city as to the
category of use assigned to such owner's property pursuant to this chapter may
request a review and appeal such interpretation, but only in accordance with
this section. The dispute must first be presented to the Community Development
Director for review and thereafter may be appealed to the City Council in
accordance with this section. Failure to appeal an interpretation made under
this chapter within the time and in the manner provided shall be sufficient
cause to deny the relief requested. Except in cases of hardship as determined
by the Council, disputes which result in changes in the street maintenance fee
charged under this chapter shall become effective with the next billing cycle.
   B.   A utility customer may request a review of the category of use
assigned. The Community Development Director shall conduct the review,
considering all relevant evidence presented by the customer related to their
actual trip generation patterns. Such evidence may include business records,
parking lot usage, or traffic studies. The Community Development Director shall
make a determination based on the evidence provided and provide notice to the
customer.
   C.   A customer who wishes to dispute an interpretation made by the
Community Development Director as to the assigned category of use under this
chapter shall submit a written appeal to the City Administrator within 10 days
from the date of notice of the Community Development Director's determination
under division B., together with a filing fee in the amount of $300. The
application for appeal shall specify the reasons therefore and include an
engineering study prepared by a licensed professional engineer in conformance
with the methodology outlined in the ITE Manual. Appeals shall be limited to
the issue of whether the appropriate category of use has been assigned to the
property.
   D.   The City Administrator shall schedule the matter for City Council
review and notify the appellant not less than 10 days prior to the date of such
Council review. The Council shall conduct a hearing during a public meeting and
determine whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the
interpretation given by the Community Development Director. The Council may
continue the hearing for purposes of gathering additional information bearing
on the issue. The Council shall make a tentative oral decision and shall adopt
a final written decision together with appropriate findings in support. The
decision of the Council with respect to the category of use shall be limited to
whether the appellant has been assigned to the appropriate category of use. If
the Council should determine that a different category of use should be
assigned, it shall so order, provided no refund of prior street maintenance
fees shall be given. Only where the Council decision results in a change in
category of use will the filing fee on the appeal be refunded. The Council
decision shall be final.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.100   Exceptions to street maintenance fee.
   The following shall not be subject to the street maintenance fee:
   A.   City public parking lots.
   B.   Publicly owned parkland, open spaces, and greenways, unless public off-
street parking designed to accommodate the use of such areas is provided.
   C.   Areas encompassed by railroad and public rights-of-way, except for
developed railroad property such as maintenance areas, non-rolling storage
areas and areas used for the transfer of rail-transported goods to non-rail
transport, which areas shall be subject to street maintenance fees.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 3.30.110  Severability.
   In the event any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this
chapter is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unenforceable, the validity of the remainder of the chapter shall continue to
be effective. If a court of competent jurisdiction determines that this chapter
imposes a tax or charge, which is therefore unlawful as to certain but not all
affected properties, then as to those certain properties, an exception or
exceptions from the imposition of the street maintenance fee shall be created
and the remainder of the ordinance and the fees imposed thereunder shall
continue to apply to the remaining properties without interruption. Nothing
contained herein shall be construed as limiting the city's authority to levy
special assessments in connection with public improvements pursuant to
applicable law.
(Ord. 1262, passed 1-16-2008)
CHAPTER 3.35:  PARK MAINTENANCE PROGRAM
Sections:
   
3.35.010   Creation of park maintenance fee; purpose.
   
3.35.020   Definitions.
   
3.35.030   Administrative officers.
   
3.35.040   Dedication of revenues.
   
3.35.050   City maintenance of effort contribution.
   
3.35.060   Annual park maintenance program report.
   
3.35.070   Park maintenance fee.
   
3.35.080   Low income assistance.
   
3.35.090   Determination of park maintenance fee.
   
3.35.100   Administration of park maintenance fee.
   
3.35.110   Waiver of park maintenance fee in case of vacancy.
   
3.35.120   Park maintenance fee appeal procedure.
   
3.35.130   Exceptions to park maintenance fee.
   
3.35.140   Severability.
§ 3.35.010  Creation of park maintenance fee; purpose.
   A.   There is hereby created a park maintenance fee for the purpose of
providing for the operation and maintenance of parks and facilities within the
city. Fees collected shall be deposited into the city’s general fund Park
Maintenance Fee Account to be used only for purposes identified within this
chapter.
   B.   The City Council hereby finds, determines and declares the necessity of
providing operation and maintenance of the city’s parks and facilities as a
comprehensive park maintenance fee, with such operation and maintenance to
include such activities as are necessary in order that the parks and facilities
may be properly operated and maintained and that the health, safety and welfare
of the city and its inhabitants may be safeguarded.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.020  Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Consumer Price Index (CPI). Consumer Price Index for Portland Metropolitan
Statistical Area.
   Developed Property. A parcel or portion of real property on which an
improvement exists or has been constructed. Improvement on developed property
includes, but is not limited to buildings, parking lots, landscaping and
outside storage.
   Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms designed for occupancy by 1 family and not
having more than 1 cooking facility.
   Maintenance of Effort (MOE). The share of cost of the park maintenance
program borne by the general fund of the City of Canby.
   Multi-Unit Residential Property. Residential property consisting of 2 or
more dwelling units. For the purposes of this chapter, condominiums, attached
single-family residences, and individual mobile home units are also classified
as multi-unit residential properties.
   Non-Residential Property. Any property that is not residential property.
   Park Lands. A public park that is under the jurisdiction or control of the
city. For purposes of this chapter, landscaped city property maintained by the
Parks Department during the 2016-17 fiscal year shall be considered park lands.
   Park Maintenance Program. Program established by this chapter to maintain,
repair and reconstruct city parks. Activities include the administration and
collection of the park maintenance fee; preventive maintenance, rehabilitation
and reconstruction projects; design and inspection of such projects; park
condition monitoring and assessment, including inspection of park repairs; and
staff training and consultant services in support of the above activities.
   Public Works Director. The City of Canby Public Works Director or the
Director’s designee.
   Residential Property. A property that is primarily for personal, domestic
accommodation, including single single-family, multi-unit residential property
and group homes, but not including hotels and motels.
   Responsible Party. The person or persons who by occupancy or contractual
arrangement are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to
an occupied unit. Unless another party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy
of the writing is filed with the city, the person(s) paying the sewer bill for
an occupied unit shall be deemed the responsible party as to that occupied
unit. For any occupied unit not otherwise required to pay a sewer bill,
Responsible Party shall mean the person or persons legally entitled to
occupancy of the occupied unit, unless another responsible party has agreed in
writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city. Any person who
has agreed in writing to pay is considered the responsible person if a copy of
the writing is filed with the city.
   Single Family Residential. Residential property that has only detached
dwelling units.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.030  Administrative officers.
   A.   Except as provided below, the Public Works Director shall be
responsible for the administration of this chapter.
   B.   The Public Works Director shall annually develop a park maintenance
program schedule.
   C.   The Public Works Director shall provide an annual report on the park
maintenance program to the City Council and Budget Committee.
   D.   The Finance Director shall be responsible for the administration and
collection of fees under this chapter.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.040  Dedication of revenues.
   All funds and all proceeds from funds collected pursuant to this chapter
shall be used for the park maintenance program.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.050  City maintenance of effort contribution.
   A.   The general fund of the city shall contribute funds towards the
operation of city parks in an amount equal to the actual operating expenditures
for the city’s park budget for the fiscal year 2016-17, excluding capital
outlay.
   B.   The city contribution shall be adjusted annually in an amount equal to
the percentage change in the consumer price index for the Pacific Cities (CPI-
U adjustment).
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017; Ord. 1505, passed 4-3-2019)
§ 3.35.060  Annual Park Maintenance Program Report.
   A.   Each year the Public Works Director shall prepare and present to the
Budget Committee and City Council the “Annual Park Maintenance Program Report.”
This document is a public record.
   B.   The report shall include a narrative description of the overall
condition of the parks, the findings of any new condition assessments, a
detailed project schedule for the upcoming year, and a report on the previous
year projects, workload impacts, and overall program progress. The report shall
include revenues received relative to revenue projections, and any other new
developments that impact the adequacy of the program funds to meet program
goals.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.070  Park maintenance fee.
   A.   A park maintenance fee is imposed and levied upon the responsible party
for all developed property within the city. The fee shall be based on the
direct and indirect use of or benefit derived from the use of public parks
generated by the developed property, to be calculated as described in §
3.35.090.
   B.   The park maintenance fee is also imposed and levied on the property
owner of the developed property in the event of non-payment by the responsible
party.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.080  Low income assistance.
   Monthly park maintenance fees for parks maintenance to the principal
residence of low income citizens, as defined under the city’s low income
assistance program for sewer bills, shall be charged at one-half the regular
rate. Any citizen currently receiving the reduced sewer service charge for low-
income citizens shall automatically receive the reduced parks maintenance fee.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.090  Determination of park maintenance fee.
   A.   Residential Unit. There is hereby imposed upon developed residential
units in the city an initial park maintenance fee of $5 for each dwelling unit
existing on that parcel.
   B.   Multiple-Family Unit. There is hereby imposed upon the responsible
party for a multiple-family unit an initial park maintenance fee equal to $5
for each separate dwelling unit within the multiple-family unit existing on
that parcel. By way of example, an apartment complex containing 30 units would
be subject to a monthly park maintenance fee of $150.
   C.   Nonresidential Unit. There is hereby imposed upon the responsible party
for a nonresidential unit an initial park maintenance fee of $5 for each common
meter to serve the nonresidential unit existing on that parcel.
   D.   This fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay for the operation
and maintenance of parks and facilities within the city. The effective starting
date of this fee will be January 1, 2018, and will appear on sewer bills
delivered in December, 2017.
   E.   Annual Adjustment. An annual rate adjustment shall be made based on the
Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) for the Pacific Cities and index period December
2017=100. The adjustment shall be the percent change in the CPI for the
calendar year ending December 31 of each year. The adjustment shall be
completed annually with the Council adopted Master Fee Schedule resolution,
effective July 1 of each year beginning July 1, 2019.
   F.   Expiration. Unless extended by a majority vote of the City Council,
this fee shall expire and Chapter 3.35: Park Maintenance Program shall
automatically be repealed on December 31, 2022.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017; Am. Ord. 1505, passed 4-3-2019)
§ 3.35.100  Administration of park maintenance fee.
   A.   The park maintenance fee shall be billed and collected with and as part
of the monthly sewer bill for those lots or parcels utilizing city sewer and
billed and collected separately for those developed properties not utilizing
city sewer. In the event of non-payment, the city may bill the property owner
or take other action as authorized by law to collect from the responsible
party.
   B.   In the event funds received from city utility billings are inadequate
to satisfy in full all of the sanitary sewer and park maintenance fees, credit
shall be given first to the park maintenance fee and second to the sanitary
sewer service charges.
   C.   Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the city may
institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to injunctive relief and collection of
charges owing. The city’s enforcement rights shall be cumulative.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.110  Waiver of park maintenance fee in case of vacancy.
   A.   When any property within the city becomes vacant and utility services
are discontinued (if applicable), a waiver of the park maintenance fee may be
granted by the Finance Director upon written
application of the person responsible, including a signed statement, affirming
under penalty of perjury that the property is vacant, and upon payment of all
outstanding sanitary sewer and park maintenance charges.
   B.   For purposes of this section, Vacant shall mean that an entire building
or utility billing unit has become vacant or continuously unoccupied for at
least 30 days. Vacant shall not mean that only a portion of a property without
a separate water meter has become vacant or unoccupied.
   C.   Fees shall be waived in accordance with this section only while the
property remains vacant. The person responsible shall notify the city within 5
days of the premises being occupied, partially occupied or used, regardless of
whether utility service is restored.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.120  Park maintenance fee appeal procedure.
   A.   Any owner who disputes any fee assessment may request a review and
appeal such fee, but only in accordance with this section. The dispute must
first be presented to the Public Works Director for review and thereafter may
be appealed to the City Council in accordance with this section. Failure to
appeal within the time and in the manner provided shall be sufficient cause to
deny the relief requested. Except in cases of hardship as determined by the
Council, disputes which result in changes in the park maintenance fee charged
under this chapter shall become effective with the next billing cycle.
   B.   A customer who wishes to dispute an interpretation made by the Public
Works Director shall submit a written appeal to the City Administrator within
10 days from the date of notice of the Public Works Director’s determination
under division B., together with a filing fee in the amount of $300. Appeals
shall be limited to the issue of whether the property in question has been
occupied during the period in dispute.
   C.   The City Administrator shall schedule the matter for City Council
review and notify the appellant not less than 10 days prior to the date of such
Council review. The City Council shall conduct a hearing during a public
meeting and determine whether there is substantial evidence in the record to
support the interpretation given by the Public Works Director. The Council may
continue the hearing for purposes of gathering additional information bearing
on the issue. The Council shall make a tentative oral decision and shall adopt
a final written decision together with appropriate findings in support. The
decision of the Council shall be final.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.130  Exceptions to park maintenance fee.
   City parks shall not be subject to the park maintenance fee.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 3.35.140  Severability.
   In the event any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this
chapter is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unenforceable, the validity of the remainder of the chapter shall continue to
be effective. If a court of competent jurisdiction determines that this chapter
imposes a tax or charge, which is therefore unlawful as to certain but not all
affected properties, then as to those certain properties, an exception or
exceptions from the imposition of the park maintenance fee shall be created and
the remainder of the chapter and the fees imposed thereunder shall continue to
apply to the remaining properties without interruption. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed as limiting the city’s authority to levy special
assessments in connection with public improvements pursuant to applicable law.
(Ord. 1466, passed 9-6-2017)
CHAPTER 3.40:
MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL TAX
Sections:
   
3.40.020   Definitions.
   
3.40.030   Tax imposed.
   
3.40.040   Amount and payment.
   
3.40.050   Permit requirements.
   
3.40.060   Permit applications and issuance.
   
3.40.070   Failure to secure permit.
   
3.40.080   Revocation of permit.
   
3.40.090   Cancellation of permit.
   
3.40.100   Remedies cumulative.
   
3.40.110   Payment of tax and delinquency.
   
3.40.120   Monthly statement of dealer and fuel-handler.
   
3.40.130   Failure to file monthly statement.
   
3.40.140   Billing purchasers.
   
3.40.150   Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.
   
3.40.160   Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.
   
3.40.170   Exemption of export fuel.
   
3.40.180   Sales to armed forces exempted.
   
3.40.190   Fuel in vehicle coming into city not taxed.
   
3.40.200   Refunds.
   
3.40.210   Examination and investigations.
   
3.40.220   Limitation on credit for refund or overpayment and on assessment of
additional tax.
   
3.40.230   Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.
   
3.40.240   Records to be kept by dealers and fuel handlers.
   
3.40.250   Records to be kept 3 years.
   
3.40.260   Use of tax revenues.
   
3.40.270   Administration.
   
3.40.280   Severability.
§ 3.40.020   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
   City means City of Canby and any person, agency or other entity authorized
by the city to act as its agent related to administration of the this chapter
or collection of the motor vehicle fuel tax.
   Dealer means any person who:
      1.   Supplies or imports motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution
in, and after the same reaches the city, but "dealer" does not include any
person who imports into the city motor vehicle fuel in quantities of 500
gallons or less purchased from a supplier who is permitted as a dealer
hereunder and who assumes liability for the payment of the applicable motor
vehicle fuel tax to the city; or
      2.   Produces, refines, manufactures or compounds motor vehicle fuels in
the city for use, distribution or sale in the city; or
      3.   Acquires in the city for sale, use or distribution in the city motor
vehicle fuels with respect to which there has been no motor vehicle fuel tax
previously incurred.
   Motor Vehicle Fuel-Handler means any person who acquires or handles motor
vehicle fuel within the city through a storage tank facility with storage tank
capacity that exceeds 500 gallons of motor vehicle fuel.
   Distributor means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the deliverer of
motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage
facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from
which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or for delivery into
the fuel tanks or motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or
storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer.
   Motor Vehiclemeans all vehicles, engines or machines, moveable or immovable,
operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel.
   Motor Vehicle Fuel includes gasoline, diesel, and any other flammable or
combustible gas or liquid, by whatever name that gasoline, gas or liquid is
known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles. Propane fuel
and motor vehicle fuel used exclusively as a structural heating source are
excluded as a taxable motor vehicle fuel.
   Person includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, or
corporation.
   Service Station means and includes any place operated for the purpose of
retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor
vehicles.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.030   Tax imposed.
   A motor vehicle fuel tax is hereby imposed on every dealer operating within
the corporate limits of the city. The city motor vehicle fuel tax imposed shall
be paid monthly to the city.
   A.   A person who is not a permitted dealer or permitted motor vehicle fuel-
handler shall not accept or receive motor vehicle fuel in this city from a
person who supplies or imports motor vehicle fuel who does not hold a valid
motor vehicle fuel dealers permit in this city. If a person is not a permitted
dealer or permitted motor vehicle fuel-handler in this city and accepts or
receives motor vehicle fuel, the purchaser or receiver shall be responsible for
all taxes, interests and penalties prescribed herein.
   B.   A permitted dealer or fuel-handler who accepts or receives motor
vehicle fuel from a person who does not hold a valid dealer or fuel-handler
permit in this city, shall pay the tax imposed by this chapter to the city,
upon the sale, use or distribution of the motor vehicle fuel.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.040   Amount and payment.
   A.   Subject to divisions B. and C. of this section, by law, every dealer
engaging in his own name, or in the name of others, or in the name of his
representatives or agents in the city, in the sale, use or distribution of
motor vehicle fuel, shall:
      1.   Not later than the twenty-fifth day of each calendar month, render a
statement to the city or to its authorized agent, of all motor vehicle fuel
sold, used or distributed by him in the city as well as all such fuel sold,
used or distributed in the city by a purchaser thereof upon which sale, use or
distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the applicable motor vehicle
fuel tax during the preceding calendar month.
      2.   Pay a motor vehicle fuel tax computed on the basis of 3.0 cents per
gallon of such motor vehicle fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such
statement in the manner and within the time provided in this chapter.
   B.   In lieu of claiming refund of the tax as provided in §
3.40.200, or of any prior erroneous payment of motor vehicle fuel tax made to
the city by the dealer, the dealer may show such motor vehicle fuel as a credit
or deduction on the monthly statement and payment of tax.
   C.   The motor vehicle fuel tax shall not be imposed wherever it is
prohibited by the Constitution or laws of the United States or of the State of
Oregon.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.050   Permit requirements.
   No dealer or fuel handler, shall sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle
fuel until he has secured a dealer or fuel-handler permit as required herein.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.060   Permit applications and issuance.
   A.   Every person, before becoming a dealer or fuel handler in motor vehicle
fuel in this city shall make an application to the city or its duly authorized
agent, for a permit authorizing such person to engage in business as a dealer
or fuel-handler.
   B.   Applications for the permit must be made on forms prescribed, prepared
and furnished by the city or its duly authorized agent.
   C.   The applications shall be accompanied by a duly acknowledged
certificate containing:
      1.   The business name under which the dealer or fuel-handler is
transacting business.
      2.   The place of business and location of distributing stations in the
city and in areas adjacent to the city limits in the state.
      3.   The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses
of the several persons constituting the firm or partnership and, if a
corporation, the corporate name under which it is authorized to transact
business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered
agent, as well as primary transport carrier.
   D.   The application for a motor vehicle fuel dealer or fuel-handler permit
having been accepted for filing, the city, shall issue to the dealer or fuel-
handler a permit in such form as the city or its duly authorized agent may
prescribe to transact business in the city. The permit so issued is not
assignable, and is valid only for the dealer or fuel handler in whose name
issued.
   E.   The City Recorder's office shall keep on file a copy of all
applications and/or permits.
   F.   No fee(s) shall be charged by the city for securing said permit as
described herein.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.070   Failure to secure permit.
   A.   If any dealer sells, distributes or uses any motor vehicle fuel without
first filing the certificate and securing the permit required by §
3.40.060, the motor vehicle fuel tax shall immediately be due and payable on
account of all motor vehicle fuel so sold, distributed or used.
   B.   The city shall proceed forthwith to determine, from the best available
sources, the amount of such tax, and it shall assess the tax in the amount
found due, together with a penalty of 200% of the tax, and shall make its
certificate of such assessment and penalty, determined by City Administrator or
the city's duly authorized agent. In any suit or proceeding to collect such tax
or penalty or both, the certificate is prima facie evidence that the dealer
therein named is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty
therein stated.
   C.   Any fuel-handler who sells, handles, stores, distributes, or uses any
motor vehicle fuel without first filing the certificate and securing the permit
required by §
3.40.060, shall be assessed a penalty of $250 unless modified by §
3.40.270(a), determined by the City Manager or the city's duly authorized
agent. In any suit or proceeding to collect such penalty, the certificate is
prima facie evidence that the fuel-handler therein named is indebted to the
city in the amount of the penalty therein stated.
   D.   Any tax or penalty so assessed may be collected in the manner
prescribed in §
3.40.110 with reference to delinquency in payment of the tax or by court
action.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.080   Revocation of permit.
   The city shall revoke the permit of any dealer or fuel-handler refusing or
neglecting to comply with any provision of this chapter. The city shall mail by
certified mail addressed to such dealer or fuel-handler at his last known
address appearing on the files, a notice of intention to cancel. The notice
shall give the reason for the cancellation. The cancellation shall become
effective without further notice if within 10 days from the mailing of the
notice the dealer or fuel-handler has not made good its default or delinquency.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.090   Cancellation of permit.
   A.   The City may, upon written request of a dealer or fuel-handler cancel
any permit issued to such dealer or fuel-handler, the cancellation to become
effective 30 days from the date of receipt of the written request.
   B.   If the city ascertains and finds that the person to whom a permit has
been issued is no longer engaged in the business of a dealer or fuel-handler,
the city may cancel the permit of such dealer or fuel-handler upon
investigation after 30 days' notice has been mailed to the last known address
of the dealer or fuel-handler.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.100   Remedies cumulative.
   Except as otherwise provided in §§
3.40.110 and
3.40.130, the remedies provided in §§
3.40.070,
3.40.080, and 3.04.090 are cumulative. No action taken pursuant to those
sections shall relieve any person from the penalty provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.110   Payment of tax and delinquency.
   A.   The motor vehicle fuel tax imposed by §§
3.40.030 and
3.40.040 shall be paid on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month to the
city which, upon request, shall receipt the dealer or fuel-handler therefor.
   B.   Except as provided in division D., to any motor vehicle fuel tax not
paid as required by division A., there shall be added a penalty of 1% of such
motor vehicle fuel tax.
   C.   Except as provided in division D. of this section, if the tax and
penalty required by division B. of this section are not received on or before
the close of business on the last day of the month in which the payment is due,
a further penalty of 10% shall be paid in addition to the penalty provided for
in division B.
   D.   If the city, determines that the delinquency was due to reasonable
cause and without any intent to avoid payment, the penalties provided by
divisions B. and C. may be waived. Penalties imposed by this section shall not
apply when the penalty provided in §3.40.070 has been assessed and paid.
   E.   If any person fails to pay the motor vehicle fuel tax or any penalty
provided for by this chapter, the amount thereof shall be collected from such
person for the use of the city. The city shall commence and prosecute to final
determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to collect the
same.
   F.   In the event any suit or action is instituted to collect the motor
vehicle fuel tax or any penalty provided for by this chapter, the city shall be
entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney's fees at trial or
upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by
law.
   G.   No dealer who collects from any person the tax provided for herein,
shall knowingly and willfully fail to report and pay the same to the city, as
required herein.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.120   Monthly statement of dealer and fuel-handler.
   Unless modified by §
3.40.270B., every dealer and fuel-handler in motor vehicle fuel shall render to
the city, on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month, on forms prescribed,
prepared and furnished by the city, a signed statement of the number of gallons
of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed, used or stored by him during the
preceding calendar month. The statement shall be signed by the permit holder.
All statements as required in this section are public records.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.130   Failure to file monthly statement.
   If any dealer or fuel-handler fails to file the report required by §
3.40.120, the city, shall proceed forthwith to determine from the best
available sources the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed, used or
stored by such dealer or fuel-handler for the period unreported, and such
determination shall be prima facie evidence of the amount of such fuel sold,
distributed, used or stored. The city, immediately shall assess the motor
vehicle fuel tax in the amount so determined, as pertaining to the reportable
dealer, adding thereto a penalty of 10% for failure to report. Fuel-handlers
failing to file a monthly statement of motor vehicle fuel shall be assessed a
penalty of $50. The penalty shall be cumulative to other penalties provided in
this chapter. In any suit brought to enforce the rights of the city under this
section, the above determination showing the amount of tax, penalties and costs
unpaid by any dealer or fuel-handler and that the same are due and unpaid to
the city is prima facie evidence of the facts as shown.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.140   Billing purchasers.
   Bills shall be rendered to all purchasers of motor vehicle fuel by dealers
in motor vehicle fuel. The bills shall separately state and describe to the
satisfaction of the city the different products shipped thereunder and shall be
serially numbered except where other sales invoice controls acceptable to the
city are maintained. The bills required hereunder may be the same as those
required under O.R.S. 319.210.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.150   Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.
   No person shall receive and accept any shipment of motor vehicle fuel from
any dealer, or pay for the same, or sell or offer the shipment for sale, unless
the shipment is accompanied by an invoice or delivery tag showing the date upon
which shipment was delivered and the name of the dealer in motor vehicle fuel.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.160   Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.
   Every person operating any conveyance for the purpose of hauling,
transporting or delivering motor vehicle fuel in bulk shall, before entering
upon the public streets of the city with such conveyance, have and possess
during the entire time of his hauling or transporting such motor vehicle fuel
an invoice, bill of sale or other written statement showing the number of
gallons, the true name and address of the seller or consignor, and the true
name and address of the buyer or consignee, if any, of the same. The person
hauling such motor vehicle fuel shall at the request of any officer authorized
by the city to inquire into or investigate such matters, produce and offer for
inspection the invoice, bill of sale or other statement.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.170   Exemption of export fuel.
   A.   The license tax imposed by §§
3.40.030 and
3.40.040 shall not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel:
      1.   Exported from the city by a dealer; or
      2.   Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for
export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers
other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer shall be required
to report such exports and sales to the city in such detail as may be required.
   B.   In support of any exemption from motor vehicle fuel taxes claimed under
this section other than in the case of stock transfers or deliveries in his own
equipment, every dealer must execute and file with the city an export
certificate in such form as shall be prescribed, prepared and furnished by the
city, containing a statement, made by some person having actual knowledge of
the fact of such exportation, that the motor vehicle fuel has been exported
from the city, and giving such details with reference to such shipment as may
be required. The city may demand of any dealer such additional data as is
deemed necessary in support of any such certificate, and failure to supply such
data will constitute a waiver of all right to exemption claimed by virtue of
such certificate. The city may, in a case where it believes no useful purpose
would be served by filing of an export certificate, waive the certificate.
   C.   Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a
motor vehicle shall not be considered as exported from the city.
   D.   No person shall, through false statement, trick or device, or
otherwise, obtain motor vehicle fuel for export as to which the city motor
vehicle fuel tax has not been paid and fail to export the same, or any portion
thereof, or cause the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof not to be
exported, or divert or cause to be diverted the motor vehicle fuel or any
portion thereof to be used, distributed or sold in the city and fail to notify
the city and the dealer from whom the motor vehicle fuel was originally
purchased of his act.
   E.   No dealer or other person shall conspire with any person to withhold
from export, or divert from export or to return motor vehicle fuel to the city
for sale or use so as to avoid any of the fees imposed herein.
   F.   In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor
vehicle fuel in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the
purchaser, the dealer shall retain in his files for at least three years an
export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such
information as is prescribed by the city. This certificate shall be prima facie
evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which it applies only
if accepted by the dealer in good faith.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.180   Sales to armed forces exempted.
   The motor vehicle fuel tax imposed by §§
3.40.030 and
3.40.040 shall not be imposed on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the Armed
Forces of the United States for use in ships, aircraft or for export from the
city; but every dealer shall be required to report such sales to the city, in
such detail as may be required. A certificate by an authorized officer of such
Armed Forces shall be accepted by the dealer as sufficient proof that the sale
is for the purpose specified in the certificate.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.190   Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.
   Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the fuel
tank of such vehicle motor vehicle fuel for his own use only and for the
purpose of operating such motor vehicle without securing a license or paying
the tax provided in §§
3.40.030 and
3.40.040, or complying with any of the provisions imposed upon dealers herein,
but if the motor vehicle fuel so brought into the city is removed from the fuel
tank of the vehicle or used for any purpose other than the propulsion of the
vehicle, the person so importing the fuel into the city shall be subject to all
provisions herein applying to dealers.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.200   Refunds.
   Refunds will be made pursuant to O.R.S. 319.280 to 319.320.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.210   Examination and investigations.
   The city, or its duly authorized agent, may make any examination of
accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, fuel-handlers,
service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing
motor vehicle fuel or other petroleum products within this city, and such other
investigations as it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this
chapter. If the examinations or investigations disclose that any reports of
dealers or other persons theretofore filed with the city pursuant to the
requirements herein, have shown incorrectly the amount of gallons of motor
vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing thereon, the city may make such
changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or other persons, or
may make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors by its
examinations or investigations.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.220   Limitation on credit for refund or overpayment and on assessment
of additional tax.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any credit for erroneous
overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim
for refund of tax erroneously overpaid filed by a dealer must be so taken or
filed within 3 years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the
city or to its authorized agent.
   B.   Except in the case of a fraudulent report or neglect to make a report,
every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this chapter shall
be served on dealers within three years from the date upon which such
additional taxes become due.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.230   Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.
   The  city or its duly authorized agent may at any time during normal
business hours examine the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle
fuel operating within the city for the purpose of checking shipments or use of
motor vehicle fuel, detecting diversions thereof or evasion of taxes in
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.240   Records to be kept by dealers and fuel handlers.
   Every dealer and fuel-handler in motor vehicle fuel shall keep a record in
such form as may be prescribed by the city of all purchases, receipts, sales
and distribution of motor vehicle fuel. The records shall include copies of all
invoices or bills of all such sales and purchases, and shall at all times
during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the city or
its authorized officers or agents.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.250   Records to be kept 3 years.
   Every dealer and fuel-handler shall maintain and keep, for a period of 3
years, all records of motor vehicle fuel used, sold and distributed within the
city by such dealer or fuel-handler, together with stock records, invoices,
bills of lading and other pertinent papers as may be required by the city. In
the event such records are not kept within the state, the dealer shall
reimburse the city or its duly authorized agents for all travel, lodging, and
related expenses incurred in examining such records. The amount of such
expenses shall be an additional tax imposed hereunder.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.260   Use of tax revenues.
   A.   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the disposition of the
revenue from the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner provided by this
section.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, net revenue shall mean the revenue
from the tax imposed by this chapter remaining after providing for the cost of
administrating the motor vehicle fuel tax to motor vehicle fuel dealers and any
refunds and credits authorized herein. The program administration costs of
revenue collection and accounting activities shall not exceed 10.5% for the
first year, and 10% thereafter, of annual tax revenues.
   C.   The net revenue shall be used only for the activities related to the
construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, and maintenance of public
highways, roads and streets within the city.
   D.   The net revenue shall be used for the street maintenance program
established under Chapter 3.30.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.270   Administration.
   The City Administrator or his designate is responsible for administering
this chapter. In addition, the City Administrator may enter into an agreement
with the Motor Vehicle Division of the Department of Transportation as an
authorized agent for the implementation of certain sections of this chapter. If
the Motor Vehicles Division is chosen as an authorized agent of the city, then
the modifications outlined below shall apply:
   A.   The fuel handler's penalty of §
3.40.070C. shall be reduced to $100. And if the Division determines that the
failure to obtain the permit was due to reasonable cause and without any intent
to avoid obtaining a permit, then the penalty provided in §
3.40.070 and this section may be waived.
   B.   The fuel handler's monthly reporting requirements of §§
3.40.120 and
3.40.130 shall be waived.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
§ 3.40.280   Severability.
   If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1261, passed 1-2-2008)
CHAPTER 3.50:  TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
Sections:
   
3.50.010   Definitions.
   
3.50.020   Tax imposed.
   
3.50.030   Where tax is imposed.
   
3.50.040   Collections of tax by operator; rules for collection.
   
3.50.050   Operator’s duties.
   
3.50.060   Exemptions.
   
3.50.070   Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate
of authority.
   
3.50.080   Due date, returns, and payments.
   
3.50.090   Penalties and interest.
   
3.50.100   Deficiency determinations; fraud; evasion; operator delay.
   
3.50.110   Re-determinations.
   
3.50.120   Security; collection of tax.
   
3.50.130   Lien.
   
3.50.140   Refunds.
   
3.50.150   Administration.
   
3.50.170   Appeals to the Municipal Court.
   
3.50.180   Violations.
§ 3.50.010  Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Accrual Accounting means the operator enters the rent due from a transient
on his or her records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.
   Cash Accounting means the operator does not enter the rent due from a
transient on his or her records until rent is paid.
   City means the City of Canby.
   Municipal Court means the City of Canby Municipal Court.
   Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, for lodging or sleeping purposes, of any room or rooms in a hotel,
or room in a short-term rental, or space in a mobile home, or trailer park, or
portion thereof.
   Operator means the person who is acting as proprietor of the lodging
facility in any capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions
through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the
managing agent shall also be deemed an Operator for the purposes of this
chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter, by either the principal or the
managing agent, shall be considered to be compliance by both.
   Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private
dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a
unit.
   Rent means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the
operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor,
credits, property, or any other consideration valued in money, without any
deduction; but does not include the sale of any goods, services, and
commodities, other than the furnishing of room accommodations and parking space
in mobile home parks or trailer parks. A guaranteed no-show charge based on the
rate charged for the room is considered Rent, but a cancellation fee is not
rent.
   Rent Package Plan means the consideration charged for both food and rent
where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to
rent for determination of transient room tax under this chapter shall be the
same charge made for rent when consideration is not a part of a package plan.
   Short-Term Rental means a house, duplex, multiplex, apartment, condominium,
trailer, or other residential dwelling unit where a person rents guest bedrooms
or the entire residential dwelling unit for transient lodging occupancy.
   Tax means either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of
taxes due from an operator during the period for which he or she is required to
report his or her collections.
   Tax Administrator means the official designated by the City Administrator to
carry out provisions of this chapter.
   Transient means any person who exercises occupancy, or is entitled to
occupancy, in a transient lodging facility for a period of 30 consecutive
calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day
a transient checks out of the transient lodging facility shall not be included
in determining the 30 day period if the transient is not charged rent for that
day by the operator. Any such person so occupying space in a transient lodging
facility shall be deemed to be a Transient until the period of 30 days has
expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the
occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the tenancy actually
extends more than 30 consecutive days. In determining whether a person is a
Transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter may be considered. A person who pays for
lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month,
shall not be deemed a Transient.
   Transient Lodging Facility means any structure, or any portion of any
structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy,
for 30 days or less, for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes. This
includes, but is not limited to, any hotel, motel, inn, Airbnb, Home Away or
similar services, bed and breakfast, space in campgrounds, mobile home or
trailer parks, tourist home, condominium, hostel, studio hotel, lodging house,
rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity,
sorority, public or private club, or similar structure or portions thereof so
occupied.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.020  Tax imposed.
   A.   For the privilege of occupancy in any transient lodging facility, on
and after the effective date of this chapter, each transient shall pay a tax as
adopted by resolution of City Council. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the
transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator.
The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the transient lodging
facility at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on his
or her records when rent is collected if the operator keeps his or her records
on the cash accounting basis, and when earned if the operator keeps his or her
records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, the
transient shall pay a proportionate share of the tax to the operator with each
installment.
   B.   Pursuant to O.R.S. 320.350, 70% of the net proceeds from this transient
room tax shall be used for the purposes described in O.R.S. 320.350(5)(a) or
(c) (tourism promotion or tourism related facilities, including the financing
or refinancing of tourism related facilities). Pursuant to O.R.S. 320.350, 30%
of the net proceeds from this transient room tax may be used to fund city
services.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.030  Where tax is imposed.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall apply to all transient lodging
facilities located within the city.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.040  Collections of tax by operator; rules for collection.
   A.   Every operator renting rooms in this city, the occupancy of which is
not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect a tax from the
occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owed
by the operator to the city.
   B.   In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax
to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall
not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made.
   C.   A hosting platform for short-term rentals may collect a fee for booking
services in connection with short-term rentals only when those short-term
rentals are lawfully registered as operators with the city and possess a
business license at the time the short-term rental is occupied.
   D.   Operators who receive any portion of the rent and hosting platform that
provide booking service are jointly and severally liable for the tax.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.050  Operator’s duties.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time
as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be
separately stated upon the operator’s records and any receipt rendered by the
operator. Bills and invoices provided to transients shall list the city’s
transient room tax separately and must accurately state the amount of the tax.
No operator of a transient lodging facility shall advertise that the tax, or
any part of the tax, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it
will not be added to the rent, or that when added, any part will be refunded,
except in the manner provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.060  Exemptions.
   No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon:
   A.   Any person for more than 30 successive calendar days; (a person who
pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such
month, shall not be deemed a transient);
   B.   Any person whose rent is of a value less than $15 per day;
   C.   Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility
from any owner who personally rents such facilities incidentally to his or her
own use thereof;
   D.   Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical
clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people;
   E.   Employees, officials or agents of the U.S. government occupying a
transient lodging facility in the course of official business; or
   F.   A dwelling unit that is leased or occupied by the same person for a
consecutive period of 30 days or more during the year.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.070  Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate
of authority.
   A.   Every person engaging, or about to engage in, business as an operator
of a transient lodging facility in this city shall register with the Tax
Administrator on a form provided by the Tax Administrator. Operators engaged in
business at the time this chapter is adopted must not register later than 30
calendar days after passage of this chapter. Operators starting business after
this chapter is adopted must register within 15 calendar days after commencing
business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such
tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection
of tax, regardless of registration. Registration shall set forth the name under
which an operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of
his or her place or places of business and such other information to facilitate
the collection of the tax as the Tax Administrator may require. The operator
shall sign the registration.
   B.   The Tax Administrator shall, within 10 days after registration, issue
without charge from the occupant a certificate of authority to the registrant
to collect the tax, from the occupant of the hotel, together with a duplicate
thereof, for each additional place of business for each registrant.
Certificates shall be non-assignable and nontransferable and shall be
surrendered immediately to the Tax Administrator upon the cessation of business
at the location named or upon its sale or transfer.
   C.   Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to
which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be
seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking
occupancy.
   D.   Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
      1.   The name of the operator;
      2.   The address of the transient lodging facility;
      3.   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
      4.   “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that
the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the
Transient Room Tax Chapter of the Canby Municipal Code by registration with the
Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the room tax
imposed by the City of Canby and remitting the tax to the Tax Administrator.”
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.080  Due date, returns, and payments.
   A.   The transient shall pay the tax imposed by this chapter to the operator
at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any
operator are due and payable to the Tax Administrator on a quarterly basis of
the calendar year for periods ending on April 30, June 30, September 30, and
December 31. Tax collections are due by the fifteenth day of the month
following the preceding quarter and are delinquent on the last day of the month
in which they are due.
   B.   On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each quarter of
collection, a return for the preceding quarter’s tax collections shall be filed
with the Tax Administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the Tax
Administrator may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax.
   C.   Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the
related period. The Tax Administrator may require returns to show the total
rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of the
operator for such period, an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between
such amounts, and the amount of rents exempt, if any.
   D.   The person that is required to file the return should deliver the
return together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due to the Tax
Administrator. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the
date of delivery for determining delinquencies. To ease administrative burdens,
remittances under $10 can be carried forward 1 time to the next quarter and
paid with no penalty.
   E.   For good cause, the Tax Administrator may extend for up to 1 month the
time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be
granted, except by the City Administrator. Any operator to whom an extension is
granted shall pay interest at the rate of 1% per month or fraction of a month,
on the amount of tax due. If a return is not filed and the tax and interest due
is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become
a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this
chapter.
   F.   If the operator has complied with the terms of this chapter and
particularly the provisions of this section relating to prompt payment of taxes
due and payable to the Tax Administrator, the operator shall be permitted to
deduct as collection expense 5% of the amount of the total taxes collected for
that quarter, as shown by the return mentioned in division C. of this section.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.090  Penalties and interest.
   A.   Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an
extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax
imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency, shall pay a penalty of 10% of the
amount of tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.
   B.   Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an
extension of time for remittance of tax due and who failed to pay any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of 15% of the amount of the tax due, plus the amount of the tax due and
the 10% penalty first imposed.
   C.   Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any
remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, or intent to evade the
provisions thereof, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax due shall be
added thereto, in addition to the penalties stated in divisions A. and B. of
this section.
   D.   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails
to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 0.5%
per month or fraction of a month on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of
penalties, for the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until
paid.
   E.   Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as
accrues under the provisions of this chapter, shall be merged with and become a
part of the tax herein required to be paid.
   F.   Petition for Waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax levied
within the time stated shall pay the penalties stated. However, the operator
may petition the Tax Administrator for waiver and refund of the penalty or any
portion thereof, and the Tax Administrator may, if a good and sufficient reason
is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof.
   G.   Any penalties or interest applied under this section do not bar the
application of further penalties under §
3.50.180.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.100  Deficiency determinations; fraud; evasion; operator delay.
   A.   Deficiency Determination. If the Tax Administrator determines that the
returns are incorrect, he or she may compute and determine the amount required
to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns, or
upon the basis of any information within his or her possession. One or more
deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for 1 or more than 1
period and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon
service of notice as herein provided, after which the amount determined is
delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in §
3.50.090.
      1.   In making a determination, the Tax Administrator may offset
overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or
periods against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against
penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments
shall be computed in the manner set forth in §
3.50.090.
      2.   The Tax Administrator shall give to the operator or occupant a
written notice of their determination. The notice may be served personally or
by certified mail. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by
this chapter, the service is complete upon receipt by the operator or his or
her agent or employee, or if refused, the date of its refusal as shown by the
U.S. Postal Department return receipt.
      3.   Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or
authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made
and notice thereof mailed within 3 years after the last day of the month
following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to
be determined or within 3 years after the return is filed, whichever period
expires later.
      4.   Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon
receipt of notice and shall become final within 10 days after the Tax
Administrator has given notice thereof. However, the operator may petition for
redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes
final as herein provided.
   B.   Fraud; Refusal to Collect; Evasion. If any operator shall fail or
refuse to collect said tax or to make within the time provided in this chapter
any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this
chapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade
this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she
may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of
the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator has determined the tax due that
is imposed by this chapter from any operator who has failed or refused to
collect the same and to report and remit said tax, he or she shall proceed to
determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties
provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the Tax
Administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so
assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within 3 years
after discovery by the Tax Administrator of any fraud, intent to evade,
failure, refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any
determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice
and shall become final within 10 days after the Tax Administrator has given
notice thereof. However, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if
the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein
provided.
   C.   Operator Delay. If the Tax Administrator believes that the collection
of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city
will be jeopardized by delay or if any determination will be jeopardized by
delay, he or she shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of
tax required to be collected noting the fact upon the determination. The amount
so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the
operator shall immediately pay the same determination to the Tax Administrator
after service of notice thereof provided. However, the operator may petition
after payment has been made for redemption and refund of such determination, if
the petition is filed within 10 days from the date of service of notice by the
Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.110  Re-determinations.
   A.   Any operator against whom a determination is made under § 8.02.100 or
any person directly interested may petition for a re-determination and
redemption and refund within the time required in §
3.50.100 hereof. If a petition for re-determination and refund is not filed
within the time required in §
3.50.100, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable
time.
   B.   If a petition for re-determination and refund is filed within the
allowable period, the Tax Administrator shall reconsider the determination,
and, if the person has so requested in their petition, shall grant the person
an oral hearing, and shall give them 10 days’ notice of the time and place of
the hearing. The Tax Administrator may continue the hearing as needed.
   C.   The Tax Administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the
determination as a result of the hearing, and if an increase is determined,
such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.
   D.   The order or decision of the Tax Administrator upon a petition for re-
determination of redemption and refund becomes final 10 days after service upon
the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is
filed with the Municipal Court within 10 days after service of such notice.
   E.   No petition for re-determination of redemption and refund or appeal
thereof shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first
complied with the payment provisions hereof.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.120  Security; collection of tax.
   A.   The Tax Administrator, after delinquency and when he or she deems it
necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, may require any operator
subject thereto to deposit with the city such security in the form of cash,
bond, or other security as the Tax Administrator may determine. The amount of
the security shall be fixed by the Tax Administrator but shall not be greater
than twice the operator’s estimated average quarterly liability for the period
for which he or she files returns, determined in such manner as the Tax
Administrator deems proper, or $5,000, whichever amount is the lesser. The
amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the Tax Administrator
subject to the limitations herein provided.
   B.   At any time within 3 years after any tax or any amount of tax required
to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within 3 years after any
determination becomes final, the Tax Administrator may bring an action in the
courts of this state, or any state, or of the United States in the name of the
city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.130  Lien.
   A.   The tax imposed by this chapter together with the interest and
penalties herein provided and the filing fees paid to the Clerk of Clackamas
County, Oregon, and advertising costs which may be incurred when same becomes
delinquent as set forth in this chapter shall be and remain until paid a lien
from the date of its recording with the County Clerk and superior to all
subsequent recorded liens on all tangible personal property used in the
transient lodging facility of an operator, which may be foreclosed on and sold
as may be necessary to discharge said lien. The personal property subject to
such lien may be seized by any authorized deputy or employee of the city and
may be sold at public auction after 20 days’ notice of sale given by two
publications in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notices
required hereunder shall be published not less than 7 days apart. Such seizure
and sale shall be in addition to any other process to secure payment of the
delinquent tax allowed by law.
   B.   Any lien for taxes shall upon the payment of all taxes, penalties, and
interest thereon, be released by the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.140  Refunds.
   A.   Operators’ Refunds. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or
interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this chapter, it may be
refunded, provided that a verified claim in writing therefor stating the
specific reason upon which the claim is founded is filed with the Tax
Administrator within 3 years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made
on forms provided by the Tax Administrator. If the claim is approved by the Tax
Administrator, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be
credited on any amounts then due and payable from the operator from whom it was
collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to each such
operator, his or her administrators, executors or assignees.
   B.   Transient Refunds. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been
collected by the operator and deposited by the operator with the Tax
Administrator, and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or
illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator, it may be refunded by
the Tax Administrator to the transient provided that a verified claim in
writing therefor stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded is
filed with the Tax Administrator within 3 years from the date of payment.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.150  Administration.
   A.   Transient Room Tax Fund. The Tax Administrator shall place all monies
received pursuant to this order in the Transient Room Tax Fund.
   B.   Records Required from Operators. Every operator shall keep guest
records of room sales and accounting books and records of room sales. The
operator shall retain all records for a period of 3 years and 6 months after
they come into being.
   C.   Examination of Records; Investigations. For the purpose of enforcing §
3.50.100 of this chapter, if the Tax Administrator has reason to believe that
the returns are incorrect or that fraud, refusal to remit, evasion, or operator
delay has occurred as set forth in §
3.50.100 of this chapter, then the Tax Administrator or any person authorized
in writing by him or her may examine during normal business hours the books,
papers, and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator after
notification to the operator liable for the tax and may investigate the
business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made,
or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount
required to be paid.
   D.   Confidential Character of Information Obtained; Disclosure Unlawful. It
shall be unlawful for the Tax Administrator or any person having an
administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter to make
known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information
obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to
obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate or pay a transient
occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of
official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses,
expenditures, or any particular thereof set forth in any statement or
application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or
any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined
by any person. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent:
      1.   The disclosure to or the examination of records and equipment by
another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole
purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or
collecting taxes imposed hereunder;
      2.   The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect
to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators,
assignees, and guarantors if directly interested of information as to any paid
tax, unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest and
penalties; further provided, however, that the City Attorney approves each such
disclosure, and that the Tax Administrator may refuse to make any disclosure
referred to in this division when in his or her opinion the public interest
would suffer thereby;
      3.   The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom
transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued; or
      4.   The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or
business done in the city.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.170  Appeals to the Municipal Court.
   Any person aggrieved by any provisions of the Tax Administrator may appeal
to the Municipal Court by filing a notice of appeal with the Tax Administrator
within 10 days of the Tax Administrator’s decision. The Tax Administrator shall
transmit said notice of appeal, together with the file of said appealed matter
to the Municipal Court who shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal.
The Municipal Court shall give the appellant not less than 10 days written
notice of the time and place of hearing of said appealed matter. The Municipal
Court will have the final say in the determination.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 3.50.180  Violations.
   It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required to fail or
refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be
made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required
by the Tax Administrator, or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person
required to make, render, sign, or verify any report shall make any false or
fraudulent report with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any
amount due, required by this chapter. Any person willfully violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 per
violation.
(Ord. 1477, passed 5-16-2018)
CHAPTER 3.60:  MARIJUANA TAX
Section
   
3.60.010   Definitions.
   
3.60.020   Tax imposed.
   
3.60.030   Collection.
§ 3.60.010   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter as written unless
context or requires a different meaning.
   MARIJUANA ITEM. Has the meaning given that term in Oregon Law 2015, chapter
614, section 1.
   MARIJUANA RETAILER. Any entity licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control
Commission to sell marijuana items to a consumer in this state.
   RETAIL SALE PRICE. The price paid for the marijuana item, excluding tax, to
a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item.
(Ord. 1428, passed 11-4-2015)
§ 3.60.020   Tax imposed.
   As described in section 34a of House Bill 3400 (2015), the City of Canby,
Clackamas County, Oregon, hereby imposes a tax of 3% on the retail sale price
of marijuana items by a marijuana retailer in the area subject to the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 1428, passed 11-4-2015)
§ 3.60.030   Collection.
   The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of the marijuana item by a
marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted by
each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items.
(Ord. 1428, passed 11-4-2015)
TITLE 4:  LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
   Chapter
      
4.04   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
      
4.08   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR SENIOR CITIZENS
      
4.12   ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
      
4.20   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
      
4.24   ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
      
4.28   URBAN RENEWAL PLAN
      
4.32   REAL PROPERTY COMPENSATION; PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING DEMANDS
CHAPTER 4.04:  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
Section
   
4.04.010   Definitions.
   
4.04.020   Declaration of intention; report from City Engineer;
recommendations.
   
4.04.030   Council consideration of Engineer’s report.
   
4.04.040   Notice of hearing on Engineer’s report.
   
4.04.050   Hearing procedure.
   
4.04.060   Manner of doing work; contracts, bids and bonds.
   
4.04.070   Special hearing when low bid exceeds estimate.
   
4.04.080   Assessment ordinance.
   
4.04.090   Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.
   
4.04.100   Appeal.
   
4.04.110   Lien recording; interest; foreclosure
   
4.04.120   Notice of assessment; bonding.
   
4.04.130   Errors in assessment calculations.
   
4.04.140   Deficit assessment.
   
4.04.150   Rebate.
   
4.04.160   Abandonment of proceedings.
   
4.04.170   Curative provisions.
   
4.04.180   Reassessment.
§ 4.04.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   City Engineer refers to the duly appointed and then acting City Engineer of
the city and/or other engineer or firm of engineers appointed by the City
Council in connection with any proposed improvement.
   Owner, in relation to the ownership of real property, means the record
holder of the legal title to the land in question; except that if there is a
purchaser of the land whose interest therein is evidenced by a recorded
contract for the sale thereof or by written verified statement of the record
holder of the legal title, and which verified statement has been duly filed
with the Recorder of the city, then the purchaser shall be deemed the Owner.
§ 4.04.020   Declaration of intention; report from City Engineer;
recommendations.
   A.   Whenever the Council shall decide to make street, sewer, sidewalk or
other public improvements to be paid for in whole or in part by special
assessments, the Council shall by motion declare its intention to initiate the
improvement, and by that motion direct the City Engineer to make a survey and a
written report of the proposed project and file the same with the City Recorder
within the time set forth by the Council in the motion. 
   B.   The report shall contain:
      1.   A plat or map showing the general nature, location and extent of the
improvements proposed and the lands to be assessed for the purpose of paying
all or any part of the costs thereof;
      2.   Plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done;
      3.   An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement, including
legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto;
      4.   A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used, in order
that a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the costs of the
improvement can be assessed to the property to be specially benefited thereby,
and which recom- mendation shall be in accord with the provisions of §
4.04.090;
      5.   An estimate of the unit cost of the improvements to the specially
benefited properties derived from applying the recommended assessment method to
the estimated cost of the improvement;
      6.   A description of the location and assessed value of each lot, tract
or parcel of land or portion thereof to be specially benefited by the
improvement, with the names of the record owners thereof and when readily
available the names of other owners thereof as defined in this chapter;
      7.   A statement showing outstanding assessments against property to be
assessed; and
      8.   Any other information required by the Council.
§ 4.04.030   Council consideration of Engineer’s report.
   After the City Engineer’s report has been filed with the City Recorder the
Council shall consider the report.  The Council may approve the report as
submitted or may amend and approve the report as amended.  The Council may
direct the City Engineer to furnish the Council with a further report of
information or, on the basis of the Engineer’s report, the Council may, by
motion, record its intention to abandon the improvement.
§ 4.04.040   Notice of hearing on Engineer’s report.
   After the Council has approved the Engineer’s report as submitted or as
amended by the Council:
   A.   It shall direct the City Recorder to cause to be published forthwith
once each week for 2 successive weeks, in the Canby Herald or in any other
newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the city, a notice
stating:
      1.   That the report or amended report of the City Engineer as approved
by the Council is on file in the City Recorder’s office, subject to examination
giving the date no earlier than 10 days immediately following the first
publication of notice when any objections thereto will be considered by the
Council at a public hearing;
      2.   That written remonstrances may be filed against the proposed
improvement at the office of the City Recorder not later than the scheduled
time for the Council hearing of objections to the proposed improvement;
      3.   That the improvement will be abandoned for at least 6 months if
there is presented a valid remonstrance of the owners of 2/3 of the land to be
specially assessed as a result of the proposed public improvement;
      4.   A description of the boundaries of the district to be specially
benefited by the improvement, giving the names of the record owners thereof and
when readily available then the names of other owners thereof as defined in
this chapter;
      5.   The estimated total cost of the improvement which is to be paid for
by special assessment of benefited property; and
      6.   The City Engineer’s estimated unit cost of the improvement to the
specially benefited property, clearly indicating that this is an estimate and
not an assessment.
   B.   It shall also direct the City Recorder to send forthwith, by first-
class mail, the same notice, addressed to each record owner at Canby, Oregon,
and when readily known to each owner as defined in this chapter, of the
property to be specially benefited by the proposed improvement.
   C.   It may, in its discretion, direct the City Recorder  upon  the  basis
of  the  Council-approved Engineer’s report, to advertise for bids and
designate the time at which the bids shall be opened, which time may be the
time of the aforesaid hearing; provided, however, that if bids for the
construction of the public improvement have been previously received by the
Council and the contract let as a result thereof, no work shall be commenced on
the improvement and the payment for which is to be assessed against the
properties especially benefited thereby until after the aforesaid public
hearing is held and any objections to the Council-approved Engineer’s report
are heard by the Council.
§ 4.04.050   Hearing procedure.
   At the aforesaid hearing the Council shall hear oral objections to the
proposed improvement and shall consider any written remonstrances thereto.  If
either oral or written remonstrances of the owners of 2/3 of the land to be
specially assessed as a result of the proposed public improvement are received
by the Council at the public hearing, then the remonstrances shall have the
effect of defeating the proposed improvement, in which event no further action
to effect the improvement shall be taken for 6 months.  For the purposes of
receiving and considering remonstrances, the owners of the property shall be
those persons defined as owner in this chapter.  If the Council, after hearing
the oral and/or written remonstrances finds that there is not a sufficient
remonstrance, it may  proceed with the improvement.
§ 4.04.060   Manner of doing work; contracts, bids and bonds.
   The Council shall provide, by resolution, the time and manner of doing the
work of the improvement and may provide for the city to do the work or may
award the work on contract.  In the event that the work is done under contract,
all contracts shall be let in accordance with the Canby and State of Oregon
Public Contracting Rules. The contract shall be let to the lowest responsible
bidder, provided that the Council shall have the right to reject any and all
bids when they are deemed unreasonable or unsatisfactory.  The Council shall
provide for taking security by bond for the faithful performance of any
contract let under its authority, and the provisions thereof in case of default
shall be enforced by action in the name of the city.
§ 4.04.070   Special hearing when low bid exceeds estimate.
   If bids for the construction of the proposed improvement are not advertised
for or received prior to the filing of the Engineer’s report and estimate, as
provided in this chapter, and the Council finds upon opening bids for the work
of the improvement that the lowest responsible bid substantially exceeds the
Engineer’s estimate, it may in its discretion hold a special hearing for the
purpose of receiving objections to proceeding with the improvement on the basis
of that bid and may direct the City Recorder to publish reasonable notice
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the
city.
§ 4.04.080   Assessment ordinance.
   When the Council after the aforesaid hearing or hearings shall determine to
proceed with the improvement, it shall pass an ordinance assessing the various
lots, parcels, tracts of properties specially benefited thereby with their
apportioned share of the cost of the improvement; provided, however, that the
passage of such an assessment ordinance may be delayed until the contract for
the work is let or the improvement is completed and the total cost thereof
determined.
§ 4.04.090   Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.
   A.   The Council, in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the
improvement, may:
      1.   Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any
improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;
      2.   Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed that is just
and reasonable between the properties to be specially benefited; and
      3.   Authorize payment by the city of all or any part of the cost of the
improvement, when in the opinion of the Council, on account of topographical or
physical conditions, unusual or excessive public travel or other character of
the work is involved or when the Council otherwise believes the situation
warrants it; provided, the method selected creates a reasonable relation
between the benefits derived by the properties specially assessed and the
benefits derived by the city as a whole.
   B.   Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the Council from using
other available means of financing improvements, including federal or state
grants-in-aid, sewer service or other types of service charges, revenue bonds,
general obligation bonds or other legal means of finance.  In the event any of
these other means of finance are used, the Council may, in its discretion, levy
special assessments under this section according to benefits to cover any part
of the costs of the improvement not covered by those means.
§ 4.04.100   Appeal.
   Any person feeling aggrieved by assessments made as provided in this chapter
may, within 20 days from the passage of the ordinance levying the assessment,
appeal there from to the circuit court.  The appeal and the requirements and
formalities thereof shall be heard, governed and determined and the judgment
thereon rendered and enforced so far as is practical in the manner provided for
appeals for reassessments contained in O.R.S. 34.010 to 34.100, as now appears
or hereafter amended.  The result of such an appeal shall be a final and
conclusive determination of the matter of the assessment except with respect to
the city’s right of reassessment as provided in this chapter.
§ 4.04.110   Lien recording; interest; foreclosure.
   After the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the City Recorder
shall enter in the docket of city liens a statement of the respective amounts
assessed upon each particular lot, tract or parcel of land, with the names of
record owners thereof and so far as readily known the names of the owners
thereof as defined in this chapter.  Upon this entry in the lien docket, the
amount so entered shall be a lien and charge upon the respective lots, tracts
and parcels of land against which the same are placed.  These liens shall be
first and prior to all other liens or encumbrances thereon and insofar as the
laws of the state allow.  Interest shall be charged at a rate determined by the
City Council in accordance with state law from the date on which the assessment
or corrected assessment was entered in the lien docket, and the same shall be
done in the manner provided for the foreclosure or enforcement of liens by the
general laws of the state.
(Am. Ord. 1091, passed 2-20-2002)
§ 4.04.120   Notice of assessment; bonding.
   Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the
City Recorder shall cause to be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation, published and printed in the city, a notice of assessment, which
notice shall contain the names of the owners as defined in this chapter of each
lot, tract or parcel of land assessed and together with the amount of their
respective assessments.  This notice shall also state the time within which the
assessments must be paid or bonded and that assessments which are not paid or
bonded within the time stated in the notice shall bear interest at the current
rate as determined by the Council per year, and that the property so assessed
is subject to foreclosure if the assessments are not paid or bonded within the
time stated in the notice.  The record owner or other owner, as defined in this
chapter, may make application to bond the assessment pursuant to the provisions
of O.R.S. 223.205 through 223.300, which is known as the Bancroft Bonding Act
or any amendments thereof.
§ 4.04.130   Errors in assessment calculations.
   Calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the City
Recorder prior to any payment on the account.  The City Recorder shall
determine whether there is an error in fact.  If he or she shall find that
there is an error in fact, he or she shall recommend to the Council an
amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error.  Upon the enactment
of such an amendment by the Council, the City Recorder shall make the necessary
correction in the docket of city liens and send by first-class mail to the last
known address of the owner a corrected notice of the assessment.
§ 4.04.140   Deficit assessment.
   If assessment is made before the total costs of improvement are known and it
is found that the amount assessed is insufficient to defray the expense of the
improvement, the Council may, by motion, declare the deficit and prepare a
proposed deficit assessment.  The Council shall set a time for hearing of
objections to the deficit assessment and shall direct the City Recorder to
publish objections to the deficit assessment and shall direct the City Recorder
to publish reasonable notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation,
printed and published in the city.  The Council, upon this hearing, shall make
a just and equitable deficit assessment by ordinance.  The deficit assessment
shall be consolidated with the assessment in the lien docket in accordance with
the provisions of §
4.04.110.  Thereafter, the provisions of §§
4.04.120 and
4.04.130 shall be applicable with regard to the deficit assessment.
§ 4.04.150   Rebate.
   If upon completion of the project it is found that any sum theretofore
assessed upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the cost for the
public improvement completed, the Council shall ascertain and declare the same
by ordinance, and when so declared, it must be entered in the docket of city
liens as a credit upon the appropriate assessed owner’s account.  If any such
assessment has been paid, the person who paid the same or his or her legal
representative shall be entitled to a rebate and to the amount of the credit as
ascertained and declared.
§ 4.04.160   Abandonment of proceedings.
   The Council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind
proceedings for improvements under this chapter at any time prior to the final
consummation of the proceedings, and if liens have been assessed upon any
property under this chapter or pursuant to the provisions hereof, they shall be
canceled and any payments made thereon shall be refunded to the payor, his or
her assigns or legal representatives.
§ 4.04.170   Curative provisions.
   No improvement assessment shall be invalid by reason of a failure to give,
in any report pertaining to the proposed public improvement or the proposed
assessment or by reason of a failure to insert in the assessment ordinance or
ordinance or in the lien docket or elsewhere in the proceedings, the name of
the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land or part thereof, or the name of
any person having a lien upon or interest in the property, or by reason of any
error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional or
otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps hereinabove specified, unless it
appears that the assessment as made insofar as it affects the person
complaining, is unfair and unjust; and in that event the Council shall have
power and authority to remedy and correct all these matters by suitable action
and proceedings.
§ 4.04.180   Reassessment.
   Whenever an assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment for any
improvement, which has been or may be hereafter made by the city, has been or
shall be hereafter set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void or its
enforcement refuted by any court of this state or any federal court having
jurisdiction thereof, whether directly or by virtue of any decision of the
court, or when the Council shall be in doubt as to the validity of the
assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment or any part thereof, the Council
may make a new assessment or reassessment.  This reassessment shall be made in
the manner provided by O.R.S. 223.405 through 223.490 or as the same may be
amended.
CHAPTER 4.08:  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR SENIOR CITIZENS
Section
   
4.08.010   Purpose.
   
4.08.020   Senior citizen defined.
   
4.08.030   Qualification of senior citizens.
   
4.08.040   Deferral of assessment.
   
4.08.050   Investigation of status of land.
   
4.08.060   Assessment to be a lien.
   
4.08.070   Election.
§ 4.08.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to permit qualified senior citizens to have
deferred the special assessments that may be levied against their residences
for street, curb, gutter and related improvements.
§ 4.08.020   Senior citizen defined.
   A Senior Citizen is one who is 65 years of age or more on or before the
first day of January of the year in which the assessment in question is to be
levied.
§ 4.08.030   Qualification of senior citizens.
   To qualify for this senior citizens’ assessment deferral program:
   A.   The property to be assessed must be owned by a senior citizen or, if
owned by a husband and wife, then only 1 of them needs to be a senior citizen;
   B.   The property to be assessed must be the residence of the senior
citizen; and
   C.   The senior citizen shall have an income not to exceed $3,600, and if he
or she is married then their joint income shall not exceed $4,100, and further
not to exceed an increase of more than $400 for each additional dependent who
is living with them during the calendar year preceding the one in which the
assessment is to be levied.
§ 4.08.040   Deferral of assessment.
   To the extent that funds are conveniently available to the city, a qualified
senior citizen may choose to have deferred the special assessment for street,
curb and gutter and related improvements that is to be levied against his or
her residence.  This assessment shall bear interest at the rate of 7% per year
from the date that it is levied against the residence and until paid, and shall
become due when the property ceases to be the residence of the senior citizen
or his or her spouse.  This may be by reason of the sale or rental of the
property or the death of both the senior citizen and his or her spouse or for
any other reason whatsoever.
§ 4.08.050   Investigation of status of land.
   As frequently as appears appropriate, the staff shall review the county
records relating to deferred special assessments and shall also make
investigations as appear appropriate to learn of any other material changes in
the status of the subject land.
§ 4.08.060   Assessment to be a lien.
   Any special assessment that is deferred by the terms of this chapter shall
become a lien on the land just as though this chapter had not been adopted.
When the assessment becomes due by the terms of §
4.08.040, it may be enforced and collected as provided in state law for the
collection of assessments or by any other means provided by law.
§ 4.08.070   Election.
   A qualified senior citizen who elects to have a special assessment deferred
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall enter into a contract to be
prepared by the City Attorney.  The 10% interest rate chargeable for docketed
assessment liens according to the provisions of §§ 11 and 12 of Ord. 393 as
amended by Ord. 598 enacted January 5, 1976, shall not apply to a special
assessment deferred for a senior citizen who has entered into an assessment
deferral agreement with the city.
CHAPTER 4.12:  ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
4.12.010   Definitions.
   
4.12.020   Purpose.
   
4.12.022   Applicability.
   
4.12.030   Receipt of application.
   
4.12.040   City staff analysis.
   
4.12.050   Public hearing.
   
4.12.060   Notification.
   
4.12.070   Advance financing resolutions and agreements.
   
4.12.080   Advance financed reimbursement.
   
4.12.090   Disposition of advance financed reimbursements.
   
4.12.100   Recording.
   
4.12.110   Public improvements.
   
4.12.120   Multiple public improvements.
§ 4.12.010   Definitions.
   The following are definitions for the purposes of this chapter and for the
purposes of any advance financing agreement entered into pursuant hereto and
for any actions taken as authorized  pursuant to this chapter or otherwise:
   Advance Financing means a developer’s or city’s payment for the installation
of 1 or more public improvements installed pursuant to this chapter which
benefiting property owners may utilize upon reimbursing a proportional share of
the cost of the improvement.
   Advance Financing Agreement means an agreement between a private developer
and the city, as authorized by the Council and executed by the City
Administrator, which agreement provides for the installation of and payment for
advance financed public improvements, and may in the agreement require the
guarantee or guarantees as the city deems best to protect the public and
benefiting property owners, and may make other provisions as the Council
determines necessary and proper.
   Advance Financing Resolution means a resolution passed by the Council and
executed by the Mayor designating a public improvement to be an advance
financed public improvement and containing provisions for financial
reimbursement by benefiting property owners who eventually utilize the
improvement and other provisions as determined in the best interest of the
public by the Council.
   Benefiting Property Owner means the fee holder of record of the legal title
to real property which, by virtue of installation of an advance financed public
improvement, may be served, all or in part, by the same.  Where real property
is being purchased under a recorded land sales contract, then the purchasers
shall also be deemed owners.
   Developer means the city, an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, a subdivider, a partitioner of land or any other entity, without
limitation, who will bear, under the terms of this chapter, the expense of
construction, purchase, installation or other creation of a public improvement.
   Proportional Share means the amount of the advance financed reimbursement
due from the benefiting property owner calculated in accordance with §
4.12.080B.
   Public Improvement means the following:
      1.   The grading, graveling, paving or other surfacing of any street; or
opening, laying-out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or
constructing any street;
      2.   The construction of sidewalks;
      3.   The construction or upgrading of any sanitary or storm sewer; and/or
      4.   Any other public improvement authorized by the Council.
§ 4.12.020   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure orderly new development by
providing methods to finance necessary public improvements so that these
necessary public improvements are installed concurrent with or before the new
development occurs; to allow the city to require that new development pay the
installation cost of these necessary public improvements; to assure that these
necessary public improvements are installed in accordance with adopted public
facilities plans; and to reimburse developers and/or the city for a share of
costs incurred if a development or improvement provides access to public
improvements for other benefiting property owners.
§ 4.12.022   Applicability.
   A.   In accordance with § 16.06.120B. of the Land Development and Planning
Ordinance, the Planning Commission may condition approval of subdivisions, land
partitions and conditional use permits to require that the applicant construct
necessary public improvements for the development.  When the development is to
occur at locations where approved master planning documents show new public
improvements are necessary, the Planning Com- mission may condition approval of
subdivisions, land partitions and conditional use permits to require that the
applicant enter into an advance financing agreement when the Commission deems
the agreement will best protect the public and promote the general welfare of
the city.  The applicant, at his or her option, may alternatively elect to be
reimbursed by negotiating with the public service provider for reimbursement of
oversized public improvements, where provisions for the negotiations exist; by
completing the public improvement without reimbursement; or by a combination of
methods.
   B.   In accordance with §
4.12.020, the City Council may determine that an advance financed public
improvement will best protect the public and promote the general welfare of the
city by ensuring orderly new development.  In the absence of a development
application, the Council may, by motion, designate the city or other public
entity as the developer and direct the City Administrator to prepare an advance
financing application.
§ 4.12.030   Receipt of application.
   The Council will receive applications, accompanied by an application fee
that the Council may, from time to time, set by resolution, for advance
financed public improvements, and submit the applications to the Public Works
Department.  The fee will be applied against the cost of administrative
analysis of the proposed advance financed public improvements for the cost of
notifying the property owners, and for recording cost and the like.  When the
city or other public entity is the developer, the Council shall, by motion,
direct the City Administrator to submit the application to the Public Works
Department without fee.  Applications for advance financed public improvements
are expected to be submitted and approved prior to start of work; however,
applications will be accepted for a period of 6 months after start of work for
the public improvement.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 4.12.040   City staff analysis.
   Upon receipt of the advance financed public improvements application, the
Public Works Department shall make an analysis of the advance financed public
improvements proposal and shall prepare a report to be submitted to the City
Administrator for Council review and discussion and public hearing.  The report
shall include a map showing the location and area of all benefiting
properties.  The report shall also include the City Engineer’s estimate of the
total cost of the advance financed public improvement.
§ 4.12.050   Public hearing.
   Within a reasonable time after the Public Works Department has completed its
analysis, an informational public hearing shall be held in which all parties
and the general public shall be given the opportunity to express their views
and ask questions pertaining to the proposed advance financed public
improvement.  Since advance financed public improvements do not give rise to
assessments, the public hearing is for informational purposes only and is not
subject to mandatory termination due to remonstrances.  The Council has the
sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether or not an advance
financing resolution shall be passed.
§ 4.12.060   Notification.
   Not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to any public hearing being
held pursuant to this chapter, the developer, all benefiting property owners
and the general public shall be notified of the hearing and the purpose
thereof.  Public notice shall be accomplished by a written notice posted at
City Hall and other conspicuous locations as the Council may determine to be
appropriate, and by a written notice published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the community, once in either of the 2 consecutive weeks prior
to the hearing.  Notification of benefiting property owners shall also be
accomplished by regular mail, or by personal service.  If notification is
accomplished by mail, notice shall be made on the date that the letter of
notification is posted.  Failure of any owner to be so notified shall not
invalidate or otherwise affect any advance financing resolution or the
Council’s action to approve or not to approve the same.
§ 4.12.070   Advance financing resolutions and agreements.
   After the public hearing held pursuant to §
4.12.050, if the Council desires to proceed with advance financed public
improvement, it shall pass an advance financing resolution accordingly.  The
resolution shall designate the proposed improvement as an advance financed
public improvement and provide for advance financed reimbursement by benefiting
property owners pursuant to this chapter. When the developer is a private
developer, the advance financing resolution shall instruct the City
Administrator to enter into an agreement between the developer and the city
pertaining to the advance financed public improvement, and may in the agreement
require a guarantee or guarantees as the city deems best to protect the public,
benefiting property owners, and may make other provisions as the Council
determines necessary and proper.
§ 4.12.080   Advance financed reimbursement.
   A.   Imposed. An advance financed reim- bursement is imposed on all
benefiting property owners.  It shall be due and payable at the time that the
property owners apply for connection to the advance financed public
improvement, or apply for building permits for projects that utilize an advance
financed public improvement.  In the case of property located outside of the
city limits, but within the advance financed district, the property owner may
pay off the assessed reimbursement in full, including any accrued interest
thereon at any time prior to the time of actual connection, to stop interest
charges from further accruing.  The property owner is not required to pay the
reimbursement prior to the time the owner connects to or utilizes the advance
financed public improvements, but may do so voluntarily at his or her
discretion.  This prepayment does not guarantee annexation of the property at a
particular time, or approval of a particular development.
(Am. Ord. 1005, passed 8-19-1998)
   B.   Rates. 
      1.   Benefiting property owners shall pay advance financed reimbursement
calculated as follows:
         a.   If the advance financed public improvement was completed by a
private developer, the reimbursement shall be the total actual cost of the
improvement, increased by 7% annual simple interest, or other interest rate as
the Council may, from time to time, set by resolution, multiplied by the
fraction of area owned by the benefiting property owner of the total area of
all the benefiting property owners;
         b.   If the advance financed public improvement was completed by a
public agency, the reimbursement to the public agency shall be the total cost
of the improvement increased by the same interest rate, including costs, as the
public agency pays to finance construction, multiplied by the fraction of area
owned by the benefiting property owner of the total area of all the benefiting
property owners; or
         c.   If the advance financed public improvement was completed without
the issuance of debt by the public agency, the reimbursement to the public
agency shall be to the total cost of the improvement increased by the current
interest rate private developers receive, as set forth above, multiplied by the
fraction of area owned by the benefiting property owner of the total area of
all the benefiting property owners.
      2.   If inequities are created through the strict implementation of the
above formulas, the Council may modify its impact on a case-by-case basis.
   C.   Collection.
      1.   The advance financed reimbursement is immediately due and payable by
benefiting property owners upon their application for connection to an advance
financed public improvement or any building permit, the result of which will
utilize any advance financed public improvement.  If connection is made or
construction commenced without the above-mentioned permits, then the advance
financed reimbursement is immediately due and payable upon the earliest date
that the permit was required.  No permit for connection or construction shall
be issued until the advance financed reimbursement is paid in full or otherwise
processed in accordance with the terms of division C.2. of this section. 
Whenever the full and correct advance financed reimbursement is due and has not
been paid and collected for any reason, the City Administrator shall report to
the Council the amount of the uncollected reimbursement, the description of the
real property to which the reimbursement is attributable, the date upon which
the reimbursement was due and the name or names of the benefiting property
owners.  The City Council, by motion, shall then set a public hearing and shall
direct the City Administrator to give notice of the hearing to each of those
benefiting property owners, together with a copy of the City Administrator’s
report concerning the unpaid reimbursement, either in person or by certified
mail.  Upon public hearing, the Council may accept, reject or modify the City
Administrator’s report; and if it finds that any reimbursement is unpaid and
uncollected, the Council, by motion, may direct the City Recorder to docket the
unpaid and uncollected reimbursement in the city record of liens.  Upon
completion of the docketing, the city shall have a lien against the described
land for the full amount of the unpaid advance financed reimbursement, interest
and the city’s actual cost of serving notice upon the benefiting property
owners. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided by O.R.S. Chapter
223.
      2.   Whenever an advance financed reimbursement is due and collectable,
the benefiting property owner may apply, upon forms provided by the City
Administrator, for the voluntary imposition of a lien upon a parcel for the
full amount of the advance financed reimbursement and the payment of that lien
in 20 equal semi-annual installments including interest at the current legal
rate.  The applicant must provide a certificate from a licensed title insurance
company showing the identity and amount of all other liens already of record
against the property and a certificate from the County Tax Assessor showing the
assessed valuation of the property.  The city shall not permit a lien greater
than the assessed value less the combined total principal balance and accrued
interest on all prior liens.  Upon receipt of these certificates and
application, the City Administrator shall compute the amount of the advance
financed reimbursement, the date upon which the reimbursement is due, the name
or names of the applicant/owners and the description of the property; and upon
receiving that report, the City Recorder shall docket the lien in the city
docket of liens.  From the time that docketing is completed, the city shall
have a lien upon that land for the amount of the charge and interest upon that
charge at the rate established by the Council for advance financed public
improvements.  That lien shall be enforced in the manner provided in O.R.S.
Chapter 223.
§ 4.12.090   Disposition of advance financed reimbursements.
   Developers shall receive advance financed reimbursement collected by the
city pertaining to their advance financed public improvements.  Such
reimbursement shall be delivered to the developer for a period of 10 years from
the date the applicable advance financing agreement has been executed.  In
addition, any developer, or said developer’s heirs, successors or assigns, may
apply at 5-year intervals for 2 5-year extensions beyond the initial 10-year
period.  Such reimbursement will be made by the city within 90 days of receipt
of the advance financed reimbursements.  Advance financed reimbursements not
paid the developer under the terms of this chapter shall be retained by the
city to be used for related system improvements as authorized from time to time
by the Council.
(Am. Ord. 903, passed 1-4-1993)
§ 4.12.100   Recording.
   All advance financing resolutions shall be recorded by the city in the deed
records of Clackamas County.  The resolution shall identify full legal
description of the benefiting properties.  Failure to make the recording shall
not affect the legality of an advance financing resolution or agreement.
§ 4.12.110   Public improvements.
   Public improvements installed pursuant to advance financing agreements shall
become and remain the sole property of the city pursuant to the advance
financing agreements, and advance financed reimbursement, plus interest, not
paid to the developer during the 10-year period, or any extension or extensions
thereof, as set forth in §
4.12.080, shall be paid to the city to be used for related system improvement
as authorized from time to time by the Council.
§ 4.12.120   Multiple public improvements.
   More than 1 public improvement may be the subject of an advance financing
agreement or resolution.
CHAPTER 4.20:  SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
Section
   
4.20.010   Purpose.
   
4.20.020   Scope.
   
4.20.030   Definitions.
   
4.20.040   Establishment.
   
4.20.050   Methodology.
   
4.20.060   Authorized expenditures.
   
4.20.070   Parkland development charges.
   
4.20.080   Expenditure restrictions.
   
4.20.090   Improvement plan.
   
4.20.100   Collection of charge.
   
4.20.110   Delinquent charges; hearing.
   
4.20.120   Exemptions.
   
4.20.130   Credits.
   
4.20.140   Segregation and use of revenue.
   
4.20.150   Appeal procedure.
   
4.20.160   Prohibited connection.
   
4.20.170   Penalty.
§ 4.20.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of the system development charge is to impose all or a portion
of the cost of capital improvements for wastewater treatment or disposal,
transportation, drainage, flood control and parks upon those developments that
create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements.
§ 4.20.020   Scope.
   The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and
in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided
by law or imposed as a condition of development.
§ 4.20.030   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Bedroom means a private habitable room in a residential dwelling unit
available for use for sleeping purposes, but not including a kitchen, bathroom,
or utility room, first living room, and dining room connected directly with a
kitchen, toilet compartment and shower room.  This definition is intended to
include as Bedrooms spaces even though labeled on plans by some other names.
   Capital Improvements means facilities, land acquisitions or assets used for
the following, exclusive of normal costs of operation or routine maintenance:
      1.   Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;
      2.   Stormwater, drainage and flood control;
      3.   Transportation; or
      4.   Parks and recreation.
   Development means conducting a building or mining operation, making a
physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land
into 2 or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creating or
terminating a right of access.
   Dwelling Unit means 1 or more rooms designed for occupancy by 1 family and
not having more than 1 cooking facility.
   Improvement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements
to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to §
4.20.040.
   Land Area means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of
the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane, with the exception of a portion
of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude
for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.
   Owner means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or
purchasers under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an
interest of record in the described real property.
   Parcel of Land means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is
occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that
includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision
or other development ordinances.
   Parkland means public or private land set aside to provide space and
facilities for people to engage in both active and passive recreation.
   Qualified Public Improvements means a capital improvement that is:
      1.   Required as a condition of residential development approval;
      2.   Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to §
4.20.090; and
      3.   Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject
of the residential development approval.
   Reimbursement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements
constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to §
4.20.040.
   System Development Charge means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee, a
dedication or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of
increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a
development permit or building permit at the time of a plat sign-off, or at the
time of connection to the capital improvement.  System Development Charge
includes that portion of a sewer system connection charge that is greater than
the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting
and installing connection with sewer facilities.  System Development Charge
does not include fees assessed or collected as a part of a local improvement
district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the
cost of complying with other requirements or conditions imposed by a land use
decision, except parkland.
§ 4.20.040   Establishment.
   A.   System development charges shall be established and may revised by
resolution of the Council.
   B.   Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other
local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all
parcels of land within the city and upon all lands outside the boundary of the
city that connect to or otherwise use the transportation system, the park
system, sewer facilities or storm sewer facilities of the city.
§ 4.20.050   Methodology.
   A.   The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider
the cost of then- existing facilities, prior contributions by the then-
existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate- making principals employed
to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors
identified by the Council.  The methodology shall promote the objective that
future systems users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the
cost of then-existing facilities.
   B.   The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider
the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of
the systems to which the fee is related.
   C.   The methodology used to establish system development charges,
improvement fee or reimbursement fee shall be established and may be revised by
resolution of the Council.
   D.   The park and recreational space development charge as established by
resolution of the Council shall be updated at least every 5 years.  It has been
determined that the construction cost index (CCI) is the accepted index used in
adjusting historical costs for parkland improvements to establish the current
cost for remaining city master park plan capital improvements.  A final
determination of the current cost for city master park plan capital
improvements shall be made by the City Council based upon the current CCI and
information submitted by the city staff.
§ 4.20.060   Authorized expenditures.
   A.   Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements
associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including
expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.
   B.   1.   Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity-increasing
capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of future
debt for the improvements.  An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital
improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing
facilities or provides new facilities.  The portion of the capital improvements
funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by development.
      2.   A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues
derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the
city pursuant to §
4.20.090.
   C.   Notwithstanding divisions B.1. and B.2. of this section, system
development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying
with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system
development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system
development charge expenditures.
§ 4.20.070   Parkland development charges.
   A.   Fees or Land Dedication Required.  An applicant for a residential
building permit, a residential subdivision, a residential planned unit
development (PUD), a residential mobile or manufactured home park, a
residential partition or the addition of more bedrooms to an existing dwelling
shall be required to contribute cash for the development and acquisition of
parks, dedicate lands for park development, or a combination of both at the
option of the city.  All land considered or required for parkland dedication
shall be based on the city master park plan map, referencing areas planned for
park development and upon the standards and criteria in division B. below.  The
exact amount of the cash contribution shall be fixed and due at the time of the
issuance of the building permit by the Building Official.  The cash
contribution will be assessed in accordance with the most current rate setting
resolution.
   B.   Standards and Criteria for Parkland Dedication. 
      1.   Lands shall be selected by the city for reservation as park and
recreation areas in accordance with all of the following priorities:
         a.   City comprehensive plan;
         b.   City master park plan;
         c.   Conveniently located areas where recreation opportunities can be
created to best serve neighborhood needs;
         d.   Property is adequate as to size, location and topography to
satisfy the needs of the city’s residents and not unduly impair the builder’s
ability to develop the property;
         e.   Lands that coordinate well with surrounding jurisdictions’ park
and open space plans; and
         f.   In no case shall land dedication requirements be in excess of 15%
of the gross land area of the development without the agreement of the
developer.
      2.   The decision of whether land is acceptable for use by the public for
park and recreation purposes is to be made by the City Planning Commission
based on the findings and planning set forth in the city master park plan. 
Formal acceptance of parks and recreation lands required to be dedicated shall
be by the City Council following any land use hearing and recommendation by the
City Planning Commission.  In all cases, except for PUDs, actual dedication of
land shall occur prior to final plat sign- off.  Dedication of land in the case
of a PUD shall occur, by separate instrument, prior to commencement of
construction of the project.
      3.   If land proposed for dedication to the public does not meet the
criteria set forth in the city master park plan, then at the option of the
city, a park system development charge shall be required.
      4.   Once calculated, the dedication of land shall remain the same and
not change, unless the original plans are altered.
   C.   Procedures for Land Dedication. Development applications shall include
a scaled plan which identifies the sites proposed to be dedicated as parkland.
      1.   Parkland and recreational sites shall be clearly and accurately
depicted on the final plat map and documented in the tax lot files.  All phased
residential subdivisions and planned unit developments shall show any proposed
parkland for dedication on the overall master plan plat for the proposed
development in addition to other anticipated public facilities.  The master
plan as finally approved and accepted by the Planning Commission is considered
binding on all future phases.  Any requests by the developer to change parkland
dedication for future phases must be brought back to the Commission for
approval.  In the case of phased development where separate plats are recorded,
land dedication shall occur prior to final platting of 40% of the gross land
area.
      2.   Tentative approval of parkland boundaries shall be made by the
hearing body at the time of the public hearing on the development proposal.
      3.   All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service
including electrical, water, sewer and streets as is applicable to the location
of the site or as is acceptable to the city.  Improvements to any specific site
may be delayed until completion of necessary infrastructure and/or improvements
to adjacent sites can be made at the discretion of the city.  In case of phased
development, sites may be improved as each phase is developed rather than at
the time of original dedication.  An environmental audit sufficient to meet DEQ
requirements shall be required on all parkland proposed to be dedicated to the
city prior to acceptance.  The cost of this audit shall be split  equally
between  the  city  and the developer.
      4.   All lands dedicated to the city for parkland and recreational space
shall be conveyed to the city either by warranty deed or be depicted on the
final recorded plat as so dedicated.  The conveyor shall be responsible for
payment of all title searches, real estate taxes and recording fees at the time
of conveyance.
   D.   Options for Meeting System Development Charge Requirements. 
      1.   Any land proposed or required for parkland dedication, including
improvements thereon, shall be appraised at its fair market value at the time
it is dedicated to the city.  The cost of the appraisal shall be divided
equally between the developer and the city.  This value of the property shall
be credited toward the system development charge calculated for the
development, with the difference being the cash owed the System Development
Improvement Fund.  In no case may the city require more land of the developer
than would be required if the entire amount of the system development charge
was paid in cash.  Similarly, no developer may dedicate parkland above the
valuation required by the system development charge so that the city would be
required to refund money to the developer, unless mutually agreed upon by the
city and developer.
      2.   If no parkland dedication is required or requested by the city, the
full amount of the park system development charge will be assessed and is due
and payable at the time the first building permit(s) is/are issued.
§ 4.20.080   Expenditure restrictions.
   A.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements.
   B.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the
operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
§ 4.20.090   Improvement plan.
   The Council shall adopt a plan that:
   A.   Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee
revenues; and
   B.   Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement.
§ 4.20.100   Collection of charge.
   A.   The system development charge is payable upon issuance of:
      1.   A building permit; or
      2.   A permit to connect to the sewer system or stormwater system.
   B.   If no building or connection permit is required, the system development
charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is
increased.
   C.   If development is commenced or connection is made to the sewer system
or stormwater system without an appropriate permit, the system development
charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was
required.
   D.   The City Treasurer shall collect the applicable system development
charge when a permit that allows building or development of a parcel is issued
or when a connection to the sewer system or stormwater system of the city is
made.
   E.   The Building Official shall not issue a permit or allow a connection
until the charge has been paid in full, or unless an exemption is granted
pursuant to §
4.20.120.
§ 4.20.110   Delinquent charges; hearing.
   A.   When, for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid,
the City Treasurer shall report to the Council the amount of the uncollected
charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is
attributable, the date upon which the charge was due, the name of the owner of
the subject property and/or the name of the person responsible for incurring
the charge, if different from the owner.
   B.   The City Council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter and
direct that notice of the hearing be given to both the owner and the person
responsible for incurring the charge, if different from the owner, with a copy
of the City Treasurer’s report concerning the unpaid charge.  Notice of the
hearing shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by both personal and mailed notice, and by posting notice on the
parcel at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing.
   C.   At the hearing, the Council may accept, reject or modify the
determination of the City Treasurer as set forth in the report.  If the Council
finds that a system development charge is unpaid or uncollected, it shall
direct the City Recorder to docket the unpaid and uncollected system
development charge in the lien docket.  Upon completion of the docketing, the
city shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the
unpaid charge, together with interest at the then existing legal rate per annum
and with the city’s actual cost of serving notice of the hearing on the
owners.  The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in O.R.S. Chapter
223.
§ 4.20.120   Exemptions.
   A.   Structures and uses established and existing on or before October 16,
1991 are exempt from a system development charge, except sewer charges, to the
extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of
land as it is constituted on that date.  Structures and uses affected by this
division shall pay the sewer charges pursuant to the terms of this chapter upon
the receipt of a permit to connect to the sewer system.
   B.   Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the
addition of another bedroom are exempt from all portions of the parks system
development charge under §
4.20.070.
   C.   An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not
increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of the public improvement facility is
exempt from all portions of the system development charge.
   D.   A project financed by city revenues is exempt from all portions of the
system development charge.
   E.   With City Council approval, housing specifically limited in occupancy
to very low income persons or families, as defined by the most recent HUD
(Federal Housing and Urban Development Department) criteria.
§ 4.20.130   Credits.
   A.   A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a
parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for the computed system
development charge to the extent that prior structures existed and services
were established on or after October 16, 1991.  The credit so computed shall
not exceed the calculated system development charge. No refund shall be made on
account of the credit.
   B.   A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement
associated with a residential development.  If a qualified public improvement
is located partially on and partially off the parcel that is the subject of the
residential development approval, the credit shall be given only for the cost
of the portion of the improvement not located on or wholly contiguous to the
property.  The credit provided for by this division shall be only for the
improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed and shall
not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement
exceeds the applicable improvement fee.
   C.   Credit shall not be transferable from 1 development to another except
in compliance with standards adopted by the City Council.
   D.   Credit shall not be transferable from 1 type of capital improvement to
another.
   E.   Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a
proposed residential development and the space is to be privately owned and
maintained by the future residents of the development, partial credit, not to
exceed 50%, may be given against the system development charge if the Planning
Commission finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the
following standards are met:
      1.   That yards, court areas and setbacks required to be maintained by
the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the
computation of the private parkland;
      2.   That the private ownership and maintenance of the parkland is
adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance or
restrictions;
      3.   That the use of the private parkland is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor
of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated
without the consent of the city or its successor;
      4.   That the proposed private parkland is reasonably adaptable for use
for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as
size, shape, topography, geology, access and location;
      5.   That facilities proposed for the parkland are in substantial
accordance with the provisions of the city master park plan; and
      6.   a.   That the parkland for which credit is given is a minimum of 2
acres and provides a minimum of 3 of the local park basic elements listed
below, or a combination of those and other recreational improvements that will
meet the specific recreation park needs of the future residents of the area:
 
Criteria List                                                    Acres
Children’s play apparatus area                                 .50-.75
Landscape park-like and quiet areas                              .50-1.00
Family picnic area                                               .25-.75
Game court area                                                  .25-.50
Turf play field                                                  1.00-3.00
Recreation center building                                       .15-.25
Swimming pool (42 ft. x 75 ft.) with adjacent deck and lawn area .25-.50
Recreation community gardening                                   .15-.25
 
         b.   Before credit is given, the Planning Commission shall make
written findings that the above standards are met.
§ 4.20.140   Segregation and use of revenue.
   A.   All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge
are to be segregated by accounting practices from all funds of the city.  That
portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of
a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set
forth in §
4.20.060.
   B.   The City Treasurer shall provide the City Council with an annual
accounting, based on the city’s fiscal year, for system development charges
showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for
each type of facility and the projects funded from each account.
§ 4.20.150   Appeal procedure.
   A.   A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system
development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the
City Council by filing a written request with the City Administrator describing
with particularity the decision of the City Administrator and the expenditure
from which the person appeals.  An appeal of an expenditure must be filed
within 2 years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.
   B.   After providing notice to the appellant, the Council shall determine
whether the City Administrator’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance
with this chapter and the provisions of O.R.S. 223.297 to 223.314 and may
affirm, modify or overrule the decision.  If the Council determines that there
has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the
Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited
within 1 year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.
   C.   A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the Council
pursuant to §
4.20.050 shall not be filed later than 60 days after the adoption.
§ 4.20.160   Prohibited connection.
   No person may connect to the sewer system or stormwater system of the city
unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid or the
installment payment method has been applied for and approved.
§ 4.20.170   Penalty.
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
1.08.010.
   B.   Violation of §
4.20.160 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500.
CHAPTER 4.24:  ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
Section
   Creation Procedures
   
4.24.010   Definitions.
   
4.24.020   Petition.
   
4.24.030   Public hearing.
   
4.24.040   Assessments.
   
4.24.050   Appeals.
   
4.24.060   Final ordinance.
   
4.24.070   Advisory committee.
   
4.24.080   Use of monies.
   Assessments
   
4.24.150   Findings of fact.
   
4.24.160   Creation of district.
   
4.24.170   Duration.
   
4.24.180   Assessment rate.
   
4.24.190   Total assessment.
   
4.24.200   Reference material and docket of city liens.
   
4.24.210   Collection of funds.
   
4.24.220   Disbursement of funds by City Recorder.
   
4.24.230   Expenditure of funds.
   
4.24.240   Classification; assessments and fees; notice.
CREATION PROCEDURES
§ 4.24.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Economic Improvement means:
      1.   The planning or management of development or improvement activities;
      2.   Landscaping, maintenance and provision of security for public areas;
      3.   The promotion of commercial activity or public events;
      4.   The conduct of activities in support of business recruitment and
development;
      5.   The provision of improvements in parking systems or parking
enforcement; and/or
      6.   Any other economic improvement activity that specially benefits
property.
   Economic Improvement Plan means a plan prepared by the property owners or
tenants within the proposed district or their designees setting out:
      1.   A description of economic improve- ments proposed to be carried out;
      2.   The number of years, to a maximum of 5, in which assessments are
proposed to be levied;
      3.   A preliminary estimate of annual cost of the proposed economic
improvements;
      4.   The proposed boundaries, designated by map or perimeter description
of an economic improvement district, within which subject properties would be
assessed to finance the cost of the economic improvement;
      5.   The proposed formula for assessing the cost of economic improvements
against subject properties, which formula may be either an assessment based on
the assessed value of the property involved or a business license fee on any
business, trade, occupation or profession carried on or practiced in the
economic improvement district, or both the assessment and business license fee;
      6.   A statement whether the property assessment will be a voluntary
assessment or mandatory assessment; and
         a.   If voluntary, that the scope and level of improvements could be
reduced depending on the amount of money collected; or
         b.   If mandatory, that the assessment may be considered a tax under
the Oregon Constitution, Article XI, Section 11(b) and may be reduced to fit
within the property tax limitation, thereby affecting the level and scope of
services described.
(Am. Ord. 984, passed 2-18-1998)
   Exempt Property means residential real property and any portion of a
structure used for residential purposes and, in addition, those properties
exempt from general property taxation under state law.
   Owner means the owner of the title to real property or the contract
purchaser of record, as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in
the office of the County Assessor.
   Subject Property means the real property within the economic improvement
district except for exempt property.
(Ord. 982, passed 1-7-1997)
§ 4.24.020   Petition.
   The City Council shall consider creation of an economic improvement district
whenever owners of the properties file with the City Recorder a petition for
the establishment of a district containing the signatures of the owners of 33%
or more of the area of the assessed value of subject properties within the
proposed district; or when the City Council, on its own motion, decides to
undertake the consideration of the district.  Any petition filed by the owners
as set forth above shall contain a proposed economic improvement plan.  If the
Council, on its own motion, decides to consider such a district, it shall
instruct the city staff to prepare the economic improvement plan.
(Ord. 982, passed 1-7-1997)
§ 4.24.030   Public hearing.
   After filing of the aforementioned petition or motion of the Council to
consider an economic improvement district, the City Council shall schedule a
public hearing to be held on the question of establishment of such a district. 
Notices of the proposed hearing shall be mailed or delivered personally to
affected property owners and/or business owners, and shall announce the
intention of the Council to construct or undertake the economic improvement
project and to assess benefited properties or impose a business licence fee for
a part or all of the cost.  The notice shall state the time and place of the
public hearing.  This hearing shall be set not sooner than 30 days after the
mailing or delivery of the notices to the affected property owners.
(Ord. 982, passed 1-7-1997)
§ 4.24.040   Assessments.
   A.   If, after the hearing held pursuant to §
4.24.030 herein, the City Council determines that the economic improvements
would afford special and peculiar benefit to subject parcels within the
economic improvement district different in kind or degree from that afforded to
the general public, and that the economic improvement district should be
established, then the City Council may adopt an ordinance stating those
findings and establishing the district.  The Council shall then determine
whether the property benefited shall bear all or a portion of the cost, and
shall require notice of the proposed assessment or business license fee to be
mailed or personally delivered to the owner of each lot to be assessed or
business to be charged, which notice shall state the amount of the assessment
proposed on the property of the owner receiving the notice, or the charge to
the owner of the business receiving the notice.  The notice shall state the
time and place of a second public hearing at which affected property owners or
business owners may appear to support or object to the proposed charge.  The
second hearing shall not be held sooner that 30 days after the mailing or
personal delivery of the notices.
   B.   At the hearing, the Council may consider objections and may adopt,
correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments or charges.
   C.   The ordinance will also provide that the assessments will not be made
and the economic improvement project will be terminated when written objections
are received at the second public hearing from owners of property upon which
more than 33% of the total amount of assessments is levied, or if a business
license fee is charged, from more than 33% of persons conducting business
within the economic improvement district who will be subject to the proposed
license fee.
(Ord. 982, passed 1-7-1997)
§ 4.24.050   Appeals.
   Pursuant to the requirement as set forth above, an assessment ordinance may,
at the discretion of the Council, provide that:
   A.   When the Council receives written objections at the second public
hearing only from owners of property upon which less than 33% of the total
amount of assessments is levied, the economic improvement project may be
undertaken or constructed, but that assessment shall not be levied on any lot
or parcel of property if the owner of that property submitted written objection
at the public hearing.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an owner of
property who fails to submit written objections at the public hearing as
provided for in the ordinance shall be deemed to have made a specific request
for the economic improvement services to be provided during the period of time
specified in the assessment ordinance.
   B.   The Council, after excluding from assessment property belonging to
those owners, shall determine the amount of the assessment on each of the
remaining lots or parcels in the district.
(Ord. 982, passed 1-7-1997)
§ 4.24.060   Final ordinance.
   If written objections in the requisite 33% are not received as provided
above, the City Council may adopt a final ordinance levying the appropriate
assessments or business license charge.  Upon adoption of the final ordinance,
the City Recorder shall enter each assessment in the docket of city liens.  All
these assessments shall be collected in the same manner as local improvement
assessments.  Failure to pay may result in foreclosure in the same manner as
provided for other assessments.
(Ord. 982, passed 1-7-1997)
§ 4.24.070   Advisory committee.
   Any assessment ordinance adopted as herein provided may require creation,
for each economic improvement district, of an advisory committee to allocate
expenditure of monies for economic improvement activities within the scope of
this subchapter.  If an advisory committee is created, the Council shall
strongly consider appointment of owners of property within the economic
improvement district to the advisory committee.  An existing association of
property owners or tenants may enter into agreement with the city to provide
the proposed economic improvement.
(Ord. 982, passed 1-7-1997)
§ 4.24.080   Use of monies.
   Money derived from assessments or fees levied under the procedures set forth
in this subchapter shall be spent only for the economic improvements set forth
in the economic improvement plan and for the cost of city administration of the
economic improvement district.
(Ord. 982, passed 1-7-1997)
ASSESSMENTS
§ 4.24.150   Findings of fact.
   The City Council makes and enters the following findings of fact, based upon
the oral and written testimony received on January 15, 2003:
   A.   Written notices to the affected property owners were mailed not less
than 30 days prior to the scheduled public hearings;
   B.   The area within the proposed district is zoned commercial;
   C.   No residential real property or any portion of a structure used
primarily for residential purposes is assessed;
   D.   Written objections to the proposed district that were received at the
public hearing are less than 33% of the total assessment to be levied; and
   E.   The rate to be assessed each benefited and assessed property is in
proportion to the benefit that the property may be derived from the district.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 4.24.160   Creation of district.
    The City Council hereby approves and creates the Canby Commercial Economic
Improvement District (District) for the purpose of promoting within the
district economic improvements by planning or management of development of
improvement activities; by landscaping or other maintenance of public areas; by
promotion of commercial activity or public events; by activities in support of
business expansion, development and recruitment; and by improvement in parking
systems or parking enforcement.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 4.24.170   Duration.
   The District shall be in effect for 5 consecutive years commencing April 1,
2003.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 4.24.180   Assessment rate.
    The property shall be assessed as follows:
   A.   Four cents  per square foot per year of real property in Zone 1;
   B.   One cent per square foot per year of real property in Zone 2; and
   C.   One-quarter of 1 cent per square foot per year of real property in Zone
3.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 4.24.190   Total assessment.
   The total assessment each year of the 5-year term is $67,157.85.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 4.24.200   Reference material and docket of city liens.
   A.   Attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference is a copy of
the area contained in the district, including the boundaries of Zones 1, 2 and
3; a copy of the annual assessments for FYE 2003-2008 assessed in the District,
as prepared by the City Recorder; and an updated annual assessment final report
for FYE 2003-2008.  The City Recorder is directed to enter a statement of each
assessment in the city lien docket as provided by the Charter and ordinances of
the city.  Each of the assessments is hereby declared to be and to constitute a
lien against the respective real property described in the assessment adopted
hereby.
   B.   A copy of the updated annual assessment final report for FYE 2003-2008
attached to Ord.1160 is by this reference incorporated herein as if set out in
full.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003; Am. Ord. 1160, passed 10-20-2004)
§ 4.24.210   Collection of funds.
   The City Recorder is hereby directed to give notice that the above
assessments are declared to be due and payable with 30 days from the date of
mailing of the notice of assessment, and in the event that the assessments are
not so paid, the same shall thereupon become delinquent and bear interest at
the rate of 9% per annum thereafter; and thereafter, the City Council shall
proceed in the manner prescribed by the Charter and the ordinances of the city
for the collection of the delinquent assessments.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 4.24.220   Disbursement of funds by City Recorder.
    The City Recorder shall disburse funds collected for the district to Canby
Business Development (CBD) bi-monthly, commencing May 15, 2003, to accomplish
the purposes set forth in §
4.24.160.  Effective May 22, 2006, all interest charged and collected by the
city, together with past due assessments received shall be distributed to CBD
with the next bi-monthly payment from the city to CBD.  No funds shall be
distributed if the CBD ceases to exist for the purposes set forth in its
adopted bylaws or if bylaws are amended so as to be in conflict with the
enabling legislation contained in O.R.S. Chapter 223 or in §
4.24.160.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003; Am. Ord. 1160, passed 10-20-2004; Am. Ord. 1219,
passed 9-6-2006)
§ 4.24.230   Expenditure of funds.
   Funds shall be allocated and expended by the CBR in accordance with the
following conditions: the filing with the City Recorder of materials showing
compliance with §
4.24.160 before any funds are released.  A report will be prepared annually and
provided to the City Recorder on June 1, of each year that the district is in
effect.  The annual report will include a current budget, including an annual
financial statement, scope of work and list of accomplishments of the CBR from
the prior year.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 4.24.240   Classification; assessments and fees; notice.
   A.   The property assessments of this subchapter are not subject to the
limits of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution.
   B.   Within 15 days of the adoption of this subchapter, the City Recorder
shall cause to be published, in a newspaper of general circulation within the
city, a notice of adoption of this subchapter classifying the property
assessments as incurred charges and not subject to the limits of Article XI,
Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution.  The notice shall:
      1.   Appear in the general news section of the newspaper, not in the
classified advertisements;
      2.   Measure at least 3 square inches;
      3.   Be printed in a type size at least equal to 8-point type; and
      4.   State that the city has adopted this subchapter classifying the
property assessment for the financing of the district as charges that are not
subject to the limits of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution,
that the reader may contact the designated city official, the City Recorder, to
obtain a copy of the ordinance, that judicial review of the classification may
be sought within 60 days of the date this subchapter was adopted, the date of
the adoption being February 19, 2003, and if no review is sought within the
time specified, no subsequent challenges to the classification will be
permitted.
(Ord. 1113, passed 2-19-2003)
CHAPTER 4.28:  URBAN RENEWAL PLAN
Section
   
4.28.010   Adoption
§ 4.28.010   Adoption.
   The City Council hereby incorporates by reference the urban renewal plan,
attached to Ord. 1031 as Exhibit “A,” as if set out in full herein. A copy is
available through city offices.
(Ord. 1031, passed 11-24-1999)
CHAPTER 4.32:  REAL PROPERTY COMPENSATION; PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING DEMANDS
Section
   
4.32.010   Purpose.
   
4.32.020   Definitions.
   
4.32.030   Pre-filing conference.
   
4.32.040   Demand filing procedures.
   
4.32.050   City Administrator investigation and recommendation.
   
4.32.060   City Council public hearing.
   
4.32.070   City Council action on demand.
   
4.32.080   Processing fee.
   
4.32.090   Private cause of action.
§ 4.32.010   Purpose.
   This real property compensation chapter is intended to implement the
provisions added to O.R.S. Chapter 197 by Ballot Measure 37 (November 2,
2004).  These provisions establish a prompt, open, thorough and consistent
process that enables property owners an adequate and fair opportunity to
present their demands to the city; preserves and protects limited public funds;
and establishes a record of the city’s decision capable of circuit court
review.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
§ 4.32.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Appraisal means a written statement prepared by an appraiser licensed by the
Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board of the State of Oregon pursuant to
O.R.S. Chapter 674.  In the case of commercial or industrial property, the term
Appraisal additionally means a written statement prepared by an appraiser
holding the MAI qualification, as demonstrated by a written certificate.
   City Administrator means the City Administrator of the City of Canby, or his
or her designee.
   Claimant means the property owner who submits a demand to waive a land use
regulation or receive compensation for loss of property value under this
chapter.
   Demand means a claim filed under Ballot Measure 37.
   Exempt Land Use Regulation means a land use regulation that:
      1.   Restricts or prohibits activities commonly and historically
recognized as public nuisances under common law;
      2.   Restricts or prohibits activities for the protection of public
health and safety, such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation
regulations, solid or hazardous waste regulations and pollution control
regulations;
      3.   Is required in order to comply with federal law;
      4.   Restricts or prohibits the use of property for the purpose of
selling pornography or performing nude dancing; or
      5.   Was enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the property by the
owner or a family member of the owner who owned the subject property prior to
acquisition or inheritance by the owner, whichever occurred first.
   Family Member includes the wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father,
brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent,
stepchild, grandparent or grandchild of the owner of the property, an estate of
any of the foregoing family members, or a legal entity owned by any 1 or
combination of these family members or the owner of the property.
   Land Use Regulation includes:
      1.   Any statute regulating the use of land or any interest therein;
      2.   Administrative rules and goals of the Land Conservation and
Development Commission;
      3.   Local government comprehensive plans, zoning ordinances, land
division ordinances and transportation ordinances; and
      4.   Statutes and administrative rules regulating farming and forest
practices.
   Owner means the present owner of the property, or any interest therein.
   Valid Demand means a demand submitted by the owner of real property that is
subject to a land use regulation adopted or enforced by the city that restricts
the use of the private real property in a manner that reduces the fair market
value of the real property.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
§ 4.32.030   Pre-filing conference.
   A. Before submitting a demand for compensation, the owner must schedule and
attend a pre-filing conference with city staff to discuss the demand.  The pre-
filing conference shall follow procedures set forth by the city.  No fee shall
be charged for the conference.
   B.   The pre-filing conference is for the owner to provide a summary of the
owner’s demand to the city, and for the city to provide information to the
owner about regulations that may affect the demand.  Any omission or failure by
staff to recite to an owner all relevant applicable regulations will not
constitute a waiver or admission by the city.
   C.   A pre-filing conference is valid for 6 months from the date it is
held.  If no demand is filed within 6 months of the conference, the city may
require the owner to schedule and attend another conference before the city
will accept a demand.
   D.   Following the conference, the city shall provide the owner with an
estimate of the cost of processing the owner’s demand.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
§ 4.32.040   Demand filing procedures.
   A.   A person seeking to file a demand under §§
4.32.010 through
4.32.070 must be the present owner of the property that is the subject of the
demand at the time the demand is submitted.  The demand shall be filed with the
city on forms provided for this purpose by the city.
   B.   A demand shall include:
      1.   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of all owners and
anyone with any interest in the property, including lienholders, trustees,
renters and lessees, and a description of the ownership interest of each;
      2.   The address, tax lot and legal description of the real property that
is the subject of the demand, together with a title report issued no more than
30 days prior to the submission of the demand that reflects the ownership
interest in the property, or other documentation reflecting ownership of the
property by the claimant, and the date the property was acquired;
      3.   The current land use regulation(s) that allegedly restricts the use
of the real property and allegedly causes a reduction in the fair market value
of the subject property;
      4.   The amount of the demand, based on the alleged reduction in value of
the real property supported by an appraisal by an appraiser licensed by the
Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board of the State of Oregon;
      5.   Copies of the deed and any leases or covenants, conditions and
restrictions (CCRs) applicable to the real property, if any, that impose
restrictions on the use of the property;
      6.   Documentation that the subject property has been owned by the owner
or owner’s family member continuously since before the date the land use
regulation(s) in question were adopted; and
      7.   Statement of relief sought, with specific details.
   C.   Notwithstanding a claimant’s failure to provide all of the information
required by division B. of this section, the city may review and act on a
demand.
   D.   The city may retain an appraiser or seek any other outside assistance
needed to make a decision, at its discretion.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
§ 4.32.050   City Administrator investigation and recommendation.
   A.   Following an investigation of a demand, the City Administrator shall
forward a recommendation to the City Council that the demand be:
      1.   Denied;
      2.   Investigated further;
      3.   Declared valid, and waive or modify the land use regulation, or
compensate the claimant upon completion of an appraisal; or
      4.   Evaluated with the expectation of the city acquiring the property by
condemnation.
   B.   The City Administrator shall also make a recommendation as to whether a
public hearing should be held on the demand.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
§ 4.32.060   City Council public hearing.
   The City Council may choose to conduct a public hearing before taking final
action on a recommendation from the City Administrator.  Notice of the public
hearing shall be provided to the claimant, to owners and occupants of property
within 500 feet of the perimeter of the subject property, and neighborhood
groups or community organizations officially recognized by the City Council
whose boundaries include the subject property.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
§ 4.32.070   City Council action on demand.
   A.   Upon conclusion of the public hearing, and prior to the expiration of
180 days from the date the demand was filed, the City Council shall:
      1.   Determine that the demand does not meet the requirements of Measure
37 and this chapter, and deny the demand; or
      2.   Adopt a resolution with findings therein that supports a
determination that the demand meets the requirements of Measure 37 and this
chapter, and either direct that the claimant be compensated in an amount set
forth in the resolution for the reduction in value of the property, or remove,
modify or direct that the challenged land use regulation not be applied to the
property.
   B.   The City Council’s decision to waive or modify a land use regulation or
to compensate the owner shall be based on whether the public interest would be
better served by compensating the owner or by removing or modifying the
challenged land use regulation with respect to the subject property.
   C.   If the City Council removes or modifies the challenged land use
regulation, it may, at its discretion, put back into effect with respect to the
subject property all of the land use regulations in effect at the time the
claimant acquired.
   D.   A decision by the City Council to remove or modify a land use
regulation shall be personal to the claimant(s) and shall automatically become
invalid and void upon the transfer of any ownership interest in the  subject
property by anyone.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
§ 4.32.080   Processing fee.
   A.   The City Administrator shall maintain a record of the city’s costs in
processing a demand, including the costs of obtaining information required by §
4.32.030 herein which a property owner does not provide to the city.  Following
final action by the city on the demand at the local level, the City
Administrator shall send to the property owner a bill for the actual costs,
including staff and legal costs, that the city incurred in reviewing and acting
on the demand.
   B.   The owner shall reimburse the city for the costs the city incurred in
processing the demand.  If the costs remain unpaid 90 days after the city
provides a detailed invoice demanding reimbursement of costs, a lien for those
costs shall be recorded in the city lien docket for the property for which the
demand was made.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
§ 4.32.090   Private cause of action.
   If the City Council’s approval of a claim by removing or modifying a land
use regulation causes a reduction in value of other property located in the
vicinity of the claimant, the neighbor(s) shall have a cause of action in state
circuit court to recover from the claimant the amount of the reduction, and
shall also be entitled to attorneys’ fees.
(Ord. 1165, passed 12-1-2004)
TITLE 5:  BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
5.04   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
5.06   SECONDHAND DEALERS
      
5.12   SIDEWALK VENDING
      
5.16   LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW
CHAPTER 5.04:  BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
   
5.04.010   Purpose.
   
5.04.020   Definitions.
   
5.04.030   Intent of Council to impose fee exclusions and liabilities.
   
5.04.040   Prohibited business operation.
   
5.04.050   One act constitutes doing business.
   
5.04.060   Presumption of engaging in business.
   
5.04.070   Application; time.
   
5.04.080   Examination of premises required prior to issuance of license.
   
5.04.090   Public hearing.
   
5.04.100   Issuance.
   
5.04.110   Effect of issuance.
   
5.04.120   Effect of suspension or revocation.
   
5.04.130   Rehearing upon suspension or revocation.
   
5.04.140   Agents responsible for compliance.
   
5.04.150   Contractors’ and subcontractors’ responsibility.
   
5.04.160   Separate fee for branch establishments.
   
5.04.170   Joint businesses.
   
5.04.180   No license required for mere delivery.
   
5.04.190   Exemptions.
   
5.04.200   Display of license.
   
5.04.210   Transfer or assignment of license.
   
5.04.220   Fee schedule.
   
5.04.230   Penalty.
   
5.04.240   Delinquency charge.
§ 5.04.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide revenue for general municipal
purposes and to recoup the necessary expenses required to undertake the
activities of the city in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
These facts shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license fee, or any
other charges required under any ordinance of the city.
   B.   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or annul or in
any way impair or interfere with the existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by the ordinance codified in
this chapter.  Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction on persons,
premises or personal property than is imposed or required by existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
   C.   This chapter shall not be construed or constitute a regulation of any
business activity or as a permit of the city to persons engaged therein to
undertake unlawful, illegal or prohibited acts.  Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to apply to any person transacting or carrying on any business
within the city which is exempt from taxation by the city by virtue of the
Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of Oregon or
applicable statutes of the United States or the state.
§ 5.04.020   Definitions.
   A.   When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. 
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      Business means all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises, establishments, and all kinds of activities and matters, together
with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of
which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or
indirectly, on any premises in the city.  It shall not include persons whose
primary endeavor is supplying goods for resale by other businesses in the city.
      Contractor means any person who undertakes or offers to undertake for a
consideration to furnish labor and/or material necessary or required to
construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or add to any building, bridge, ditch,
flume, reservoir, well, fence, street, sidewalk, machinery and all other
structures and superstructures.  Contractor, as used in this chapter, also
includes Subcontractors.
      Garage Sale means a commercial activity, open to the public, conducted at
a private residence, where personal property is sold or auctioned to others,
provided the number of sale days at a particular residence does not exceed 14
days during the calendar year.
      Premises means and includes all lands, structures, places and also the
equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and
also any personal property which is affixed to or is otherwise used in
connection with any business conducted on the premises.
      Shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 5.04.030   Intent of Council to impose fee exclusions and liabilities.
   A.   In order that business, manufacturing, pursuits, professions and trade
be carried on and conducted in the city in a profitable and peaceful manner, it
is necessary that the same be regulated and safeguarded and that the city
provide police protection, fire protection, street maintenance, street lighting
and other services.
   B.   It is necessary that license fees be levied and fixed for the purpose
of securing revenue to assist in the regulation and in defraying the cost of
police and fire protection and costs of other municipal services.
   C.   No person whose income consists of salary or wage paid to the person by
an employer or agent thereof covered and defined by this chapter and no person
working as a domestic in a private home shall be deemed to be transacting or
carrying on business in the city; provided, however, that if any person fails
to pay the license fee provided in this chapter and the person has neither his
or her residence nor place of business in the city but carries on business in
the city, the agents or employees of that person engaged in business in the
city shall be liable for the payment of the fee or for penalties imposed for
failure to comply with this chapter.
§ 5.04.040   Prohibited business operation.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons, either directly or indirectly, to
engage in any business without having first paid the business license fee and
issued a license as provided by this chapter.
§ 5.04.050   One act constitutes doing business.
   For the purpose of this chapter, any persons shall be deemed to be engaging
in business or engaging in nonprofit enterprise, and thus subject to the
requirement of §
5.04.040, when undertaking 1 of the following acts:
   A.   Selling any goods or service;
   B.   Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire;
and/or
   C.   Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for business
purposes.
§ 5.04.060   Presumption of engaging in business.
   Any person who advertises or otherwise holds himself or herself out to the
public as engaged in any business, profession, trade or calling, for which a
license is required, shall be presumed to be so engaged and shall pay the
license fee as is required by this chapter.
§ 5.04.070   Application; time.
   The annual nonrefundable license fee prescribed by resolution shall be paid
to the City Recorder upon the filing of an application for a new business
license, or upon the annual renewal of a previously obtained license on the 1-
year anniversary date of the original application.
§ 5.04.080   Examination of premises required prior to issuance of license.
   A.   The Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire Department, Building Official
and/or their agents and subordinates are empowered to investigate and examine
those places of business licensed or subject to license within the scope and
purpose of state and local codes and ordinances.  Examination may be made at
any and all reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether places of
business are reasonably safe, sanitary and suitable for the business so
licensed or for which application for license is made.
   B.   In the event it is determined by the officers or their agents that any
such place of business violates state or local codes or ordinances; is
dangerous to public health, safety or welfare; or is likely to become or is at
that time a menace or public nuisance and if the concerned business refuses to
correct all violations within a reasonable time as determined by the officials
or their agents, no business license shall be issued.  If the concerned
business requests, in writing, a public hearing before the City Council, a
report of the determination of denial and reasons therefor shall be made in
writing to the city.
   C.   The City Council, upon receipt of the determination of denial and
reasons therefor, and written request by the concerned business for a public
hearing, shall direct the City Recorder to send by certified mail to the
concerned business notification of a public hearing to be held before the City
Council.
   D.   The purpose of the hearing shall be to determine whether the concerned
business shall be permitted to receive a city business license, or if the
concerned business had previously been issued a city business license, should
be suspended or revoked by the City Council.
   E.   The notification to the concerned business shall set forth the time and
place of the public hearing and will cite specific incidents which constitute
the basis for the determination by the Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire
Department, Building Official or their subordinates, that the concerned
business is in violation of state or local laws; is dangerous to either public
health, safety or welfare; or is likely to become or is at the present time a
public menace or nuisance.
§ 5.04.090   Public hearing.
   A.   Public hearing for the purpose of determining whether a business
license should be issued, or if previously issued whether it should be
suspended or revoked, shall be conducted as a quasi- judicial proceeding before
the City Council.
   B.   Evidence or testimony shall be received and considered by the City
Council only when the evidence or testimony is relevant to the cited incidents
or offenses contained in the notification to the concerned business.
   C.   If the City Council determines that all or a portion of the incidents
or offenses set out in the notification to the concerned business are supported
by substantial evidence, the City Council may refuse to issue a business
license to the concerned business or, if a business license has previously been
issued, may suspend or revoke the license.
§ 5.04.100   Issuance.
   Upon application being made, any investigation required by this chapter to
be made having been satisfactorily completed without a determination by the
city officials set out in §
5.04.080 that the business is dangerous to public health, safety, welfare or
likely to become or is now a public menace or nuisance or, if the determination
has been so made, and if the City Council finds that the determination is not
supported by substantial evidence, and if the fee is paid as provided in §
5.04.220, a license shall be issued by the City Recorder.
§ 5.04.110   Effect of issuance.
   A.   The issuing of a license pursuant to this chapter or the collection of
fee shall not permit any person to engage in any unlawful business.
   B.   The fees levied and fixed by this chapter shall be in addition to the
general ad valorem taxes now or hereafter levied pursuant to law.
   C.   All ordinances of the city in force on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter pertaining to or covering any business,
pursuit or occupation shall remain in full force and effect and in the event of
a conflict or duplication of a license fee, then the other ordinance shall take
precedence over the provisions of this chapter to the end that there will be no
duplication of license fees for the same business, occupation, profession or
pursuit.  Zoning ordinance fees are in addition to business license fees.
§ 5.04.120   Effect of suspension or revocation.
   A.   If a business license is suspended or revoked, the concerned business
shall immediately cease conducting any and all businesses within the city.
   B.   Any business which continues to conduct business within the city
subsequent to action by the City Council to suspend or revoke the city license
for the business shall be subject to the same fine and penalties as if the
business had never obtained a city business license and was carrying on
business within  the city without a business license.
§ 5.04.130   Rehearing upon suspension or revocation.
   A.   Any business which has been denied a city business license or has had a
city license suspended or revoked by action of the City Council under the
provisions of this chapter shall have the right of a rehearing before the City
Council for the purpose of reconsideration of the action of the City Council
if, in the opinion of the City Council, the concerned business has presented
substantial new evidence relevant to the refusal of the city to issue a
business license or to the suspension or revocation of a previously issued
business license.
   B.   A request for rehearing shall be presented in writing by the concerned
business to the City Council and shall set out the new evidence that the
concerned business seeks to bring before the City Council.
   C.   If the City Council grants a rehearing, it will be conducted in the
same manner set forth in §
5.04.090 to determine whether a business license should be initially issued or
whether, if one had previously been issued, if it should be suspended or
revoked, except that the only evidence or testimony which the City Council
shall hear in the rehearing is that which is relevant or material to the new
evidence set forth in the request for rehearing by the concerned business.
§ 5.04.140   Agents responsible for compliance.
   The agents or other representatives of businesses doing business in the city
shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of
the businesses they represent with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5.04.150   Contractors’ and subcontractors’ responsibility.
   It shall be the responsibility of all general contractors, utility companies
and subcontractors working in the city to obtain a business license.  All
construction contractors shall be required to be registered with the Oregon
Construction Contractors Board (CCB) and be in good standing.  It shall further
be the responsibility of all general contractors and utility companies working
in the city to provide a list of all names and addresses of subcontractors
under their direction.  Failure of any subcontractor to obtain a license may
result in a stop work order on any project within the city’s jurisdiction.
(Am. Ord. 1399, passed 6-4-2014)
§ 5.04.160   Separate fee for branch  establishments.
   A fee shall be paid in the manner prescribed in this chapter for each branch
establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if each branch
establishment or location were a separate business; provided that warehouses
and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business
licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be
separate places of business or branch establishments.  Separately franchised
operations shall be deemed separate businesses even if operated under the same
name.
§ 5.04.170   Joint businesses.
   A person engaged in 2 or more businesses at the same location shall be
required to pay separate fees for conducting each business; but, when eligible,
shall be issued 1 receipt which shall specify on its face all such businesses.
§ 5.04.180   No license required for mere delivery.
   No license shall be required for any person for any mere delivery in the
city of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from the person at the
regular place of business outside the city.
§ 5.04.190   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Garage sales, as described in this chapter.
   B.   Participants of all official city-sponsored or sanctioned events and
the Canby Farmers Market.
   C.   (Reserved).
   D.   Any person engaged as a landlord in leasing or renting property to
others, unless the person leases at any 1 time more than 2 separate rental
units, spaces or parcels, whether it be land, buildings or both, or
residential, commercial or both.
   E.   Municipal, state, or federal agencies.
   F.   All non-profit organizations are exempt from the business license fee,
but are still required to complete an application.
   G.   Businesses that are participating in an event sponsored by a non-profit
organization.
   H.   Any person who carries on or engages in a business that is illegal
under applicable city, state, or federal laws is prohibited from being issued a
business license.
   I.   Any business which is exempt from a license by virtue of state or
federal law.
   J.   Any business who is in operation for 3 or fewer consecutive days at the
same location and operates less than a total of 30 days per calendar year
within C-1 Downtown Commercial Zone of the city.  This exemption does not apply
to contractors, landscapers, or any business engaged in a contract with the
city or Canby Urban Renewal Agency.
   K.   Taxi companies and vehicle for hire transportation services.
(Ord. 1396, passed 3-5-2014; Am. Ord. 1447, passed 9-7-2016; Am. Ord. 1464,
passed 9-6-2017)
§ 5.04.200   Display of license.
   All licenses issued in accordance with this chapter shall be openly
displayed in the place of business or kept on the person or on the vehicle of
the person licensed and shall be immediately produced and delivered for
inspection to the Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire Department and their
agents or subordinates when requested by the individuals to do so.  Failure to
carry the license or produce the same on request shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter.
§ 5.04.210   Transfer or assignment of license.
   If any person licensed to do business within the city shall sell or transfer
such business to another, the license for such business shall be transferred to
such other person upon application being made and payment of a license transfer
fee.  The anniversary date of the business shall then be changed to the date of
the new application.  The license fee for this transfer or assignment shall be
set forth by resolution.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 5.04.220   Fee schedule.
   The annual license fee and penalties for delinquency required in this
chapter shall be set forth by resolution.
§ 5.04.230   Penalty.
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the city, be punished by a fine
not to exceed an amount set by resolution.  Each day of the violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
   B.   A finding that a person has committed a violation of this chapter shall
not act to relieve the person from payment of any unpaid business fee,
including delinquent charges, for which the person is liable.  The penalties
imposed by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any remedies
available to the city.
   C.   If a provision of this chapter is violated by a firm or corporation,
the officer or officers, or person or persons responsible for the violation
shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this section.
(Am. Ord. 1399, passed 6-4-2014)
§ 5.04.240   Delinquency charge.
   The fee required by resolution shall be paid within 30 days after the
anniversary date of the original issuance of a business license.  A delinquency
charge in an amount to be set by resolution will be charged on overdue licenses
thereafter at 30-day intervals until the license fee and delinquency charges
are paid in full.  The total amount paid, including delinquency charges shall
not exceed the license fee plus 5 months’ delinquency charges.
CHAPTER 5.06:  SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
   
5.06.010   Purpose.
   
5.06.020   Definitions.
   
5.06.030   Permit required.
   
5.06.035   Minimum standards.
   
5.06.040   Application for permit.
   
5.06.050   Issuance and renewal of permit.
   
5.06.060   Permit fees.
   
5.06.070   Additional locations.
   
5.06.080   Reporting of secondhand dealer regulated property transactions and
seller identification.
   
5.06.090   Regulated property sale limitations.
   
5.06.092   Release of held or seized property.
   
5.06.095   Exceptions to regulated property sale limitations.
   
5.06.100   Tagging regulated property for identification, Chief’s inspection.
   
5.06.110   Prohibited acts.
   
5.06.120   Citation.
   
5.06.130   Revocation or suspension of permit.
   
5.06.140   Appeals.
   
5.06.150   Maintenance of regulated business activity in violation declared a
nuisance, abatement.
§ 5.06.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to strictly regulate certain business
activities that present an extraordinary risk of being used by criminals to
dispose of stolen property. This risk is present despite the best effort of
legitimate secondhand dealer and pawnbroker businesses, because these
businesses process large volumes of goods and materials that are frequently the
object of theft. This chapter is intended to reduce this type of criminal
activity by facilitating timely police notification of such property
transactions, and by regulating the conduct of persons engaged in this business
activity. The need for these regulations outweighs any anti-competitive effect
that may result from their adoption.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.020   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
   A.   Acceptable Identification means either a current driver license, an
identification card issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of a United
States state, or 2 current United States federal, state or local government-
issued identification 1 of which has a photograph of the seller.
   B.   Acquire means to take or transfer any interest in personal property in
a voluntary transaction, including but not limited to: sales, consignments,
memoranda between a dealer and a private party seller, leases, trade-ins,
loans, refinements and abandonments. Any acquisitions of regulated property by
a dealer will be presumed to be an acquisition on behalf of the secondhand
dealer business. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Acquire does not include:
      1.   Any loans made in compliance with state laws by persons licensed as
pawnbrokers by the State of Oregon for the purposes of making a pawn loan; or
      2.   Memoranda between a dealer and a person engaged in the business of
selling regulated property.
   C.   Council means the City of Canby City Council or its designee.
   D.   Criminal Convictions Related to Fraud, Deception, Dishonesty, or Theft
means any conviction for a criminal violation of this chapter; O.R.S. 162.015
to 162.121; 162.265 to 162.385; 164.005 to 164.235; 164.377; 164.395 to
164.415; Chapter 165, or any similar provision of previous or later Oregon
statutes, or statutes of another state, or of the United States.
   E.   Dealer or Secondhand Dealer:
      1.   Means any sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership,
family limited partnership, joint venture, association, cooperative, trust,
estate, corporation, personal holding company, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership or any other form of organization for doing
business and that either:
         a.   Acquires regulated property on behalf of a business, regardless
of where the acquisition occurs, for the purpose of reselling the property; or
         b.   Offers for sale regulated property in the City of Canby.
      2.   Notwithstanding division 1. above, Dealer or Secondhand Dealer does
not include any of the following:
         a.   A business whose acquisitions of regulated property consist
exclusively of donated items and/or purchases from 501(c)(3) organizations;
         b.   An individual or business whose only transactions involving
regulated property in the City of Canby consist of the acquisition of regulated
property for personal use, or the sale of regulated property that was
originally acquired by the seller for personal use; or
         c.   A person whose only business transactions with regulated property
in the City of Canby consist of a display space, booth, or table maintained for
displaying or selling merchandise at any trade show, convention, festival,
fair, circus, market, flea market, swap meet or similar event for less than 14
calendar days in any calendar year.
   F.   Held Property means any regulated property that cannot be sold,
dismantled, altered, or otherwise disposed of for a proscribed period of time
as more specifically described in § 5.06.090.
   G.   Investment Purposes means the purchase of personal property by
businesses and the retention of that property, in the same form as purchased,
for resale to persons who are purchasing the property primarily as an
investment.
   H.   Medication means any substances or preparation, prescription or over-
the-counter, used in treating or caring for ailments and/or conditions in
humans or animals.
   I.   New means anything conspicuously not used.
   J.   Pawnbroker has the meaning set forth in O.R.S. 726.010(2) and includes
any business required by O.R.S. 726.040 to hold an Oregon Pawnbroker's license.
   K.   Person means any natural person, or any partnership, association,
company, organization or corporation.
   L.   Principal. means any person who will be directly engaged or employed in
the management or operation of the secondhand dealer business, including any
owners and any shareholders with a 5% or greater interest in the company.
   M.   Regulated Property means any property of a type that has been
determined by the Chief of Police to be property that is frequently the subject
of theft, including but not limited to the following property, unless excluded
by division 3. below, and may be revised as necessary by the Chief of Police
after giving appropriate advance notification.
      1.   Used items:
         a.   Precious metals;
         b.   Precious gems;
         c.   Watches of any type and jewelry containing precious metals or
precious gems;
         d.   Sterling silver including, but not limited to, flatware,
candleholders, salt and pepper shakers, coffee and tea sets or ornamental
objects;
         e.   Audio equipment;
         f.   Video equipment;
         g.   Other electronic equipment including, but not limited to: global
positioning systems (GPS), electronic navigation devices or radar detectors;
         h.   Photographic and optical equipment;
         i.   Electrical office equipment;
         j.   Power equipment and tools;
         k.   Automotive and hand tools;
         l.   Telephones or telephone equipment;
         m.   Power yard and garden tools;
         n.   Musical instrument and related equipment;
         o.   Firearms including, but not limited to, rifles, handguns,
shotguns, pellet guns or BB guns;
         p.   Sporting equipment;
         q.   Outboard motors, and boating accessories;
         r.   Household appliances;
         s.   Cell phones, smart devices, smart phones, tablets, iPods, and all
similar devices;
         t.   Property that is not purchased by a bona fide business for
investment purposes, limited to:
            i.   Gold bullion bars (0.995 or better);
            ii.   Silver bullion bars (0.995 or better);
            iii.   All tokens, coins, or money, whether commemorative or an
actual medium of exchange adopted by a domestic or foreign government as part
of its currency whose intrinsic, market or collector value is greater than the
apparent legal or face value; or
            iv.   Postage stamps, stamp collections and philatelic items whose
intrinsic market or collector value is greater than the apparent legal or face
value;
         u.   Computers and computer related software and equipment.
      2.   New items.
         a.   New items purchased from a licensed business shall be exempt from
regulation under this chapter if the dealer has a bill of lading, receipt,
invoice or the equivalent for the new items that specifies the seller's
business name, physical and mailing address, date of transaction and
description of the purchased items. The bill of lading shall be held by the
dealer for 1 year, or as long as the property is in the dealer's possession,
whichever is longer. Upon reasonable belief that a specific licensed business
is dealing in stolen property, the Chief of Police may deem that new items
purchased from that specific licensed business are regulated property.
         b.   Items acquired from a manufacturer, manufacturer's representative
or distributor that are discontinued or have been used for display or
demonstration but not previously sold are new and exempt from regulation under
this chapter if the dealer has a bill of lading, receipt, invoice or the
equivalent that includes the information specified in division 2.a. of this
section.  The dealer must hold the bill of lading, receipt, and invoice or
equivalent for 1 year or as long as the property is in the dealer's possession.
      3.   Regulated property does not include any of the following property:
         a.   Books and comic books;
         b.   Sports cards and sports memorabilia;
         c.   Glassware and objects d'art including, but not limited to,
paintings, prints, sculptures, ceramics, and porcelains;
         d.   Vehicles required to be registered with the Oregon Motor Vehicles
Division;
         e.   Boats required to be certified by the Oregon Marine Board;
         f.   Furniture; and
         g.   Refrigerators, freezers, stoves, ovens, dishwashers, washers and
dryers.
   N.   Remanufactured means that an item has been altered to the degree that
the main components are no longer identifiable as the original item.
   O.   Chief of Police means the Chief of Police for the City of Canby Police
Department, or his or her designee.
   P.   Seller means any person who:
      1.   Offers items of regulated property in exchange for money or other
property; or as collateral for a loan; or
      2.   Donates or abandons items of regulated property.
   Q.   Transaction Report means the record of the information required by §
5.06.080, transmitted to the Chief of Police by means required in § 5.06.090.
   R.   Trade Show means an event open to the public, held in a venue other
than a dealer's business location, at which vendors of a specific type of
merchandise may exhibit, buy, sell or trade items that may include regulated
property.
   S.   Used means anything that has been put into action or service.
   T.   Hearings Officer means an officer, official of the city or other
employee of the appropriate authority, but shall not have participated in any
determination or investigation related to the incident that is subject of the
hearing. The Hearings Officer is to be designated by the City Administrator.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.030  Permit Required.
   A.   No person shall act as a secondhand dealer in the City of Canby without
a valid secondhand dealer's permit issued by the Chief of Police.
   B.   Any person or business that advertises or otherwise holds him/herself
out to be acquiring or offering for sale regulated property within the City of
Canby will be presumed to be operating as a secondhand dealer subject to the
terms of this chapter.
   C.   Any pawnbroker operating within the City of Canby shall be required to
maintain a valid license pursuant to the O.R.S. Ch. 726. If any pawnbroker also
acts as a secondhand dealer, that pawnbroker shall be required to obtain a
secondhand dealer permit and meet all requirements of this chapter. Any
pawnbroker that is not a secondhand dealer shall nonetheless be subject to the
following sections of this chapter:
      1.   5.06.080 Reporting requirements (this section shall be used by
pawnbrokers in order to meet the requirements of O.R.S. 726.280 to 726.285).
      2.   5.06.090 Sale Limitations.
      3.   5.06.095 Exceptions to Sale Limitations.
      4.   5.06.100 Tagging and Inspection of Property.
      5.   5.06.110 Prohibited Acts.
      6.   5.06.120 Citations.
      7.   5.06.150 Nuisance.
   D.   The sale of regulated property at events known as "garage sales," "yard
sales," "flea markets" or "estate sales," is exempt from these regulations if
all of the following are present:
      1.   No sale exceeds a period of 72 consecutive hours; and
      2.   No more than 14 calendar days of sales are held in any 12-month
period.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.035   Minimum Standards.
   A.   No person may operate as a secondhand dealer within the City of Canby
unless the person maintains a fixed physical business location.
   B.   Any secondhand dealer who holds a valid permit may not change the
business name of the premises without notifying the Chief of Police at least 30
days prior to the actual effective date of the name change.
   C.   Dealers shall comply with all federal, state and local regulations.
   D.   Dealers will also obtain and maintain a current business license with
the City of Canby.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.040   Application for permit.
   A.   An application for secondhand dealer's permit shall set forth the
following information:
      1.   The name, business and residential address, business and residential
telephone number, birth date, driver’s license information, including state of
issue and license number and principal occupation of the applicant and any
person who will be directly engaged or employed in the management or operation
of the business or the proposed business;
      2.   The name, address, telephone number, and electronic mail address of
the business or proposed business and a description of the exact nature of the
business to be operated;
      3.   The web address of any and all web pages used to acquire or offer
for sale regulated property on behalf of the dealer, and any and all internet
auction account names used to acquire or offer for sale regulated property on
behalf of the dealer;
      4.   Written proof that the applicant and all principals of the business
are at least 18 years of age;
      5.   Each principal's business occupation or employment for the 5 years
immediately preceding the date of application;
      6.   The business license and permit history of the applicant in
operating a business identical to or similar to those regulated by this
chapter;
      7.   A brief summary of the applicant's business history in the City of
Canby or in any other city, county or state including:
         a.   The business license or permit history of the applicant; and
         b.   Whether the applicant has ever had any such license or permit
denied, revoked, or suspended, the reasons behind it, and the business activity
or occupation of the applicant subsequent to the suspension or revocation;
      8.   The form of the business or proposed business, whether a sole
proprietorship, partnership or corporation, etc.;
         a.   If a partnership, the names, birth dates, addresses, telephone
numbers, principal occupations, along with all other information required of
any individual applicant, for each partner, whether general, limited, or
silent, and the respective ownership shares owned by each; and
         b.   If a corporation, or limited liability company, the name, copies
of the articles of incorporation and the corporate bylaws, and the names,
addresses, birth dates, telephone numbers, and principal occupations, along
with all other information required of any individual applicant, for every
officer, director, and every shareholder owning more than 5% of the outstanding
shares, and the number of shares held by each;
      9.   If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and
complete copy of the executed lease (and the legal description of the premises
to be permitted) must be attached to the application; and
      10.   All arrests and criminal convictions relating to fraud, deception,
dishonesty or theft, or citations for violation of secondhand dealer ordinance
or statutes of any city, county, or state of each principal and all natural
persons enumerated in divisions 1. through 7. of this section; and
   B.   New employees of dealers shall complete and submit the secondhand
dealer personal history information as required in division A. of this section.
Employees may not acquire regulated property until all required information has
been reviewed by the Chief of Police, unless the dealer receives permission
from the Chief of Police while those employees' background checks are being
evaluated. The criteria used to review a new employee will be the same as those
used in the review of an initial application in § 5.06.050(B).
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.050   Issuance and Renewal of Permit.
   A.   Applications for secondhand dealer's permit must be notarized, and
shall be filed with the Chief of Police and shall include payment of the
required annual permit fee. Individual employee history forms containing the
required information of each employee need not be notarized, but must be signed
by the specific individual represented on the form.
   B.   The Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and
all principals and employees directly engaged in the management or operation of
the business listed according to the requirements in §§ 5.06.040A. and B. The
Chief shall issue such permit if no cause for denial as noted herein exists.
   C.   The Chief of Police shall deny an application for a secondhand dealer's
permit if:
      1.   The applicant, or any other person who will be directly engaged in
the management or operation of the business, or any person who owns a 5% or
more interest in the business, has previously owned or operated a business
regulated by this chapter or a similar ordinance or law of another city, county
or state, and:
         a.   The license and permit for the business has been revoked for
cause which would be grounds for revocation pursuant to this chapter; or
         b.   The business has been found to constitute a public nuisance and
abatement has been ordered;
      2.   Any person involved in the business has been convicted of any
criminal offense related to fraud, deception, dishonesty or theft, or convicted
of any violation of this chapter or laws of any city, county or state;
      3.   The operation as proposed by the applicant would not comply with all
applicable requirements of statutes and local ordinances including, but not
limited to: building, health, planning, zoning and fire chapters;
      4.   Any statement in the application is found to be false or any
required information is withheld;
      5.   Evidence exists to support a finding that the location of the
business for which the application has been filed has a history of violations
of the provisions of this chapter; or
      6.   The operation does not comply with applicable federal or state
licensing requirements.
   D.   Notwithstanding § 5.06.050B., the Chief of Police may grant a permit
despite the presence of 1 or more of the enumerated factors, if the applicant
establishes to the Chiefs satisfaction that:
      1.   The behavior evidenced by such factor(s) is not likely to recur;
      2.   The behavior evidenced by such factor(s) is remote in time; and
      3.   The behavior evidenced by such factor(s) occurred under
circumstances which diminish the seriousness of the factor as it relates to the
purpose of this chapter.
   E.   Secondhand dealer's permits shall be for a term of 1 year and shall
expire on the anniversary of their issuance. The permits shall be
nontransferable and shall be valid only for a single location. When the
business location is to be changed, the permit holder shall provide the address
of the new location in writing to the Chief for approval or disapproval at
least 30 days prior to such change.
   F.   All secondhand dealer's permits shall be displayed on the business
premises in a manner readily visible to patrons.
   G.   The Chief of Police will have primary authority concerning the issuance
of a permit. If an applicant for permit is denied, denied applicants will make
their first appeal to the hearings officer. If denial of an application for
permit is denied by the hearings officer, review shall be by writ of review as
provided in O.R.S. §§ 34.010 to 34.100.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.060   Permit fees.
   Every person engaged in conducting, carrying on or controlling a secondhand
dealer's business shall:
   A.   File an application as described in § 5.06.050 and pay a nonrefundable
fee as required by the Chief of Police. This fee shall be set by resolution.
   B.   For renewal of a secondhand dealer's permit, file an application and
pay a nonrefundable fee as required by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.070   Additional locations.
   A.   The holder of a valid secondhand dealer's permit shall file with the
Chief an application for a permit for each additional location, and shall pay a
nonrefundable fee as required by the Chief for each additional location.
   B.   Permits issued for additional locations shall be subject to all the
requirements of this chapter, and the term of any permit issued for an
additional location shall expire on the same date as the initial permit.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.080   Reporting of secondhand dealer regulated property transactions and
seller identification.
   A.   Dealers shall provide to the Chief all required information listed for
each regulated property transaction (not including sales). The Chief may
designate the format of transfer of this information and may direct that it be
communicated to the City of Canby Police Department by means of mail, the
internet or other computer media.
      1.   In the event the Chief directs that the transaction information be
transmitted via computer media, the Chief will specify the system that will be
utilized in order to ensure conformity among all dealers.
      2.   If, after establishing the format and requirements for the
transmission of computerized reports of transactions, the Chief alters the
required format; dealers will be given at least 60 days to comply with the new
format requirements. If unable to implement the reporting system before the
deadline, a dealer must, prior to the deadline submit a written request to the
Chief for additional time.
      3.   Pawnbrokers are required to report only new transactions. Loan
renewals and redemptions by the original client do not need to be reported as
long as the property involved in the transaction has not left the store for any
period of time. If someone other than the original pawner attempts to redeem
the pawned item(s), a photocopy of the redeemer's license or other valid ID is
required.
   B.   In the event of legitimate technical difficulties, pre-approved paper
forms can be provided to dealers with transaction report forms at cost. Any
technical difficulties shall be remedied by dealer as soon as practicable. The
chief may specify the format (size, shape and color) of the transaction report
form. The Chief may require that the transaction report form include any
information relating to the regulations of this chapter. Dealers may utilize
their own forms, in lieu of those supplied by the Police Department, if the
Chief has approved such forms. The declaration of proof of ownership is
considered to be included in references in this chapter to the transaction
reports, as appropriate. Declaration of proof of ownership will be retained by
the business and made available to law enforcement.
   C.   When receiving regulated property, the dealer must do all of the
following:
      1.   The dealer must obtain acceptable photo identification from the
seller or pledger and verify that the person in the photograph is the
individual participating in the transaction,
      2.   The dealer must record the seller's current residential address,
telephone number and thumbprint on the transaction report.
      3.   The dealer must write on the transaction report a complete, legible
and accurate description of the regulated property of sufficient detail to
distinguish like objects one from the other. If an item is new, the dealer must
include the word "new" in the property description.
         a.   The dealer must complete the transaction report in its entirety,
and the individual completing the report must initial it.
         b.   Transaction reports must be completed in legible printed English.
      4.   The dealer must require the seller to legibly complete the
declaration of proof of ownership except that no such declaration of proof of
ownership is required for pawn loans made in compliance with state law by
licensed pawnbrokers.
         a.   In completing the declaration of proof of ownership the seller
must, at the time of the transaction, certify in writing that the seller has
the legal right to sell the property that is the subject of the transaction and
is competent to do so, and that the property is not rented or leased.
         b.   The dealer or dealer's employee must place the identifiable print
of the seller's right thumb (left if right is unavailable) in the thumbprint
box on the declaration of proof of ownership. Thumbprints and the information
on the declaration of proof of ownership may be produced using a digital format
with prior approval of the process from the Chief.
         c.   When no declaration of proof of ownership is required for pawn
loan transactions, the dealer or dealer's employee shall verbally verify that
the seller has the legal right to sell the property that is the subject of the
transaction and is competent to do so, and that the property is not rented or
leased, and enter that information in the transaction report by noting in the
item description the length of time the seller has owned the item.
      5.   A dealer may provide a description of any motor vehicle (including
license number) identified as used in the delivery of regulated property and
record the description and license number next to the seller's thumbprint.
      6.   Transaction reports are designed to assist in the investigation of
the theft of property. Therefore, additional reporting for dealers includes
unregulated property that is identifiable with markings indicating apparent
ownership.
      7.   Dealers must take either a photograph or still video of each person
selling or loaning on an item of regulated property or make a copy of the
acceptable identification presented by the seller. All information on the copy
must be legible and may be made by photostatic copying, computerized scanning
or any other photographic, electronic, digital or other process that preserves
and retains an image of the document, and which can be subsequently produced or
reproduced for viewing of the image. If a photograph is taken, a print of the
photograph must be referenced to the transaction report number. A video
photograph (still) must be referenced by time and date and transaction report
number to correspond to the regulated property accepted. Copied identification
must be kept with the transaction report or shall be referenced to the
transaction report number. The photograph or videotape or copied identification
must be kept by the dealer for 1 year and must be provided to the Chief of
Police upon request.
   D.   Dealers must mail or deliver to the Chief of Police at the close of
each business day the original of all transaction reports describing articles
received during that business day.
   E.   Dealers must retain at their business location a copy of all completed
and voided transaction reports for a period of not less than 1 year from the
date of acquisition. Any unused transaction reports must be available for
inspection by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.090   Regulated property sale limitations.
   A.   Regulated property is subject to the following limitations:
      1.   Holding period: Regulated property acquired by any dealer must be
held for a period of 30 full days from the date of acquisition. Pawnbroker loan
transactions are exempt from the 30-day hold requirements of this section
because of the redeemable nature of the loans and the holding requirements of
O.R.S. Ch. 726. However, if the loan is converted to a buy by the pawnbroker
within 30 days from the date of the pawn transaction, the difference between
the original date of the pawn and the buy will count toward the 30-day hold
requirement. All other provisions of this section remain in effect.
      2.   Requirements of held property: All held property must remain in the
same form as when received, must not be sold, dismantled, altered or otherwise
disposed of, and must be kept separate and apart from all other property during
the holding period to prevent theft or accidental sale, and to allow for
identification and examination by the Chief of Police. Held property must be
kept at the business location during this holding period so that it can be
inspected during normal business hours as provided in § 5.06.100.
   B.   Upon reasonable belief that an item of regulated property is the
subject of a crime, any peace officer may provide notice to any dealer that a
specifically described item of regulated property must be held in a separate
police hold area for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of
notification, and is subject to the 30 days upon notice provided to the dealer
that additional time is needed to determine whether a specific item of
regulated property is the subject of a crime. The dealer shall comply with the
hold notice and notify the Chief of Police of the hold notice not later than 5
calendar days from the day the notice was received, either by telephone, fax,
email or in person. A dealer must notify the Chief of its intent to dispose of
any item of regulated property under police hold at least 10 days prior to
doing so. A police hold area must meet the following criteria:
      1.   Located out of public view and access;
      2.   Marked "Police Hold"; and
      3.   Contains only items that have been put on police hold.
   C.   Any peace officer or Community Service Officer (unsworn peace officers
employed by law enforcement agencies) who places a police hold on any property
suspected of being the subject of a crime shall provide the dealer with a DPSST
number and a valid incident number.
   D.   Upon probable cause that an item of regulated property is the subject
of a crime, the Chief may take physical custody of the item or provide written
notice to any dealer to hold such property for a period of time to be
determined by the Chief, not to exceed the statute of limitations for the crime
being investigated. Any property placed on hold pursuant to this division is
subject to the requirements of division A.2. above, and will be maintained in
the police hold area unless seized or released by the Chief. Seizure of
property will be carried out in accordance with O.R.S.
   E.   If a dealer acquires regulated property with serial numbers,
personalized inscriptions or initials, or other identifying marks which have
been destroyed or are illegible due to obvious normal use, the dealer shall
continue to hold the regulated property at the business location for a period
of 90 full days after acquisition. The dealer must notify the Chief of Police
by writing "90-day hold" next to the item on the transaction report or by an
electronic means approved by the Chief. The held property must conform to all
the requirements of this section.
   F.   If a peace officer seizes any property from a dealer, the dealer must
notify the Chief of Police not later than 5 calendar days from the day the
seizure occurs. The dealer must provide the name of police agency, the incident
or case number, the name and DPSST number of the peace officer, the number of
the receipt left for the seizure, and the seized property information.
Notification to the Chief of Police may be given by telephone, fax, email or in
person.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.092   Release of held or seized property.
   Items held or seized under § 5.06.090D. may not be released to anyone other
than the dealer unless the property is released to:
   A.   Another law enforcement agency that has provided documentation to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police of the stolen status of the property, or
   B.   A person who reported the property as stolen; and
      1.   A stolen property report has been filed with a law enforcement
agency where making an untruthful report is a violation of the law, and
      2.   A notice has been delivered to the dealer holding the property or
from whom the property was seized.
         a.   The notice required by this division will state that the property
will be released to the person who has filed the stolen property report unless
the dealer or pawner/seller files a motion for return of seized property within
10 days of the date of the notice and in the manner set forth in the notice.
         b.   The notice required by this division will be sent electronically
with a request for acknowledgment, or delivered in person to the dealer at the
email or physical address shown on the dealer's permit application or most
recent permit renewal application, and to the pawner/seller at the address
shown in the transaction report required by § 5.06.080.
         c.   The notice required by this division will provide the information
necessary to submit a motion for return of seized property.
         d.   The failure of any person to receive the notice required in this
subsection will not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings of this
subsection.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.095   Exceptions to regulated property sale limitations.
   A.   A dealer is not required to obtain the seller's identification,
photograph the seller, record the seller's thumbprint, or have the seller
complete the declaration of proof of ownership if the dealer complies with the
remaining requirements in § 5.06.080 and if:
      1.   The item is acquired through consignment by a dealer and the
consigned property is mailed or shipped to the dealer.
      2.   The item is acquired during a trade show. Items acquired during a
trade show may be sold or traded during the trade show without being held or
creating a transaction record. Items still in a dealer's possession at the end
of the show held at a location within 400 miles of the City of Canby will be
subject to the hold period and reporting requirements in effect for that
dealer's acquisitions of regulated property. The required reporting of the
acquisitions must occur within two business days of the end of the trade show.
The dealer must enter at least the following information into the transaction
record: a complete, clear and accurate description of the regulated property of
sufficient detail to distinguish like objects one from the other, and the name
and date of the event and the address of the venue in the name, date, and
address fields.  An item acquired during a trade show held at a location more
than 400 miles from the City of Canby is exempt from regulation under §
05.06.080 if the dealer has a bill of lading, receipt, invoice or the
equivalent for the item that specifies the seller's name, physical and mailing
address, show location, date of transaction and a description of the purchased
item. The bill of lading, receipt, invoice or the equivalent must remain in the
dealer's possession for 1 year or as long as the property is in the dealer's
possession, whichever is longer.
      3.   The item is acquired from a business whose acquisitions of regulated
property consists exclusively of donated items and/or purchases from a 501(c)
(3) organization. The dealer must record the name and location address of the
business in the name and address fields of the transaction report form and the
date of acquisition.
      4.   The item is acquired through an internet transaction. The dealer
must record on the transaction report the seller's email address or seller's
identification, the name of the internet website that listed the item, and the
date of the acquisition.
      5.   The item is acquired by the dealer from a yard sale, garage sale,
estate sale or swap meet. The dealer must record on the transaction report the
physical address of the sale location and the date of acquisition.
   Items acquired under division A. must be held in compliance with the hold
period requirement in effect for the dealer's other acquisitions of regulated
property. The hold period begins the day the acquisition is reported to the
Chief.
   B.   A dealer is not required to obtain the seller's identification,
photograph the seller, record the seller's thumbprint, have the seller complete
the declaration of proof of ownership, or hold the item if the dealer complies
with the remaining requirements of § 5.06.080 and if:
      1.   The item is regulated property acquired from a duly registered
business located outside the state of Oregon or Washington. The dealer must
keep a receipt for the item from the registered business that includes the
registered business' name and a description of the item. The receipt must be
retained at the dealer's business location for 1 year or until the item is
sold, whichever is longer. The dealer must enter in the transaction record:
         a.   The name and location address of the business into the name and
address fields;
         b.   The date of the acquisition; and
         c.   A digital photograph of sufficient size and focus to identify an
item and distinguish it from similar items.
   C.   A dealer is not required to photograph the seller, record the seller's
thumbprint or have the seller complete the declaration of proof of ownership if
the dealer complies with the remaining requirements of § 5.06.080 and if:
      1.   The item is regulated property taken to the dealer for repair;
      2.   The dealer photocopied the customer's valid identification when the
item was brought in for repair;
      3.   The item has been abandoned or consigned to the dealer;
      4.   The item is reported in a transaction record on the same day that it
is abandoned or consigned; and
      5.   The item is held for 15 days after it is reported to the Chief.
   D.   A dealer is not required to make a copy of the acceptable
identification obtained from the seller, photograph the seller, or record the
seller's thumbprint if the dealer complies with the following requirements:
      1.   Conducts each and every acquisition of regulated property by either:
         a.   Not tendering payment to the seller for a minimum of 15 days
after the regulated property is delivered to the dealer; or
         b.   Offering in-store credit that must be used for merchandise only
and not redeemed for cash;
      2.   Holds each and every item of regulated property for a minimum of 15
days from the date of acquisition; and
      3.   Complies with the remaining requirements set forth in the §
5.06.080; and
      4.   Notifies the Chief in writing that each and every acquisition of
regulated property will be conducted by not tendering payment to the seller for
a minimum of 15 days after the regulated property is delivered to the dealer.
   E.   A dealer is not required to make a copy of the acceptable
identification obtained from the seller, photograph the seller, or record the
seller's thumbprint when the dealer acquires an item of regulated property on
consignment if the dealer complies with the following requirements:
      1.   Does not tender payment to the consignor for a minimum of 15 days
after the regulated property is delivered to the dealer;
      2.   Holds each and every item of consigned regulated property for a
minimum of 15 days;
      3.   Complies with the remaining requirements in § 5.06.080.
   F.   The hold period for items may be reduced from 30 days to 20 days if the
item either displays a complete legible serial number; or is an item of
jewelry; or is precious metal scrap. The dealer must:
      1.   Report the acquisition in a transaction record on the same day the
acquisition occurs;
      2.   Include a description in the transaction record of the degree of
detail for the type of item as required § 5.06.080;
      3.   Include a digital photograph of sufficient size and focus to
identify the item and distinguish it from similar items and that clearly shows
any legible serial number on the item in the transaction record; and
      4.   Comply with all remaining requirements in § 5.06.080.
A dealer may be required to reinstate a 30 day hold period if an examination of
RAPID entries reveals a pattern of insufficient item descriptions or
insufficient photographs.
   G.   A dealer is not required to create a transaction record or hold the
item if the acquired item is regulated property acquired from a registered
business that has verifiably already entered the acquisition of that item in a
transaction record in a jurisdiction approved by the Chief. The dealer must
keep the receipt for the item from the registered business that includes the
registered business' name and a description of the item. The receipt must be
kept at the dealer's business location for 1 year or until the item is sold,
whichever is longer.
   H.   A dealer is not required to create a transaction record or hold the
item if a customer, who originally purchased the item from the dealer, returns
it to the dealer with the original receipt.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.100   Tagging regulated property for identification, Chief’s inspection.
   A.   Secondhand dealer acquiring any regulated property shall affix to such
property a tag upon which shall be written a unique number, in legible
characters, which shall correspond to the number on the transaction report
forms required by § 5.06.080. After the holding period has expired, the
transaction number must remain identifiable on the property until it is sold.
   B.   After the applicable holding period has expired, hand tools, or items
that are sold with other like items and have no identifiable numbers or
markings need not remain tagged.
   C.   After the applicable holding period has expired, items that are
remanufactured need not remain tagged.
   D.   Upon presentation of official identification, the Chief or his designee
may enter onto the business premises of any person with a secondhand dealer's
permit to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. An inspection
shall be for the limited purpose of inspecting any regulated property acquired
by the dealer, held by the dealer pursuant to § 5.06.090, or the records
incident thereto. Such inspections shall occur only during normal business
hours. The failure to grant permission to the Chief or his designee for
inspection could result in a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.110   Prohibited acts.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any principal, employee or dealer regulated by
this chapter to:
      1.   Receive any property from any person known to the principal,
employee or dealer to be prohibited from selling by a court order or is under
the age of 18 years;
      2.   Receive property prohibited by this chapter. Items specifically
prohibited from being acquired by secondhand dealers include:
         a.   Medications;
         b.   Gift cards, in-store credit cards, or activated phone cards;
         c.   Property with serial numbers, personalized inscriptions or
initials or other identifying marks which appear to have been intentionally
altered, obliterated, removed, or otherwise rendered illegible; and
         d.   Any item that cannot be lawfully possessed pursuant to local,
state, or federal law;
      3.   Act as a secondhand dealer within City of Canby without a valid
secondhand dealer's permit issued by the Chief of Police;
      4.   Fail to obtain acceptable identification from the person selling any
regulated property;
      5.   Fail to have the person selling any regulated property sign the
transaction report form describing the article acquired;
      6.   Fail to retain on the business premises a copy of the transaction
report form describing the acquired regulated property for a period of 1 year
from the date of acquisition;
      7.   Fail to mail or deliver to the Chief at the close of each business
day the original and second copy of all transaction report forms describing
regulated property acquired during that business day;
      8.   Fail to include on transaction report forms all readily available
information required by the form;
      9.   Fail to withhold from sale any regulated property for the required
holding period after acquisition;
      10.   Fail, after acquiring regulated property, to retain the property on
the business premises for the required holding period after its acquisition;
      11.   Fail to allow inspection by the Chief of any regulated property
being retained pursuant to this chapter;
      12.   Fail to allow inspection by the Chief of  any records required by
this chapter;
      13.   Fail to have affixed to any acquired regulated property, during the
required holding period, a tag on which is written a number in legible
characters which corresponds to the number on the transaction report form
required by this chapter; and
      14.   Continue activities as a secondhand dealer after suspension or
revocation of a permit or a business license.
   B.   Any initial violation of § 5.06.110A. is a city code violation
punishable by a fine in an amount set by resolution of the City of Canby City
Council or its designee. Fines for noncriminal violations of this section are
presumptively $500 and are not to exceed $1,000 per violating transaction and
could also result in revocation of the secondhand dealer's permit.  Subsequent
or repeated violations of this section can be punishable criminally as could
any secondhand dealing that occurs after permit revocation due to violations of
this section. Any criminal charges resulting from this chapter shall go before
the Canby Municipal Court and be punishable by no more than 365 days jail and/
or a $6,250 fine per violating transaction.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.120   Citation.
   A.   The Chief or his designee, upon learning of a violation of § 5.06.110A.
may issue the secondhand dealer a citation. Such citation shall be delivered at
the address listed on the permit application during regular business hours to a
person who appears to be in charge.
   B.   The citation shall list the nature of the violation, whether it is a
non-criminal or criminal, and the time and date of the citation. The citation
shall also indicate the fine assessed for said violation, which is to be paid
to the city, or appealed within 10 days from the date of delivery. Appeal of
non-criminal violations must be in writing, state the grounds for appeal, and
must be delivered to the Canby Municipal Court within 10 days of the citation
date. Criminal citations are handled through the Canby Municipal Court.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall affect the ability of the Chief to take
any and all actions otherwise authorized to abate any violation.
   D.   Any principal of a dealer that has been assessed civil penalties under
this chapter in excess of $2,000 in the previous 365 days who knowingly
violates this chapter may be punished, upon conviction, by a fine of not more
than $6,250 and a jail sentence of not more than 12 months.
   E.   Any principal of a dealer that has been denied a permit or whose
secondhand dealer permit has been revoked who knowingly violates this chapter
may be punished, upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $6,250 and a jail
sentence of not more than 12 months.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.130   Revocation or suspension of permit.
   A.   The Chief may revoke or suspend any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter:
      1.   For any cause which would be grounds for denial of a permit;
      2.   Upon a finding that any violation of the provisions of this chapter,
federal, state or other local law has been committed and the violation is
connected with the operation of the permitted business location so that the
person in charge of the business location knew, or should reasonably have
known, that such violations or offenses were permitted to occur at the location
by the dealer or any principal or employee engaged or employed in the
management or operation of the business location;
      3.   If lawful inspection has been refused;
      4.   If the secondhand dealer's activities cause significant litter,
noise, vandalism, vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion or other
locational problems in the area around the dealer's premises;
      5.   If a fine assessed under this chapter has not been paid to the City
of Canby or appealed within 10 days after the date of delivery of a citation;
      6.   If any statement contained in the application for the permit is
found to have been false; or
      7.   If any secondhand dealer fails to meet federal or state licensing
requirements.
   B.   The Chief shall give the permittee written notice of proposed
revocation or suspension of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter by
causing notice to be served upon the permit holder at the address listed on the
permit application. Service of the notice shall be accomplished by personal
service, mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
service in the same manner as a summons served in an action at law. Refusal of
the service by the person whose permit is revoked or suspended shall be prima
facie evidence of receipt of the notice. Service of the notice upon the person
in charge of a business, during its hours of operation shall constitute prima
facie evidence of notice to the person holding the permit to operate the
business.
   C.   Revocation or suspension shall be effective and final 10 days after the
giving of such notice unless such revocation or suspension is appealed in
accordance with § 5.06.140.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.140   Appeals.
   A.   Appeals of revocations or suspensions of permits shall be made to the
hearings officer, to be designated by the City Administrator. A hearings
officer may be an officer, official of the city or other employee of the
appropriate authority, but shall not have participated in any determination or
investigation related to the incident that is subject of the hearing. Hearings
under this section may be informal in nature, but the presentation of evidence
shall be consistent with that required for contested cases under O.R.S. §
183.450.  The determination of a hearings officer at the hearing for non-
criminal violations under this section is final and is not subject to appeal.
   B.   Orders of the hearings officer:
      1.   The hearings officer shall provide a written statement of the
results of the hearing held under this section to the person requesting the
hearing.
      2.   Findings of fact and conclusions of law shall accompany a final
order. The findings of fact shall consist of a concise statement of the
underlying facts supporting the hearings officer's order.
      3.   The hearings officer shall notify the appellant and respondent of a
final order by delivering or mailing a copy of the order and any accompanying
findings and conclusions to the appellant and respondent or, if applicable,
their attorney of record. The hearings officer shall issue a final order within
14 days from the conclusion of the hearing.
      4.   The hearings officer shall file all final orders with the City
Recorder. A final order shall become effective 5 days after it is filed unless
a party makes objections to the form of the order within 5 days of filing and
the hearings officer subsequently amends the final order.
   C.   Enforcement of hearings officer order:
      1.   Fines and costs are payable upon receipt of the final order
declaring the fine and costs. Fines and costs under this chapter are a debt
owing to the City of Canby and may be collected in the same manner as any other
debt allowed by law.
      2.   The City of Canby may institute appropriate suit or legal action, in
law or equity, in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce any order of
the hearings officer, including, but not limited to, an action to obtain
judgment for any fine or any assessment for costs imposed pursuant to §§
5.06.110B. or 5.06.140G.
   D.   Judicial review of the final order of the hearings officer under this
chapter shall be by writ of review as provided in O.R.S. 34.010 to 34.100.
   E.   Appeals of criminal violations of this chapter can be made de novo with
the Clackamas County Circuit Court following the procedures governing criminal
appeals in the State of Oregon.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 5.06.150   Maintenance of regulated business activity in violation declared a
nuisance, abatement.
   Any business maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The Chief is authorized to bring any
action or suit to seek imposition of fines or other authorized penalties for
violation of this chapter or to abate such nuisance by seeking injunctive or
other appropriate relief to:
   A.   Cease all unlawful activities;
   B.   Close the unlawful business establishment;
   C.   Return property obtained through unlawful activities to the rightful
owners; or
   D.   Seek such other relief as may be appropriate.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2013)
CHAPTER 5.12:  SIDEWALK VENDING
Section
   
5.12.010   Definitions.
   
5.12.020   Permit required; fee.
   
5.12.030   Permit application.
   
5.12.040   Fire Marshal inspection.
   
5.12.050   Restrictions.
   
5.12.060   Permitted items.
   
5.12.070   Special event designation.
   
5.12.080   License denial, suspension or revocation.
   
5.12.090   Appeal.
   
5.12.100   Penalty.
   
5.12.110   Violation a nuisance; summary abatement.
§ 5.12.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Commercial Zone means any property which is designated commercial under
Title 16, Planning and Zoning, of this code.
   Conduct Business means the act of offering for sale edible or nonedible
items for immediate delivery.
   Sidewalk means that portion of the street between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use
of pedestrians.
   Special Events means events specifically approved by the City Council
granting use of street and sidewalk areas within a specifically defined area,
for a period of time not exceeding 10 days, to a community-based organization.
§ 5.12.020   Permit required; fee.
   No person shall conduct business as defined in this chapter on any city
sidewalk without first obtaining a business license, a sidewalk vending
permit,  and paying the required sidewalk vending permit fee to the office of
the City Recorder.  Fees are annual and shall be payable upon the business
license renewal date.  It is unlawful for any person to sell any goods on any
sidewalk within the city except as provided by this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 1333, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 5.12.030   Permit application.
   A.   Application for a permit to conduct business on a sidewalk shall be
made at the office of the City Recorder on a form deemed appropriate by the
City Recorder.  This application shall include but not be limited to the
following information:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   Type of items sold.  Individual applications shall be accepted for
one type of product;
      3.   A valid copy of all necessary licenses or permits required by state
or local health authorities;
      4.   A signed Indemnity Agreement stating that the permittee shall hold
harmless the city, its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the city,
its officers and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to
persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of
the permit;
      5.   The permittee shall furnish and maintain this public liability, food
products liability and property damage insurance as will protect permittee,
property owners and the city from all claims for damage to property or bodily
injury, including death, which may arise from operations under the permit or in
connection there with.  This insurance shall provide coverage of not less than
$1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage for each occurrence and not
less than $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate. This permittee shall provide the city
with a certificate of liability insurance. This insurance shall be without
prejudice to coverage otherwise existing therein; shall name as additional
insured the city, its officers and employees; and shall further provide that
the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the completion of the
contract without 30 days’ written notice to the City Recorder of the city;
      6.   Means to be used in conducting business, including but not limited
to a description of any mobile container or device, to be used for transport or
to display approved items or services; and
      7.   The proposed location for conducting business, along with a signed
statement that the permittee shall hold harmless the adjacent property owner(s)
for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be
occasioned by any activity carried on under the permit.  No application shall
apply to more than one location.  Location must be approved by the City
Administrator.
   B.   A separate sidewalk vending permit application and fee shall be
required for each mobile container or device to be used for transportation or
display.
   C.   No food vendor application will be accepted for a location where a
restaurant or fruit and vegetable market, with direct access to the sidewalk,
is adjacent or within 100 feet on the same block.  No application will be
accepted for a flower vendor for a location where a flower shop, with direct
access to the sidewalk, is adjacent or within 100 feet on the same block.  The
above requirement may be waived if the application is submitted with the
written consent of the proprietor of the restaurant, fruit and vegetable market
or flower shop.  The consent must be submitted on a form deemed appropriate by
the City Recorder.
(Am. Ord. 1333, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 5.12.040   Fire Marshal inspection.
   Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Fire Marshal shall inspect and
approve any mobile device or pushcart to assure the conformance of any cooking
or heating apparatus with the provisions of the city fire code.  Only propane
will be authorized for heat source.
§ 5.12.050   Restrictions.
   A.   Any person conducting business on the sidewalks of the city with a
valid license issued under this chapter may transport and/or display approved
items upon any mobile device or pushcart, under or subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   The operating area shall not exceed 24 square feet of sidewalk,
which shall include the area of the mobile device or pushcart, and when
externally located, the operator and trash receptacle;
      2.   The length of the mobile device or pushcart shall not exceed 6 feet;
and
      3.   The height of the mobile device or pushcart, excluding canopies,
umbrellas or transparent enclosures, shall not exceed 5 feet.
   B.   All persons conducting business on a sidewalk must display in a
prominent and visible manner the license issued by the City Recorder under the
provisions of this chapter and conspicuously post the price of all items sold.
   C.   All persons conducting business on a sidewalk must pick up any paper,
cardboard, wood or plastic containers, wrappers or any litter in any form which
is deposited by any person on the sidewalk or street within 25 feet of the
place of conducting business.  Each person conducting business on a public
sidewalk under the provisions of this chapter shall carry a suitable container
for the placement of litter by customers or other persons.
   D.   All persons conducting business on a sidewalk shall obey any lawful
order of a police officer to move to a different permitted location to avoid
congestion or obstruction of the sidewalk or to remove his or her vending cart
entirely from the sidewalk if necessary to avoid congestion or obstruction.
   E.   No person shall conduct business as defined in this chapter at a
location other than that designated on his or her permit.
   F.   No permittee shall make any loud or unreasonable noise of any kind by
vocalization or otherwise for the purpose of advertising or attracting
attention to his or her wares.
   G.   No permitted cart or device shall be left unattended on a sidewalk nor
remain on the sidewalk between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   H.   No permittee shall conduct business in violation of the provision of
any ordinance providing for a special event.
§ 5.12.060   Permitted items.
   The City Administrator shall maintain a list of items which are approved for
sale from sidewalk vending carts.  Any item not on the list may be considered
for approval based on the following criteria:
   A.   All items or services to be sold must:
      1.   Be prepared in and vended from a vending cart;
      2.   Not lead to or cause congestion or blocking of pedestrian traffic on
the sidewalk;
      3.   Involve a short transaction period to complete the sale or render
the service;
      4.   Enhance business environments; and
      5.   Not cause undue noise or offensive odors.
   B.   Edible items must be immediately consumable, in addition to all
applicable requirements stated in division A. of this section.
   C.   Nonedible items, in addition to all applicable requirements stated in
division A. above, must:
      1.   Be easily carried by pedestrians; and
      2.   Not be prepackaged, pre-manufactured or previously handmade.
   D.   Requests to have an item or service considered for approval shall be
submitted in writing to the City Administrator, who shall determine whether the
item or service conforms to the above criteria.  If the item or service
conforms to the criteria, it shall be listed as approved for sale by sidewalk
vendors.  The decision of the City Administrator, if adverse to the party
making the request, may be appealed to the City Council.
§ 5.12.070   Special event designation.
   License shall not be required for sidewalk vendors during special events so
designated by the City Council.
§ 5.12.080   License denial, suspension or revocation.
   A.   The City Administrator may revoke or suspend the permit, or deny either
the issuance or renewal thereof, of any person to conduct business on the
sidewalks of the city, if he or she finds that:
      1.   The person has violated or failed to meet any of the provisions of
this chapter;
      2.   The cart operation has become detrimental to surrounding businesses
and/or the public, due to either appearance or condition of the cart;
      3.   Any required permit has been suspended, revoked or canceled; or
      4.   The permittee does not have a currently effective insurance policy
in the minimum amount provided in this chapter.
   B.   Upon denial, suspension or revocation, the City Administrator shall
give notice of the action to the license holder or applicant, as the case may
be, in writing, stating the action he or she has taken and the reasons
therefor.  If the action of the City Administrator is a revocation based on
divisions A.3 or A.4. of this section, the action shall be effective upon
giving the notice to the permittee.  Otherwise the notice shall contain the
further provision that it shall become final and effective within 20 days.  Any
revocation effective immediately may also be appealed to the City Council by
such filing within 10 days.  Any revocation, suspension or denial may be
appealed to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City
Recorder within 10 days of receipt of notification.
§ 5.12.090   Appeal.
   The City Recorder shall place the appeal on the Council calendar at the
first convenient opportunity therefor and shall notify the City Administrator
thereof.  At the hearing upon appeal the Council shall hear all witnesses,
including the City Administrator or his or her representative, who shall state
the grounds for this action, and the applicant or person whose permit has been
revoked or suspended may supply testimony in writing by witnesses or otherwise
and may question witnesses on his or her own behalf or on behalf of the city. 
The Council shall hear and determine the appeal, and the decision of the
Council shall be final and effective immediately.
§ 5.12.100   Penalty.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.  In the event
that any provision of this chapter is violated by a firm or corporation, the
officer or officers, or person or persons, responsible for the violation shall
be subject to the penalty herein provided.
§ 5.12.110   Violation a nuisance; summary abatement.
   The placement of any cart or device on any sidewalk in violation of the
provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.  The City
Administrator may cause the removal of any cart or device found on a sidewalk
in violation of this chapter and is authorized to store the cart or device
until the owner thereof redeems it by paying the removal and storage charges
therefor to be established by the City Administrator.
CHAPTER 5.16:  LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW
Section
   
5.16.010   Title and purpose.
   
5.16.020   Definitions.
   
5.16.030   License application
   
5.16.040   Chief of Police’s duties.
   
5.16.050   Hearing procedure.
   
5.16.060   Standards and criteria.
   
5.16.070   Reconsideration of applications.
§ 5.16.010   Title and purpose.
   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Liquor License
Review Chapter, and may also be referred to herein as this chapter.
   B.   The purposes of this chapter are to establish the principal criteria
which shall be considered by the Council and its designees, the Chief of
Police, in making recommendations to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission
concerning the granting, denying, modifying or renewing of all liquor licenses
for premises within the city limits and to establish a process, to be utilized
for the investigation of license applicants for the purpose of making recom-
mendations, that is fair, effective and efficient. This chapter is necessary to
ensure that all premises licensed to sell and dispense liquor in any form, meet
the high expectations of this community that all businesses are conducted in a
lawful manner that does not unreasonably disturb the peace and tranquility of
this city and its neighborhoods.
§ 5.16.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Application means the written request to the City Council to grant, modify
or renew a liquor license.
   Commission means the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.
   Special Retail Beer Licenses (SRB) means a temporary dispenser license,
issued by the Commission, pursuant to O.R.S. 471 and OAR 845-04-025(2) and (5),
for the purposes of serving beer or other malt beverage in exchange for some
financial consideration and as part of a picnic, convention, fair, civil or
community enterprise or similar special event, such as a spectator sports
event, musical concert or festival, and for which approval by the city must be
obtained.
   Special Retail Wine License (SRW) means a temporary dispenser license,
issued by the commission, pursuant to O.R.S. 471 and OAR 845-04-025(2) and (5),
for the purpose of serving wine or similarly regulated fermented beverage in
exchange for some financial consideration and as part of a picnic, convention,
fair, civic or community event, musical concert or festival, and for which
approval from the city must be obtained.
§ 5.16.030   License application.
   A.   Any person or business, requesting a city recommendation to the
Commission on a liquor license application shall make application upon suitable
forms, furnished by the city.
   B.   The application shall contain the following:
      1.   The type of license applied for and a description of the nature of
the business for which the application is made;
      2.   The name of the applicant, with address; if the business is a
partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the business is a
corporation, the name and address of the home office, and the name and address
of the designated agent in the state; if a foreign corporation, the name and
address of the local agent or representative who will be in charge of the
business in the city;
      3.   The address where the business will be located in the city;
      4.   The date of application;
      5.   Any other information the Council deems necessary for review;
      6.   A verification that the information submitted within the application
is true and accurate;
      7.   The signature of the applicant or agent making the application; and
      8.   The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee.  The
fees shall be non- refundable. These fees shall be set forth by resolution.
      9.   The applicant shall have a city business license, or have applied
for a license whose issuance is contingent upon obtaining a temporary or final
certificate of occupancy.
      10.   If the applicant for a temporary sales license can demonstrate that
it is organized and operating as a nonprofit organization, no application fee
to the city shall be required.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010; Am. Ord. 1454, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 5.16.040   Chief of Police’s duties.
   The city shall provide application forms and shall maintain a record of all
applications.  The Chief of Police shall coordinate and conduct an
investigation of each application for the purpose of determining what
recommendation shall be made by the Chief of Police to the Council or, in the
case of special retail beer and special retail wine licenses, to the
Commission.  The investigation may include those subjects contained in the
chapter of the city, as well as the statutes of the state.  The Chief of Police
may require the applicant to supply any relevant additional information to
determine the qualifications of the applicant.  Upon completion of the review
and for all applications except special retail beer and special retail wine
licenses, the Chief of Police shall make a recommendation to the City Council. 
For special retail beer and special retail wine licenses upon completion of
review, the Chief of Police shall determine and advise the applicant and the
Commission what the recommendation of the city shall be in accordance with the
standards, criteria and procedures contained in this chapter.
§ 5.16.050   Hearing procedure.
   A.   For all applications for which Council approval is required under this
chapter, and where the Chief of Police recommends approval of an application,
the matter will be scheduled as an agenda item at the next regular Council
meeting.
   B.   Prior to City Council consideration of a liquor license application, a
Council member may review the application and the investigation materials
gathered by the Chief of Police, but only to the extent that disclosure of the
application and investigation materials is not prohibited by law.  Upon the
request of a Council member or where the Chief of Police’s recommendation is
adverse to the application, by the applicant, a public hearing will be
scheduled.
   C.   Notice of public hearing before the Council shall be given in the
following manner:
      1.   The notice shall contain the business name of the applicant, the
location of the business, the nature of the license applied for, and the time
and location at which the hearing will take place.
      2.   Notice shall be mailed to the applicant or applicant’s agent at the
address shown on the application not less than 7 days before the date set for
the hearing.
      3.   Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city not less than 5 days before the date set for the hearing.
      4.   The public hearing shall be conducted as follows:
         a.   The Chief of Police shall present the police report.  Any other
written or oral evidence which is supportive of the Chief of Police’s
recommendation may also be presented at this time.
         b.   The applicant may present evidence and/or witnesses in support of
the application.
         c.   Interested members of the public shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence or testimony bearing upon the application, whether the
evidence is supportive or adverse to the application.
         d.   The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to rebut evidence
presented in opposition to the application.
         e.   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted, if it is the type of
evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to relying on in the
conduct of their serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any law or
rule which might make improper the admission of the evidence over objection in
civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.  Evidence of
past transactions and occurrences shall not be excluded solely on the basis of
having occurred in the past and may be relied upon by the Council in making its
recommendation. However, irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded.
      5.   In the case of special retail beer and special retail wine license
applications, after due consideration of all pertinent information, the Chief
of Police shall make a recommendation.  The recommendation shall be based on
substantial evidence relative to the criteria in this chapter, O.R.S. Chapter
471 and the public health, safety and welfare. The Chief of Police may attach
reasonable conditions upon the recommendation, which conditions shall be
consistent with the purposes of this chapter.  Where the Chief of Police
recommends approval of an application, the City Administrator shall cause the
applicant to be notified of the recommendation.  Where the Chief of Police’s
recommendation is for denial or otherwise adverse to the applicant, it may be
appealed to the City Council in accordance with the procedures provided in this
section.
§ 5.16.060   Standards and criteria.
   A.   The Council shall make its recommendation for approval, denial or
modification of the liquor license application based on the Council’s
evaluation of the relevant standards and criteria, as set forth herein.  The
applicant shall be held strictly accountable for the conditions of the
premises. 
   B.   The Council may recommend against the applicant if any of the following
conditions exist:
      1.   The application is incomplete;
      2.   The applicant neglects or refuses to provide in a timely manner any
information reasonably requested by the Chief of Police or City Council;
      3.   The applicant provides false or misleading information to the Chief
of Police, City Council or to any city employee;
      4.    The applicant does not possess a current city business license nor
applied for one when new construction is involved;
      5.   The zoning district in which the applicant proposes to locate the
business does not allow the business either as a permitted or conditional use;
      6.   The record of the applicant shows a conviction(s) of criminal law(s)
or ordinance(s) connected in time, place and manner with a liquor
establishment;
      7.   The applicant has maintained or allowed to exist an establishment
which creates or is a public nuisance under the ordinances of the city or laws
of the state, or in which any violations of the provisions of the city,
ordinances or federal or state law relating to minors, gambling, obscenity,
controlled substances, prostitution or alcoholic beverages, or O.R.S. Chapters
163, 164, 165 or 166 have occurred, or which creates an increase in disorderly
or violent acts, litter, noise, vandalism, vehicular or pedestrian traffic
congestion or other location problems in the reasonable proximity of the
premises;
      8.   The applicant’s premises are not maintained in reasonable repair,
both interior and exterior, and kept clean and free of litter, rubbish and
dirt;
      9.   In the case of an application for a new license or for an increase
in liquor selling or dispensing privilege, there are sufficient licensed
premises in the locality set out in the application and the license is not
demanded by public interest or convenience;
      10.   The licensing of the premises would not be in the best interest of
the community because of a history of illegal activities, altercations, noisy
conduct or other disturbances in or around the premises;
      11.   The applicant has demonstrated an unwillingness or inability to
cooperate with city agencies and/or neighbors in resolving community disputes
relating to a licensed establishment; or
      12.   The applicant’s premises place unreasonable, excessive demand on
city services, including law enforcement.
(Am. Ord. 1454, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 5.16.070   Reconsideration of applications.
   A.   After having made a recommendation other than favorable on any license
application, the Council shall not consider any new application for the same
location by the same or substantially the same applicant for a period of at
least 6 months, except as otherwise provided herein.
   B.   If the Chief of Police reasonably believes that the conditions which
caused the Council to make a recommendation, other than a favorable
recommendation, have substantially changed and no court or administrative
appeal of the license is pending, then the Chief of Police may reconsider and/
or resubmit the application to the Council.
TITLE 6:  ANIMALS
   Chapter
      
6.04   ANIMALS GENERALLY
      
6.08   ANIMAL NUISANCES
CHAPTER 6.04:  ANIMALS GENERALLY
Section
   
6.04.010   Definitions.
   
6.04.020   Keeping of certain animals prohibited.
   
6.04.030   Special permits.
   
6.04.040   Penalty.
   
6.04.050   Civil remedy.
   
6.04.060   Special permit fee.
§ 6.04.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Animals means all nonhuman living creatures, including bees and chickens,
but excepting small fish and domestic pets.
   Domestic Pets means dogs, cats, rabbits, small birds, hamsters and similar
domesticated rodents.
§ 6.04.020   Keeping of certain animals prohibited.
   Except for domestic pets and except as otherwise provided in §
6.04.030, the keeping of animals in the city is prohibited.
§ 6.04.030   Special permits.
   Special permits for the keeping of other than domestic pets may be granted
administratively by the City Administrator on terms and conditions and for
periods of time as may be determined by the Administrator.  Application for
these permits shall be filed with the City Administrator for review and
determination.  A decision of the Administrator allowing a permit may be
appealed to the City Council.  The Council may hold a public hearing on the
appeal after notice of the hearing is given in the usual manner provided for
public hearings.
§ 6.04.040   Penalty.
   Any person keeping an animal in the city without a special permit, or in
violation of a special permit, shall be deemed guilty of a violation, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished accordingly.
§ 6.04.050   Civil remedy.
   The city may institute an appropriate court suit to enjoin violations or
threatened violations of this chapter, and in that case, shall be entitled to
recover from the defendant(s) in the suit its reasonable attorneys’ fees to be
fixed by the trial court, and a further sum for attorneys’ fees as may be fixed
by the appellate court in case of an appeal.
§ 6.04.060   Special permit fee.
   The permit fee for the special animal permit shall be set forth by
resolution.
(Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
CHAPTER 6.08:  ANIMAL NUISANCES
Section
   
6.08.010   Definitions.
   
6.08.020   Running at large.
   
6.08.030   Noises.
   
6.08.040   Housing.
   
6.08.045   Offensive littering by an animal.
   
6.08.050   Dangerous animals.
   
6.08.060   Summarily seizing certain animals.
   
6.08.070   Impoundment regulations.
   
6.08.080   Record of impoundment.
   
6.08.090   Complaint, summons and hearing.
   
6.08.100   Abatement.
   
6.08.110   Penalty.
§ 6.08.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Animal means any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male
and female, singular and plural.
   At Large means off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animal or
fowl, and not under the immediate control of the owner or custodian.
   Ferae Naturae means animals which are by nature wild as distinguished from
animals which are by nature tame.
   Fowl means any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female,
singular and plural.
§ 6.08.020   Running at large.
   Animals and fowl are not to be permitted to run at large.  No person owning
or having in his or her custody animals or fowl shall permit same to go at
large to the injury or annoyance of others, nor shall the animals or fowl be
permitted at large upon the streets or the public ways of the city.  This
action is declared to be a nuisance and danger to the public health and safety.
§ 6.08.030   Noises.
   It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal or fowl which disturbs the
peace by noises at any time of day or night.
§ 6.08.040   Housing.
   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal or fowl
is or may be kept to become unclean, unwholesome or unsanitary.  The premises
shall not be in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor.
§ 6.08.045   Offensive littering by an animal.
   Any person in control of an animal which defecates on the property of
another without permission of the property owner, upon any public way as
defined in O.R.S. 164.805(2) or upon public parks property commits the offense
of permitting offensive littering by an animal, if the person fails to promptly
remove and properly dispose of the animal waste.
§ 6.08.050   Dangerous animals.
   No animal which is ferae naturae and may be dangerous to the public health
or safety shall be permitted within the corporate city limits unless prior
approval is obtained from the City Council.  Before approval is given, the
Council must find that proper precautions will be taken to ensure the public
health and safety.
§ 6.08.060   Summarily seizing certain animals.
   Any member of the Police Department or animal control officer of the city is
authorized to summarily seize any animal or fowl he or she believes is
dangerous, which is found running at large in violation of §
6.08.020, or which has injured any person within the corporate city limits. 
The seized animal or fowl shall be delivered to the pound for impounding, or
otherwise confined.
§ 6.08.070   Impoundment regulations.
   A.   Whenever an animal or fowl is impounded under the authority of this
chapter and the owner or keeper of the animal or fowl is known, he or she shall
be given notice of the impounding by personal service or by mailing the notice
to the owner’s or keeper’s last known address.  The owner or keeper of the
animal or fowl shall have 5 days from the date of notice to claim the animal or
fowl and pay the redemption fee provided in this chapter.  If he or she fails
to claim the animal or fowl within that time and pay the fees provided in this
chapter, the animal or fowl shall be disposed of as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Whenever an animal or fowl is impounded under the authority of this
chapter and the owner or keeper thereof is unknown, a notice shall forthwith be
posted in 3 public places in or about the city.  The notice shall contain a
general description of the impounded animal or fowl, showing breed, sex, color
and markings, and shall designate the date on which the described animal or
fowl shall be disposed of unless sooner claimed and redeemed.  The date shall
be not less than 5 days after impounding the animal or fowl.  If no claim or
redemption by the owner or keeper of the described animal or fowl is made
within the time fixed by the notice, the animal or fowl shall be disposed of as
provided in this chapter.
   C.   Any animals or fowl impounded for having injured a person shall not be
released until after expiration of a 5-day period to allow an appropriate
health check.  Any animal or fowl impounded under authority of this chapter may
not be released to the owner or keeper thereof until payment to the City
Recorder or his or her authorized agent or to the county dog services (in cases
of impounded dogs) a fee and/or charge for administrative costs which may be
changed from time to time by resolution of the City Council, plus the actual
costs of boarding the animal or fowl.
   D.   If an impounded animal or fowl is not claimed by its owner or keeper
within the time limits fixed in this section, it may be released to any person
on payment to the City Recorder or his or her authorized agent or to the county
dog pound (in case of impounded dogs) of the fees and charges fixed in division
C. of this section.
   E.   If no claim or redemption by the owner or keeper of the described
animal or fowl is made within the time fixed by the applicable notice, and if
no person claims the impounded animal or fowl pursuant to division D. of this
section, the animal or fowl shall be sold, given away or humanely killed at the
expiration of that time.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 6.08.080   Record of impoundment.
   The Police Department or animal control officer shall make in triplicate a
detailed record of each animal or fowl impounded, showing the date and time
impounded, description of the animal or fowl, name and address of the owner or
keeper if known, and the name and address of the person to whom the animal or
fowl is released, date of release, or date and method of other disposal.  The
original of these records shall be retained with the pound, and the duplicate
copy shall be kept by the Police Department or animal control officer and the
triplicate copy shall be filed with the City Recorder.
§ 6.08.090   Complaint, summons and hearing.
   Whenever a duly verified complaint alleging a violation of §§
6.08.020,
6.08.030,
6.08.040 or
6.08.050 is filed with the Municipal Judge, it shall be the duty of the
Municipal Judge immediately to issue a summons and to deliver the summons,
together with a copy of the complaint, to the Chief of Police to be served upon
the person alleged to be permitting or maintaining the nuisance, which summons
shall require the person alleged to be permitting or maintaining the nuisance
to appear before the Municipal Judge within 7 days and file his or her answer,
showing cause and reasons if any he or she has, as to why the nuisance should
not be summarily abated.  The Municipal Judge shall determine the matter at the
earliest possible date after the answer is filed  and  if  the  person 
charged  with  maintaining the nuisance shall be found by the Municipal Judge
to be maintaining the same as charged in the complaint or to be maintaining the
nuisance in any manner violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the
Municipal Judge shall enter judgment directing abatement of the nuisance and as
part of the judgment shall assess to the person found guilty of maintaining the
nuisance the cost of the action.
§ 6.08.100   Abatement.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to execute any judgment
which may be entered by the Municipal Judge in the manner of abating any
nuisance as provided in §
6.08.090. 
      1.   In cases where the judgment requires the Chief of Police to abate a
nuisance created by a dog, the Chief of Police shall seize the dog and deliver
the same to the county pound master along with the instructions necessary to
carry out the judgment as ordered by the court.
      2.   In the event the judgment of the Municipal Judge shall require the
abatement of any nuisance caused by any fowl, cat, horse, cow or other animal,
the Chief of Police shall seize the fowl or animal and appoint a keeper who
shall cause the fowl or animal to be confined in an appropriate place, either
within or without the corporate limits of the city, where the annoyance
complained of will not be continued, and shall immediately advertise the fowl
or animal for sale to the highest bidder.  The purchaser shall agree in writing
to keep the fowl or animal in conformance with this chapter, and the proceeds
of the sale shall be applied by the Chief of Police as follows:
         a.   To the payment of any cost which may be incurred in the municipal
court in the matter of the action for abatement of the nuisance;
         b.   Any cost which the Chief of Police or keeper appointed by him or
her may incur in caring for the fowl or animal and in selling the same; and
         c.   The surplus, if any, shall be delivered by the Chief of Police to
the owner of the fowl or animal from whom the same was seized.
   B.   In addition to the remedies provided in division A. of this section,
whenever a duly verified complaint is filed with the Municipal Judge charging
that a nuisance is being maintained in violation of §
6.08.040, the Municipal Judge may issue a notice and deliver the same to the
Chief of Police directed to the person charged with maintaining the nuisance,
requiring the person to abate the same within 7 days from the date of service
of the notice.  In the event the person alleged to be maintaining the nuisance
fails to abate the same within 7 days, the Municipal Judge shall process the
complaint which was previously filed in the Municipal Court against the person
and cause the person alleged to be maintaining the nuisance to be arrested and
brought before him or her for hearing.  At the hearing, if the person shall be
found guilty as charged in the complaint, the person shall be punished as
provided in §
6.08.110.
§ 6.08.110   Penalty.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation punishable as provided by
Chapter 1.08.
TITLE 7
(RESERVED)
 
TITLE 8:  HEALTH AND SAFETY
   Chapter
      
8.04   GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
      
8.12   NUISANCES
      
8.14   AGRICULTURAL USE PROTECTION
      
8.16   FIRE PREVENTION CODE
      
8.20   ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 8.04:  GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
8.04.010   Definitions.
   
8.04.020   Business recycling required.
   
8.04.030   Garbage containers required.
   
8.04.040   Burning of garbage; unauthorized accumulations.
   
8.04.050   Hauling garbage.
   
8.04.060   Garbage dumping ground.
   
8.04.070   Service rates.
   
8.04.080   Proper disposal of garbage required.
   
8.04.090   Disposal of garbage by private person.
   
8.04.100   Collection by contractor.
   
8.04.110   Penalty.
   
8.04.120   Outdoor burning of certain types of waste.
§ 8.04.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Business means any entity or 1 or more persons, corporate or otherwise,
engaged in commercial, professional, charitable, political, industrial,
educational or other activity that is non-residential in nature, including
public bodies. This definition does not apply to home based businesses.
   Contractor means a person or persons, corporation, partnership or other
entity who is a party to a garbage collection contract with the city.
   Garbage means all refuse and solid wastes, including ashes, rubbish, tin
cans, debris generally, dead animals, street cleanings and industrial wastes,
and things ordinarily and customarily discarded and dumped for the purpose of
promoting the cleanliness and health of the city and its residents, but not
including sewage and body waste.
   Premises means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft or
parts thereof upon or in which garbage is stored.
   Source-separated or source-separate means that the person who last uses
recyclable material separates the recyclable material from other solid waste.
(Am. Ord. 1319, passed 11-18-2009)
§ 8.04.020   Business recycling required.
   All businesses within the city shall comply with waste prevention, recycling
and composting requirements as set forth in this chapter.
   A.   Businesses will source-separate all recyclable paper, cardboard, glass
and plastic bottles and jars, and metal cans for reuse or recycling.
   B.   Businesses will ensure the provision of recycling receptacles for
internal and/or external maintenance or work areas where recyclable materials
are collected, stored or both.
   C.   Businesses will post accurate signs:
      1.   Describing the location where recyclable materials are collected,
stored or both;
      2.   Identifying the materials the business must source-separate for
reuse or recycling; and
      3.   Providing recycling instructions.
   D.   Persons and entities that own, manage or operate premises with business
tenants and that provide garbage collection service to those business tenants,
shall provide recycling collection systems adequate to enable the business
tenants to comply with the requirements of divisions A., B. and C. of this
section.
(Ord. 1319, passed 11-18-2009)
§ 8.04.030   Garbage containers required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or in control of
any dwelling, apartment house, trailer camp, restaurant, place of business or
manufacturing establishment where garbage is created or accumulated to fail at
all times to keep portable cans or containers of standard type and construction
and to deposit the garbage therein; provided, however, that stiff paper
products and wooden or metal waste matter may remain outside of cans or
containers, if neatly and orderly stored.  The cans or containers shall be
strong, water-tight, rodent-proof, insect-proof and comply with the current
garbage franchise.  The cans or containers shall be kept tightly closed at all
times except when being emptied or filled and shall be kept and maintained at a
place or places  reasonably accessible to garbage haulers at first floor or
ground level.
§ 8.04.040   Burning of garbage; unauthorized accumulations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn, dump, collect, remove or in any
other manner accumulate or dispose of garbage upon any street, alley, public
place or private property within the city, otherwise than as provided in this
chapter.  Any unauthorized accumulation of garbage on any  premises  is
declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing
accumulation of garbage within 30 days after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 8.04.050   Hauling garbage.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to haul garbage upon the streets and
public thoroughfares of the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul garbage to any place in the city
other than that designated by the City Council.
§ 8.04.060   Garbage dumping ground.
   The City Council has fixed or shall fix and designate by ordinance from time
to time a garbage dumping ground, at which designated place all garbage
produced or accumulated in the city shall be dumped, except garbage to be used
for agricultural and feeding purposes.  All persons depositing garbage on the
garbage dumping grounds shall follow rules and regulations established by the
City Council and pay dumping fees as established by the City Council.  The
rules, regulations and fees shall be reasonable and not discriminatory.
§ 8.04.070   Service rates.
   The rates and compensation for the service rendered by the contract garbage
hauler shall be reasonable and uniform and shall not be in excess of a schedule
of charges and compensation to be fixed by the contract.  The rates and charges
may be changed from time to time after negotiations with the contractor.
§ 8.04.080   Proper disposal of garbage required.
   All persons in the city are required to dispose of all perishable garbage
before the same shall have become offensive; to dispose of all nonperishable
garbage promptly and not permit the same to accumulate on or about the
premises; to dispose of the same by burning, burying or in a manner as shall
not create a nuisance and as permitted by this chapter, or by hauling or
causing the same to be hauled to the garbage dump designated by the City
Council.
§ 8.04.090   Disposal of garbage by private person.
   Any person may transport garbage produced by himself or herself of itself
upon the streets of the city, provided that the garbage must be hauled in a
manner as to prevent leakage or litter upon the streets and must be deposited
upon the designated dumping grounds or as permitted by this chapter.  The
manner and place of dumping shall be as designated by the person in charge of
the dumping ground.  Any person dumping garbage pursuant to this section shall
pay a dumping fee, which shall be reasonable and uniform and shall not be in
excess of a schedule of charges to be adopted from time to time by resolution
of the City Council.
§ 8.04.100   Collection by contractor.
   Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation other than a person, firm or corporation under contract
with the city to collect, gather and haul garbage over the streets of the city.
(Am. Ord. 1399, passed 6-4-2014)
§ 8.04.110   Penalty.
   Any person violating any of the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in the municipal court or upon a plea of guilty before the court, be subject to
a fine not exceeding $500.
§ 8.04.120   Outdoor burning of certain types of waste.
   A.   Prohibited.  No person shall kindle, maintain or allow to be maintained
an open outdoor fire, bonfire, rubbish fire or garbage fire; nor shall any
person kindle, maintain or allow to be maintained a fire for the purpose of
burning grass, wet garbage, plastics, wire insulation, automobile parts,
asphalt, petroleum products, including gasoline, petroleum treated materials,
rubber products, animal remains or animal and vegetable matter resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking or service of food or any other material
which normally emits dense smoke or nauseous odors.
   B.   Accumulation of Combustible Material a Nuisance.  No person shall
accumulate or allow to accumulate combustible materials which in the judgment
of the Fire Marshal constitute a fire hazard. Any such accumulation is a
nuisance and subject to abatement as provided in this code.
   C.   Enforcement.  Any burning in violation of this section may be
extinguished by the Fire Department or Police Department.  Fire Department or
Police Department personnel may enter upon the property of persons in order to
extinguish any fire burning in violation of this section.
   D.   Penalty.  Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of
this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, to be imposed by
the Municipal Judge of the city.
(Ord. 975, passed 8-20-1997)
CHAPTER 8.12:  NUISANCES
Section
   
8.12.010   Definitions.
   
8.12.020   Communicable diseases in animals or birds.
   
8.12.030   Nuisances affecting public health.
   
8.12.040   Abandoned iceboxes.
   
8.12.050   Attractive nuisances.
   
8.12.060   Weeds and noxious growth.
   
8.12.070   Scattering rubbish.
   
8.12.080   Fences.
   
8.12.090   Surface waters and drainage.
   
8.12.100   Radio and television interference.
   
8.12.110   Notices and advertisements.
   
8.12.120   Declaration of nuisance; general nuisance.
   
8.12.130   Abatement notice.
   
8.12.140   Abatement by owner.
   
8.12.150   Abatement by city.
   
8.12.160   Assessment of costs.
   
8.12.170   Summary abatement.
   
8.12.180   Penalty.
   
8.12.190   Separate violations.
§ 8.12.010   Definitions.
   A.   Except where the context indicates otherwise, the singular number
includes the plural, and the masculine gender includes the feminine. 
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      Person in Charge of Property means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser or person, other than the owner, having possession or control of the
property.
      Public Place means a building, place or accommodation, whether publicly
or privately owned, open and available to the general public.
      Superintendent of Public Works means the Superintendent of Public Works
or person authorized by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 8.12.020   Communicable diseases in animals or birds.
   No person may permit an animal or bird owned or controlled by him or her to
be at large within the city if the animal or bird is afflicted with a
communicable disease.
§ 8.12.030   Nuisances affecting public health.
   A.   No person may permit or cause a nuisance affecting public health. 
   B.   The following are nuisances affecting the public health and may be
abated as provided in this chapter:
      1.   Privies.  An open vault or privy constructed and maintained within
the city, except those constructed or maintained in connection with
construction projects in accordance with the Oregon Department of Environmental
Quality regulations;
      2.   Debris on Private Property.  Ac- cumulations of debris, rubbish,
manure and other refuse located on private property that are not removed within
a reasonable time and that affect the health, safety or welfare of the city;
      3.   Stagnant Water.  Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for
mosquitoes and other insect pests;
      4.   Water Pollution.  Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream
or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or
near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the
water;
      5.   Food.  Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human
consumption;
      6.   Odor.  Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause
an offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition; and
      7.   Surface Drainage.  Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises.
§ 8.12.040   Abandoned iceboxes.
   No person may leave in a place accessible to children an abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or similar container which has an
airtight door with a snap lock, lock or other mechanism which may not be
released for opening from the inside, without first removing the lock or door
from the icebox, refrigerator or similar container.
§ 8.12.050   Attractive nuisances.
   A.   No owner or person in charge of property may permit:
      1.   Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices on the property
which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;
      2.   Lumber, logs or piling placed or stored on the property in a manner
so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children; or
      3.   An open pit, quarry, cistern or other excavation without erecting
adequate safeguards or barriers to prevent these places from being used by
children.
   B.   This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects if,
during the course of construction, reasonable safeguards are maintained to
prevent injury or death to playing children.
§ 8.12.060   Weeds and noxious growth.
   No owner or person in charge of property may permit weeds or other noxious
vegetation to grow upon his or her property.  It shall be the duty of an owner
or person in charge of property to cut down or to destroy weeds or other
noxious vegetation as often as needed in order to prevent the weeds or noxious
vegetation from becoming unsightly or from becoming a fire hazard or from
maturing or going to seed.
§ 8.12.070   Scattering rubbish.
   No person may throw, dump or deposit upon public or private property an
injurious or offensive substance or any kind of rubbish, trash, debris or
refuse, or any substance which would mar the appearance, create a stench or
detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property, or would be likely to
injure an animal, vehicle or person traveling upon a public way.
§ 8.12.080   Fences.
   A.   No person may construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence or allow barbed
wire to remain as a part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way, unless the
wire is placed not less than 6 inches above the top of a board or picket fence
which is not less than 6 feet high.
   B.   No person may install, maintain or operate an electric fence along a
street or sidewalk, or along the adjoining property line of another person.
§ 8.12.090   Surface waters and drainage.
   A.   No owner or person in charge of any building or structure may suffer or
permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a
street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk.
   B.   The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in
a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that any
overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried
across or upon the sidewalk.
§ 8.12.100   Radio and television interference.
   A.   No person may operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device
apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable
interference with radio or television reception; provided that the radio or
television receiver interfered with is of good engineering design.
   B.   This section does not apply to electrical and radio devices licensed,
approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission.
§ 8.12.110   Notices and advertisements.
   A.   No person may affix or cause to be distributed any placard, bill,
advertisement or poster of a commercial nature upon real or personal property,
public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person
in control of the property.  This section shall not be construed as an
amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the city
regulating the use of and the location of signs and advertising.
   B.   No person, either as principal or agent, may scatter, distribute or
cause to be scattered or distributed on public or private property any
placards, advertisements or other similar material of a commercial nature.
   C.   This section does not prohibit the distribution of advertising material
during a parade or approved public gathering.
§ 8.12.120   Declaration of nuisance; general nuisance.
   A.   The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in
§§
8.12.020 through
8.12.110 are declared to be public nuisances; and any person who commits any
act or permits, creates or maintains any condition which is defined by this
chapter as a public nuisance shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
8.12.180.  Also, all acts, conditions or objects defined and declared by this
chapter to be a public nuisance may be abated by any of the procedures set
forth in §§
8.12.130 through
8.12.170.
   B.   In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within this
chapter, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the Council
to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the
city is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this
chapter.
§ 8.12.130   Abatement notice.
   A.   Upon determination by the Superintendent of Public Works that a
nuisance as defined in this chapter or any other ordinance of the city exists,
the Superintendent of Public Works shall forthwith cause a notice to be posted
on the premises where the nuisance exists, directing the owner or person in
charge of the property to abate the nuisance.
   B.   At the time of posting, the City Recorder shall cause a copy of the
notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the
owner or person in charge of the property at the last known address of the
owner or other person.
   C.   The notice to abate shall contain:
      1.   A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise,
on which the nuisance exists;
      2.   A  direction to abate the nuisance within 10 days from the date of
the notice;
      3.   A description of the nuisance;
      4.   A statement that unless the nuisance is removed, the city may abate
the nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the property;
and
      5.   A statement that the owner or other person in charge of the property
may protest the abatement by giving notice to the City Recorder within 10 days
from the date of the notice.
   D.   If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall
be sent to the owner by certified mail, additionally stating that the cost of
abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a
lien on the property.
   E.   Upon completion of the posting and mailing the person posting and
mailing the notice shall execute and file a certificate stating the date and
place of the mailing and posting.
   F.   An error in the name or address of the owner or person in charge of the
property, or the use of a name other than that of the owner or other person,
shall not make the notice void, and in such a case the posted notice shall be
sufficient.
§ 8.12.140   Abatement by owner.
   A.   Within 10 days after the posting and mailing of the notice as provided
in §
8.12.130, the owner or person in charge of the property shall remove the
nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.
   B.   The owner or person in charge protesting that no nuisance exists shall
file with the City Recorder a written statement which shall specify the basis
for so protesting.
   C.   The statement shall be referred to the Council as a part of the
Council’s regular agenda at the next succeeding meeting.  At the time set for
consideration of the abatement, the owner or other person may appear and be
heard by the Council and the Council shall thereupon determine whether or not a
nuisance in fact exists and that determination shall be entered in the official
minutes of the Council.  Council determination shall be required only in those
cases where a written statement has been filed as provided.
   D.   If the Council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the owner
or other person shall, within 10 days after the Council determination, abate
the nuisance.
§ 8.12.150   Abatement by city.
   A.   If within the time allowed the nuisance has not been abated by the
owner or person in charge of the property, the Superintendent of Public Works
may cause the nuisance to be abated.
   B.   The officer charged with abatement of the nuisance shall have the right
at reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the
removal of a nuisance.
   C.   The City Recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred
by the city in abating the nuisance and shall include therein a charge of 20%
of the expense for administrative overhead.
§ 8.12.160   Assessment of costs.
   A.   The City Recorder, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid,
shall forward to the owner or person in charge of the property a notice
stating:
      1.   The total cost of abatement including the administrative overhead;
      2.   That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien
against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;
and
      3.   That if the owner or person in charge of the property objects to the
cost of the abatement as indicated, he or she may file a notice of objection
with the City Recorder not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.
   B.   Upon the expiration of 10 days after the date of the notice the
Council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and determine the
objections to the costs to be assessed.
   C.   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date
of the notice, an assessment of the costs as stated or as determined by the
Council shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the
docket of city liens, and upon the entry being made shall constitute a lien
upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.
   D.   The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street
improvements are enforced, and shall bear interest at the current rate of
interest as determined by the Council. The interest shall commence to run from
the date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.
   E.   An error in the name of the owner or person in charge of the property
shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the
proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid
lien against the property.
§ 8.12.170   Summary abatement.
   The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive but is in addition
to procedures provided by other ordinances, and the Health Officer, the Chief
of the Fire Department and Chief of Police may proceed summarily to abate a
health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and from which there is
imminent danger to human life or property.
§ 8.12.180   Penalty.
   A person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by  a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 8.12.190   Separate violations.
   A.   Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a
separate offense.
   B.   The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this
chapter, but is an additional remedy.  The imposition of a penalty does not
relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance.
CHAPTER 8.14:  AGRICULTURAL USE PROTECTION
Section
   
8.14.010   Short title.
   
8.14.020   Purpose.
   
8.14.030   Definitions.
   
8.14.040   Protecting agricultural uses within the urban growth boundary (UGB).
   
8.14.050   Protecting agricultural uses outside the UGB.
   
8.14.060   Change in UGB.
   
8.14.070   Land use decisions.
   
8.14.080   Complaints by nonagricultural users.
§ 8.14.010   Short title.
   This chapter may be cited as the Canby Agricultural Use Protection Ordinance
or this chapter.
§ 8.14.020   Purpose.
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect agriculturally based,
economically productive activities of the city in order to assure the continued
health, safety and prosperity of its residents.  Agricultural uses sometimes
offend, annoy, interfere with or otherwise affect others located on or near
agricultural lands.  The city has concluded that persons located on or near
agricultural land must accept the conditions commonly associated with accepted
agricultural uses.
   B.   This chapter is intended to limit the availability of remedies based on
nuisance or trespass, complaint procedures, rights of action and claims for
relief over which the city has jurisdiction, when they otherwise would either
have an adverse impact on agricultural uses which the city seeks to protect, or
would impair full use of the agricultural base within the city.
   C.   This chapter is to provide a basis for intergovernmental agreements
with Clackamas County regarding agricultural uses abutting the city’s urban
growth boundary (UGB).
§ 8.14.030   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Agricultural Use means any current or future generally accepted farming,
ranching, nursery, or forest practice or facility conducted in compliance with
applicable city land use ordinances.  Agricultural Use does not include:
      1.   Knowingly growing unlawful, infested, infected or diseased plants or
animals; or
      2.   Trespass which involves actual physical intrusion onto the property
of another by a person or by a person’s animals.
   Facility means any real or personal property, including appurtenances
thereto and fixtures thereon, associated with a given use.
   Farming Practice means the cultivation, growing, harvesting, processing or
selling of plants of any kind which lawfully may be grown, possessed and sold,
including, but not limited to Christmas trees and nursery stock.  Other
commonly accepted agricultural practices currently in operation within the UGB,
as of the effective date of Ord. 956, would be grandfathered-in.
   Forest Practice has the meaning given that term by O.R.S. 527.620.
   Generally Accepted means either:
      1.   A practice or facility which is conducted or used in compliance with
applicable federal and state laws; or
      2.   If there is no applicable federal or state law, a practice or
facility which an average person in the city who is a grower or producer
regularly involved in the same type of agricultural use would reasonably expect
to occur or exist in a truly rural setting.  The City Council may, as it deems
necessary, establish agricultural user peer review boards consisting of 5
persons who regularly are involved in an agricultural use within the county, 3
of whom regularly are involved in the same type of agricultural use in
question, to advise the Council as to generally accepted practices of
facilities with respect to that agricultural use.
   Nonagricultural use means any facility, activity, or other use of land which
does not constitute an agricultural use, including but not limited to
residential use.
§ 8.14.040   Protecting agricultural uses within the urban growth boundary
(UGB).
   A.   No agricultural use occurring within an urban growth boundary shall be
declared to be a public or private nuisance or trespass, support any complaint
procedure or give rise to a claim for relief in favor of or to protect the
interests of nonagricultural uses or any persons or property associated
therewith, to the extent that the right, proceeding or claim would arise under
an ordinance of the inherent authority of the city.
   B.   This section applies:
      1.   Regardless of the location of the purportedly affected
nonagricultural use;
      2.   Only if the agricultural use predated the purportedly affected
nonagricultural use; and
      3.   Only if the agricultural use has not significantly increased in size
or intensity after either the effective date of Ord. 956 or the date on which
the applicable UGB is changed to include the subject agricultural use within
its limits, whichever date is later.  However, if the change is mandated by
law, this section shall apply.
   C.   Approved nonagricultural uses that antedate and abut agricultural uses
in the UGB would be responsible for adequate, 6-foot high cyclone fencing to
prohibit trespass.
§ 8.14.050   Protecting agricultural uses outside the UGB.
   A.   While realizing only the county has jurisdiction on agricultural uses
outside the city UGB, long-range planning dictates that the City of Canby and
Clackamas County develop intergovernmental agreements to protect agricultural
uses where city and county interests meet.  The city is interested in
protecting county agricultural uses from public or private nuisance or
trespass, or support any complaint procedure, or give rise to a claim for
relief in favor of, or to protect the interests of nonagricultural uses or any
persons or property associated therewith, to the extent that the right,
proceeding or claim would arise under an ordinance or the inherent authority of
the city.
   B.   This section applies when:
      1.   The location of the purportedly affected nonagricultural use abuts
county land;
      2.   Only if the agricultural use predated  the  purportedly  affected 
nonagricultural use; and
      3.   Whether the agricultural use or nonagricultural use has undergone
any change or interruption.
§ 8.14.060   Change in UGB.
   To the extent permissible under state law, if an urban growth boundary is
changed in such a way as to place an agricultural use either inside or outside
the boundary, §
8.14.050 applies with respect to any conflict between an agricultural use and
nonagricultural use.
§ 8.14.070   Land use decisions.
   The fact that the city’s comprehensive plan, zoning ordinances and land use
decisions may allow the siting, development or support of any particular use
does not negate the provisions of this chapter intended to protect an
agricultural use.
§ 8.14.080   Complaints by nonagricultural users.
   Any persons engaged in a nonagricultural use are deemed on notice that the
city will not act on complaints involving an agricultural use protected under
this chapter, wherever located, so long as the agricultural use complies with
applicable provisions of federal and state laws and this chapter.
CHAPTER 8.16:  FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Section
   
8.16.010   Adoption of Fire Code.
   
8.16.020   Establishment and duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   
8.16.030   Definitions.
   
8.16.040   Storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside, aboveground
tanks; where prohibited.
   
8.16.050   Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases; restrictions.
   
8.16.060   Storage of explosives and blasting agents; where prohibited.
   
8.16.070   Penalty.
   
8.16.080   Nonliability for damages.
§ 8.16.010   Adoption of Fire Code.
   There is adopted by the City Council, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the State of Oregon Fire Code Amendments
based on International Fire Code, save and except those portions of the code as
are deleted, modified or amended in this chapter.  Not fewer than 3 copies of
the Fire Code as adopted in this section, are to be kept on file in the office
of the city’s Fire Department, and 1 copy of the Fire Code shall be kept on
file in the office of the Building Official as a part of this chapter.  The
State of Oregon Fire Code Amendments based on International Fire Code are
adopted by reference as if the same were fully set out at length in this
chapter; and from the effective date of this chapter shall take effect, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Am. Ord. 1523, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 8.16.020   Establishment and duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   A.   The Fire and Life Safety Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Fire Department of the city, which is established and which
shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
   B.   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as  shall from time to time be necessary.
§ 8.16.030   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Chief of the Bureau of Fire (Prevention) shall mean either Fire Chief or
Fire Marshal.
   Corporation Counsel, whenever used in the Fire and Life Safety Code, shall
mean the attorney for the city.
   Jurisdiction, whenever used in the Fire and Life Safety Code, shall mean the
City of Canby, Clackamas County, State of Oregon.
§ 8.16.040   Storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside,
aboveground tanks; where prohibited.
   A.   The outside, aboveground storage of flammable or combustible liquids,
as defined in the Fire and Life Safety Code, is prohibited in all areas of the
city which are zoned for commercial development.
   B.   The development of new bulk plants for flammable or combustible
liquids, as defined in the Fire and Life Safety Code, is prohibited in all
areas of the city which are zoned for residential or commercial development.
§ 8.16.050   Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases; restrictions.
   The limits referred to in the Fire and Life Safety Code, in which bulk
storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are established as including
all areas of the city which are zoned for commercial development.
§ 8.16.060   Storage of explosives and blasting agents; where prohibited.
   The storage of explosives and blasting agents, as defined in the Fire and
Life Safety Code, is prohibited in all areas of the city which are zoned for
residential or commercial development.
§ 8.16.070   Penalty.
   A.   1.   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter,
including the Fire and Life Safety Code adopted by reference, or who shall fail
to comply therewith; who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
thereunder; who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specification or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or
permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or who shall
fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council or by
a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally
for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500. 
      2.   The imposition of 1 penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all these persons shall be required to
correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
      3.   When not otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited
conditions are maintained or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
   B.   The application of the penalties prescribed in the foregoing paragraph
shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 8.16.080   Nonliability for damages.
   The adoption of the Fire and Life Safety Code and any amendments thereto as
the fire code for the city shall not be construed to hold the city, its
officers, agents or employees responsible for any damage to persons or property
by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized by the Fire and Life
Safety Code, or for failure to inspect or reinspect on a permit issued or
denied for use of any equipment for which a permit is required.
(Am. Ord. 1523, passed 5-6-2020)
CHAPTER 8.20:  ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
8.20.010   Purpose.
   
8.20.020   Definitions.
   
8.20.030   Administration; funding; increases in fees and fines; annual
evaluation.
   
8.20.040   Alarm registrations required; terms; fees and fee collection.
   
8.20.050   Registration application; contents.
   
8.20.060   Transfer of registration prohibited.
   
8.20.070   Duties of alarm users.
   
8.20.080   Audible alarms; restrictions, abatement of malfunctioning alarm.
   
8.20.090   Registration and duties of alarm installation companies and
monitoring companies.
   
8.20.100   Duties and authority of the Alarm Administrator.
   
8.20.110   False alarm fines; fees; late charges.
   
8.20.120   Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police
response.
   
8.20.130   Alarm registration suspension; fees, fines; violation to make alarm
dispatch request for suspended alarm site.
   
8.20.140   Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and
fines.
   
8.20.150   Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations.
   
8.20.160   Suspension of police response to dispatch requests from certain
alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
   
8.20.170   Police Department response.
   
8.20.180   Confidentiality of alarm information.
   
8.20.190   Scope of police duty; immunities preserved.
§ 8.20.010   Purpose.
   The City Council finds and declares that:
   A.   The majority of alarms to which the Police Department responds are
false alarms, which are reported to the police by alarm companies.
   B.   Most false alarms are the result of improper maintenance or improper or
careless use of an alarm system.
   C.   The public and police officers can be subjected to needless danger when
the officers are called to respond to false alarms.
   D.   Officers responding to false alarms are not immediately available to
carry out other police duties.
   E.   In the interest of using limited police resources most effectively and
efficiently, the number of false alarms can and must be reduced.
   F.   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the potential dangers and
inefficiencies associated with false alarms and to encourage alarm companies
and property owners to maintain the operational reliability, properly use alarm
systems, and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.
   G.   This chapter governs systems intended to summon a police response,
establishes fees, fines, establishes a system of administration, sets
conditions for the suspension of a police response and establishes a public
education and training program.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Alarm Administrator means the person or persons designated by the Police
Department to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   Alarm Agreement means the legal contract or agreement by and between the
alarm installation company and/or monitoring company and the alarm user.
   Alarm Agreement Holding Company means the alarm installation company or
monitoring company that holds the alarm agreement with the alarm user.
   Alarm Dispatch Request means a notification to the Police Department that an
alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm
site.
   Alarm Installation Company means a person in the business of selling,
providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or
installing an alarm system at an alarm site for compensation, and includes
individuals or firms that install and service alarm systems used in a private
business or proprietary facility.
   Alarm Registration means a registration and unique number issued by the
Alarm Administrator to an alarm user, which authorizes the operation of an
alarm system.
   Alarm Response Manager (ARM) means a person designated by an alarm
installation company and monitoring company to handle alarm issues for the
company and act as the primary point of contact for the city’s Alarm
Administrator.
   Alarm Site means a location served by 1 or more alarm systems. In a multi-
unit building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate Alarm Site
if served by a separate alarm system. In a single unit building that houses 2
or more separate businesses with separate alarm systems, each business will be
considered a separate Alarm Site.
   Alarm System means a device or series of devices, which emit or transmit an
audible or remote visual or electronic alarm signal, which is intended to
summon police response. The term includes hardwired systems, surveillance
cameras and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as
cellular or private radio signals, and includes local alarm systems, but does
not include an alarm installed in a motor vehicle or a system which will not
emit a signal either audible or visible from the outside of the building,
residence or beyond, but is designed solely to alert the occupants of a
building or residence.
   Alarm User means any person who has contracted for monitoring, repair,
installation or maintenance service for an alarm system from an alarm
installation company or monitoring company, or who owns or operates an alarm
system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under agreement.
   Alarm User Awareness Class means a class conducted for the purpose of
educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of
alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.
   Alarm User List means a list provided by the alarm user’s alarm installation
company or if no alarm agreement exists between the alarm user and an alarm
installation company, the alarm user’s monitoring company.
   Arming Station means a device that controls an alarm system.
   Automatic Voice Dialer means any electronic, mechanical, or other device
which, when activated, is capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded
voice message to the Police Department or city requesting an officer dispatch
to an alarm site.
   Burglar Alarm means an alarm intended to identify the presence of an
intruder in either a business or residence.
   Business License means a business license issued by the City Business
License division to an alarm installation company or monitoring company to
conduct business in the city.
   Cancellation means the termination of a police response to an alarm site
after an alarm dispatch request is made but before an officer’s arrival at the
alarm site.
   City means City of Canby.
   Conversion of Alarm User means the transaction or process by which 1 alarm
installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing or monitoring
of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system that was previously
serviced or monitored by another alarm company.
   Duress Alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a
designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user
is being forced to turn off the system and requires an officer response.
   Enhanced Call Confirmation (ECC) means an attempt by the monitoring company,
or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user and/or the
alarm user’s designated representatives by telephone and/or other electronic
means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a police burglar alarm
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the
purpose of this chapter, telephone confirmation shall require, as a minimum
that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to
reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether
an alarm signal is valid before requesting an officer dispatch. Names and
numbers or those contacted or attempted to contact, shall be provided when
requested.
   False Alarm means an alarm dispatch request to the Police Department, which
results in the responding officer finding no evidence of a criminal offense or
attempted criminal offense after completing an investigation of the alarm site,
or, in the alternative, the same officer finding by a preponderance of evidence
a blatant misuse or error of the alarm system.
   Holdup Alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation
of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
   Local Alarm System means an unmonitored alarm system that annunciates an
alarm only at the alarm site or is a self-monitored alarm site.
   Monitoring means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals
from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the Police
Department.
   Monitoring Company means a person in the business of providing monitoring
services.
   One Plus Duress Alarm means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal
by entering a code that adds 1 number to the last digit of the normal arm/
disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one plus duress code = 1235).
   Panic Alarm means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation
of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation
requiring an officer response.
   Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, organization or similar entity as defined by Oregon
law.
   Police Department means the Canby Police Department.
   Protective or Reactive Alarm System means an alarm system that produces a
temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical,
electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or
disable a person’s vision.
   Registration Number means a unique individual number assigned to an alarm
user as part of alarm registration issued by the Police Department.
   Responsible Party means a person capable of appearing at the alarm site upon
request who has access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the
authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.
   Robbery Alarm means an alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic
activation of a device, or any system, device or mechanism on or near the
premises intended to signal that a robbery is in progress and that a person
needs immediate police assistance in order to avoid bodily harm, injury or
death. The term has the same general meaning as “holdup alarm” or “duress
alarm.”
   SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the ANSI - American National Standard
Institute- approved Security Industry Association - SIA CP-01 Control Panel
Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design
features for security system control panels and their associated arming and
disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built
and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other
nationally recognized testing organizations are marked as follows: “Design
evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for
False Alarm Reduction.”
   Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over
control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by another
alarm user.
   Zones mean a division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to
indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.030   Administration; funding; increases in fees and fines; annual
evaluation.
   A.   Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the
Police Department.
   B.   The Police Department may designate an Alarm Administrator to carry out
the duties and functions described in this section.
   C.   Monies generated by fees and fines assessed pursuant to this section
shall be deposited into the city’s General Fund.
   D.   The amount of the fees and fines set forth in this section shall be
specified in the City Fee Schedule, which may only be revised by a duly-adopted
resolution of the City Council. For purposes of this division, “fees” include
any type or class of fee and includes late charges.
   E.   The Alarm Administrator shall conduct an annual evaluation and analysis
of the effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system
improvements as warranted.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.040   Alarm registrations required; terms; fees and fee collection.
   A.   An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any alarm
system without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is
required for each alarm site having a distinct address or business name. A
registration fee including a completed alarm registration application shall be
received and approved by the Alarm Administrator prior to any alarm system
activation. A 30-day grace period shall be granted from the date of all new
alarm installations or takeovers between 2 alarm users, to accommodate the
registration application process. There may be reduced residential registration
fees for senior citizens, low-income and disabled persons, or governmental
entities. The City Council shall establish such classes of persons by
resolution.
   B.   Owners of local alarm systems are required to adhere to all sections of
this chapter and are subject to all fees, fines, suspensions, penalties or
other requirements that are applicable.
   C.   The fee for a new initial alarm registration and the alarm registration
renewal fee shall be collected by the Alarm Administrator.
   D.   Existing Alarm Systems.
      1.   Any alarm system that has been installed before the effective date
of this chapter shall be registered and a registration fee collected by the
Alarm Administrator.
         a.   The alarm agreement holding company shall provide within 40 days
of the effective date of this chapter, an alarm user list of existing alarm
users in the city, in a format approved by the Alarm Administrator, including
name, address, billing address and telephone number to the Alarm Administrator.
         b.   The alarm agreement holding company may apply to the Alarm
Administrator for an extension of the time limit in division D.1.a. based on
extenuating circumstances.
      2.   The alarm agreement holding company may, through a mutual written
agreement, have another alarm company provide the alarm user’s list.
   E.   New Alarm Systems.
      1.   Any alarm installation company that installs an alarm system on
premises located within the city shall notify the Alarm Administrator within 20
days that an alarm system has been installed and send the Alarm Administrator
the required information.
      2.   In the case of self-installed alarm systems that are to be monitored
by a monitoring company, the monitoring company shall act as the alarm
installation company regarding the duties to notify the Alarm Administrator.
      3.   Failure of an alarm installation company to notify the Alarm
Administrator of a new alarm system installation within 20 days of installation
shall result in a fine as established by resolution of the City Council to be
imposed on the alarm installation company.
      4.   The initial alarm registration fee shall be collected by the Alarm
Administrator. Failure of the alarm user to submit an application and
registration fee within the 30 days after notice shall result in the alarm
system being classified as non-registered and late charges being assessed.
   F.   Alarm Registration and Renewal Fees.
      1.   An alarm registration shall expire 1 year from the date of issuance,
and must be renewed annually by the alarm user. The Alarm Administrator shall
notify the alarm user of the need to renew their registration 30 days prior to
the expiration of the registration. It is the responsibility of the alarm user
to submit the updated information and renewal fees prior to the registration
expiration date. Failure to renew shall be classified as use of a non-
registered alarm system and subject the alarm site to a suspension and late
charge.
      2.   Registration fees shall be collected annually based on a 1-year
registration period. The amount of the registration and renewal fees required
are established by resolution of the City Council.
   G.   Late Charge. Alarm users who fail to make payment for an alarm
registration prior to the registration’s expiration date will be assessed a
late charge as established by resolution of the City Council.
   H.   Refunds. No refund of a registration fee or registration renewal fee
will be made.
   I.   Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and the
alarm registration fee, the Alarm Administrator shall issue a registration
number or alarm registration renewal to the applicant unless:
      1.   The applicant has failed to pay any fee or fine assessed under this
chapter; or
      2.   An alarm registration for the alarm site has been suspended, and the
condition causing the suspension has not been corrected; or
      3.   The alarm installation company and/or the monitoring company listed
on the registration application are not in possession of current valid state
licensing; or
      4.   Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for
refusal to issue an alarm registration.
   J.   Exceptions.
      1.   Government entities, including but not necessarily limited to the
city, county, state, federal and school districts, must obtain alarm
registrations for all alarm systems on property under their control within the
boundaries of the city, but may be subject to reduced payment of alarm
registration and renewal fees.
      2.   All registration-fee-exempted alarm sites or reduced fee sites are
required to obtain and maintain a valid alarm registration for a police
response and are subjected to all other fees, fines and suspension
enforcements, except when this action is prohibited by statute or through a
court ruling.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.050   Registration application; contents.
   An application for an alarm registration must be in a format provided by the
Police Department. The information required on such forms shall be determined
by the Alarm Administrator. Registration applicants acknowledge that the police
response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to, the
availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather
conditions, emergency conditions, prior alarm history, administrative actions
and staffing levels.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.060   Transfer of registration prohibited.
   A.   An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm
site. An alarm user shall inform the Alarm Administrator and their alarm
company of any change to the information listed on the alarm registration
application within 10 business days after such change.
   B.   Exceptions may be made in the discretion of the Alarm Administrator
when the transfer proposed is among members of the family of the original
registration holder or successors in interest to the property for which the
alarm registration has been issued.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.070   Duties of alarm users.
   A.   An alarm user shall:
      1.   Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms;
      2.   Make every reasonable effort to arrive at (or cause a designated,
responsible person to arrive at) the alarm system’s location within 30 minutes
after being requested by the monitoring company or Police Department in order
to:
         a.   Deactivate an alarm system;
         b.   Provide access to the alarm site; and/or
         c.   Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
      3.   Provide his, her, or its monitoring company with the updated names
and telephone numbers of at least 2 individuals who are able and have agreed
to:
         a.   Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;
         b.   Respond to the alarm site at any time; and
         c.   Provide access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system,
if necessary.
      4.   Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
      5.   Notify his, her, or its monitoring company of any suspension of
police response (as provided for under this chapter) and request that the
monitoring company not make a burglar alarm dispatch request.
   B.   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic voice
dialer which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to
automatically dial a telephone line leading into the Police Department or the
city and then transmit any prerecorded message or signal.
   C.   An alarm user shall keep a set of written operating instructions for
each alarm system at each alarm site.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.080   Audible alarms; restrictions, abatement of malfunctioning alarm.
   A.   No alarm system shall emit a sound resembling an emergency vehicle
siren or civil defense warning. The Chief of Police shall make the final
determination regarding any question of an audible alarm within this section.
   B.   After the effective date of this chapter no one shall install, modify
or repair an alarm system in the city that has a siren, bell or other signal
that is audible from any property adjacent to the alarm site that sounds for
longer than 15 consecutive minutes after the alarm is activated, or that
repeats the 15 minute audible cycle more than 2 consecutive times during a
single armed period.
   C.   In the event that an audible alarm is activated and fails to reset
itself or continues to activate for more than 60 minutes and the responsible
person listed on the alarm registration or other responsible person cannot or
will not respond and silence the alarm, and the continued activation of the
alarm is creating a disturbance, the Police Department may cause the alarm to
be silenced in a manner determined appropriate for the circumstances. The alarm
user shall be held responsible for the actual costs involved to abate the
malfunctioning alarm up to a maximum of $300. The city, its employees or agents
shall not be responsible or liable for damage resulting from such
disconnection.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.090   Registration and duties of alarm installation companies and
monitoring companies.
   A.   Registration.
      1.   No alarm company operator or alarm agent, as defined by the Business
and Professions Code, shall install, maintain, or repair any alarm system
within the city unless the alarm company operator or alarm agent has, prior to
performing such work, obtained a city business license.
      2.   Each alarm installation company and alarm monitoring company must
designate 1 individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the company. The
individual designated as the ARM must be knowledgeable of the provisions of
this chapter, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false
alarm issues and respond to requests from the Alarm Administrator. The name,
contact number, and email address of the ARM shall be provided to the Alarm
Administrator. Failure to comply within 30 days after being notified in writing
from the Alarm Administrator may result in the suspension of Police Department
response to alarm dispatch requests from the non-complying alarm installation
company or monitoring company.
      3.   Each alarm installation company shall provide the name, address and
phone number of any monitoring company it is using to monitor its alarm sites
within the city, and monitoring companies shall do the same for alarm
installation companies that use their monitoring services within the city.
   B.   Alarm installation companies shall:
      1.   Upon the installation or activation of an alarm system, the alarm
installation company shall distribute to the alarm user information
summarizing:
         a.   The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the
registration fee and the potential for fines and suspension of an alarm
registration;
         b.   How to prevent false alarms; and
         c.   How to operate the alarm system.
      2.   After the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation
companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending
one plus duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report one plus
duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress
alarms installed prior to the effective date of this chapter.
      3.   After the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation
companies shall not install, modify or repair “single action” devices for the
activation of hold-up, robbery or panic alarms. New devices shall require 2
actions or an activation time delay to provide more positive assurance that the
user intends to activate the device.
      4.   Ninety days after the effective date of this chapter, an alarm
installation company shall, on new installations, use only alarm control panel
(s) which are listed as ANSI/SIA CP-01- Control Panel Standard - Features for
False Alarm Reduction.
      5.   An alarm installation company shall not use an automatic voice
dialer for any alarm system which, when activated, uses a telephone device or
attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the Police
Department or the city and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal.
      6.   Ensure that alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress,
robbery, holdup or panic alarm has been provided adequate training as to the
proper use of the alarm system’s operation and function.
      7.   All alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power
supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric
utility service for a period of up to 4 hours will not activate the alarm
system.
      8.   All audible alarm systems shall include a device which will limit
the duration of the audible alarm to a period of not more than 15 minutes per
activation.
   C.   A monitoring company shall:
      1.   Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers or procedures
designated by the Alarm Administrator or other approved communication
processes.
      2.   Employ enhanced call confirmation procedures on all burglar alarm
dispatch requests. The City Police Department may refuse to accept an alarm
dispatch request from a monitoring company that has failed to comply with the
procedures required by enhanced call confirmation. This division becomes
effective 90 days after the effective date of this chapter.
      3.   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police Department in a
manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator.
      4.   Communicate cancellations to the Police Department in a manner and
form determined by the Alarm Administrator.
      5.   Communicate all available zone activations information (north,
south, front, back, door, window, etc.) about the location of an alarm signal
(s) as part of an alarm dispatch request.
      6.   Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent or audible,
interior or perimeter), if available, on any alarm dispatch request.
      7.   Notify communications (dispatch) of any alarm site that it knows, or
reasonably should know has guard dog(s), pets or is fitted with a protective-
reactive alarm system. During any alarm at such a site, a responsible party
must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to the alarm site to
disarm the device or take control of the guard dog(s).
      8.   After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the Police
Department if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or a responsible
party is on the way to the alarm site;
      9.   Each monitoring company must maintain, for a period of at least 1
year after the date of an alarm dispatch request, all records relating to the
alarm dispatch request. Records must include the name, address and telephone
number of the alarm user, each alarm system zone activated, the time of alarm
dispatch request and evidence of all attempts to verify. The Alarm
Administrator may request copies of such records for any individual alarm user.
If the request is made within 60 days after an alarm dispatch request, the
monitoring company shall furnish requested records within 3 business days after
receiving the request. If the records are requested between 60 days and 1 year
after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the
requested records within 30 days after receiving the request.
      10.   Each monitoring company shall, upon request, immediately provide
the Police Department with the names and phone numbers of the alarm user’s
emergency contacts at the time of each alarm dispatch request.
   D.   Conversion of Alarm Users. An alarm installation company or monitoring
company that converts the servicing of any alarm system account from another
company shall notify the Alarm Administrator of such conversion and shall make
a reasonable effort to provide to the Alarm Administrator, within 60 days from
the date of conversion, an alarm user list of the converted accounts, in a
format acceptable to the Alarm Administrator.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.100   Duties and authority of the Alarm Administrator.
   A.   The Alarm Administrator shall:
      1.   Designate the manner and form of alarm dispatch requests and the
telephone numbers and/or communication process that are to be used for such
requests; and
      2.   Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch
requests.
   B.   The Alarm Administrator shall establish a procedure to acquire and
record information on alarm dispatch requests.
   C.   The Alarm Administrator shall establish and implement a procedure to
notify the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following:
      1.   The date and time of an officer’s response to the false alarm; and
      2.   Any false alarm fine incurred.
   D.   The Alarm Administrator may require that a conference be held with an
alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company responsible
for repairing or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of
each false alarm. The conference may be held in person or through a conference
telephone call, at the Alarm Administrator’s discretion. Failure to participate
may result in suspension of the alarm registration, as indicated by the facts
of the case.
   E.   The Alarm Administrator may establish an alarm user awareness class.
The Alarm Administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm
companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the
class. The class shall inform alarm users of the alarm ordinance; problems
created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid creating false
alarms.
   F.   If a false robbery, holdup or panic alarm has occurred and the alarm
was triggered using a single action, non-recessed device, the Alarm
Administrator may consider a waiver or partial waiver of the false alarm fine,
if action is taken by the alarm user to remove or replace the single action,
non-recessed device.
   G.   The Alarm Administrator shall make a copy of this chapter and/or an
ordinance summary sheet available to each alarm user.
   H.   The Alarm Administrator may use electronic means to communicate with
alarm users, alarm installation companies and monitoring companies when
applicable or when requested by the recipient and at the Alarm Administrator’s
discretion.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.110   False alarm fines; fees; late charges.
   A.   The Alarm Administrator may assess the alarm user a fine for a false
alarm occurring at that alarm user’s alarm site. The amount of said fines for
the listed categories shall be established by City Council and may be
subsequently amended by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   If a false alarm fine is not paid within 30 days after the invoice is
mailed, a late charge as established by resolution of the City Council shall be
imposed.
   C.   Fines for False Alarms from Non-Registered Alarm Systems. For person(s)
operating a non-registered alarm system incurring a false alarm, fines shall be
imposed as established by resolution of the City Council.
   D.   Any monitoring company after 5 business days of receiving notice from
the Alarm Administrator that an alarm user’s registration status is that of
non-registered shall not make a burglar alarm dispatch request from that alarm
user.
   E.   If cancellation of a police response occurs prior to the officer’s
arrival at the alarm site, the response is not considered a false alarm and no
false alarm fine will be assessed.
   F.   The alarm installation company shall be assessed a fine in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council if the officer responding to a
false alarm determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation
company directly caused the false alarm. Such false alarms are not included in
the total number of false alarms for the alarm user, nor is the alarm user to
be held liable for any false alarm fine resulting from such alarm activation.
   G.   A fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall
be imposed against any monitoring company that fails to verify alarm system
signals as required in §
8.20.090C.2. of this chapter.
   H.   Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with
notice of any fine.
   I.   All registration fees, renewal registration fees or fines assessed
under this section are due within 30 days of written notice unless otherwise
noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of the City Council
shall be imposed for each individual fee or fine due that is not paid within 30
days.
   J.   The Alarm Administrator may waive the false alarm fine for the first
chargeable false alarm during the alarm user’s 1-year registration period,
pending the successful completion of the online alarm user awareness class
available through the Alarm Administrator. In order to have the fine waived,
the alarm user shall have successfully completed the class within 30 days of
the fine notice. Alarm users without online access may request the online
school and test be mailed to them. Reasonable additional time to complete the
alarm user awareness class shall be allowed for mail delivery.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.120   Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police
response.
   A.   The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing or by
other electronic means after each false alarm. The notice shall include the
amount of the fine for the false alarm, the fact that police response to
further alarms may be suspended after the fourth false alarm during the alarm
user’s 1-year alarm registration period, (excluding duress, robbery, holdup and
panic alarms), and that the alarm user has the right to appeal.
   B.   The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing 30 days
beforehand that a Police Department response to further alarms is to be
suspended. The right of appeal under this chapter shall be included with the
notice. The notice of suspension shall also include the amount of any fees and/
or fines due and a description of the reinstatement process.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.130   Alarm registration suspension; fees, fines; violation to make
alarm dispatch request for suspended alarm site.
   A.   The Alarm Administrator shall notify the Police Department of each
alarm user whose alarm registration qualifies for suspension under this
section. The Alarm Administrator may suspend an alarm registration if it is
determined that:
      1.   There is a false statement of a material fact in the registration
application;
      2.   The alarm user has had 4 or more false burglar alarms within the 1-
year registration period, except that the Alarm Administrator may waive a
suspension of a registration upon receipt of documented work orders showing
reasonable attempts to repair the alarm system prior to the notice of
suspension; or
      3.   The alarm user fails or refuses to pay an alarm registration or
alarm registration renewal fee, false alarm fine, late charge, or any other
fee, fine, or charge assessed under this section.
   B.   It is a violation of this section for a person to operate a burglar
alarm system during the period in which the alarm registration is suspended. It
is a violation of this chapter for a monitoring company to make an alarm
dispatch request to a burglar alarm site after the monitoring company’s alarm
response manager (ARM) has been notified by electronic mail by the Alarm
Administrator that the registration for that alarm site has been suspended. A
grace period of 5 business days after the ARM’s notification shall be granted
the monitoring company to comply. The alarm monitoring company shall be
assessed a fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council for
requesting a burglar alarm dispatch request on a suspended alarm site.
   C.   False Alarm Fines under Suspension Status. In addition to the fines set
forth in §
8.20.110 A., a supplemental fine is hereby imposed upon any person operating a
suspended burglar alarm system. The amount of said fines shall be established
by resolution of the City Council.
   D.   It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify their
respective alarm monitoring company of their suspension status. An alarm user
shall be held financially accountable for all false alarm fines incurred.
   E.   Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in
progress, the Police Department may or may not dispatch an officer to an alarm
site for which an alarm registration is suspended.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.140   Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and
fines.
   A.   If the Alarm Administrator assesses a fee or fine, suspends an alarm
registration or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm
registration, the Alarm Administrator shall send notice of the action and a
statement of the right to appeal to the affected applicant, alarm user, alarm
installation company or alarm monitoring company.
   B.   The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm
monitoring company may appeal any action described in division A. above to the
Police Chief (or his or her designee) by setting forth in writing the reasons
for the appeal and delivering the appeal to the Police Chief (or designee)
within 20 days after receipt of notice of the action. Failure to deliver the
appeal within that time period is a waiver of the right to appeal.
   C.   The procedure for an appeal to the Police Chief (or designee) is as
follows:
      1.   The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring
company may file a written request for appeal by paying an appeal fee and
setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal must be entitled “Appeal
from Alarm Administrator’s Action.” The appeal fee shall be in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council and will be returned to the
appealing party if the appeal is successful.
      2.   The Police Chief (or designee) shall conduct a hearing on the appeal
within 30 days after the Police Department’s receipt of the request for appeal
and appeal fee and shall consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party
and the Alarm Administrator. The Police Chief (or designee) must base the
decision on the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing and must
render a decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing. The decision
shall affirm or reverse the decision or action taken by the Alarm
Administrator. The decision of the Police Chief or designee shall be the final
decision in the matter.
      3.   Filing of an appeal stays any action by the Alarm Administrator to
suspend an alarm registration or require the payment of a fee or fine until the
appeal process has been exhausted. This provision applies only to the action of
the Alarm Administrator that is the subject of the appeal. This provision does
not operate as a bar to enforcement action on violations of this section that
occur thereafter.
   D.   The Alarm Administrator or the Police Chief, or their respective
designees, may adjust the count of false alarms or assessed fees based on:
      1.   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of a communications
services provider (i.e., telephone, cellular, cable company);
      2.   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage of more
than 4 hours or severe weather such as a tornado, earthquake, or excessive
winds (35 m.p.h. or above as measured by a local, recognized weather monitoring
station);
      3.   Evidence that an alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm; or
      4.   The occurrence of multiple alarms within a 24-hour period, which may
be considered as 1 false alarm if the alarm user has taken corrective action,
unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user.
   E.   The Alarm Administrator may waive all or part of a false alarm fine due
to extenuating circumstances or to encourage corrective action with supervisor
approval.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.150   Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations.
   A.   On the suspension of an alarm registration, a person whose alarm
registration has been suspended may obtain reinstatement of the registration by
the Alarm Administrator if the person:
      1.   Pays a reinstatement fee as established by resolution of the City
Council;
      2.   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, fines, and other
charges;
      3.   Submits a written notice from an alarm installation company stating
that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the
alarm installation company;
      4.   The alarm user successfully completes an alarm user awareness class
and test.
   B.   The Police Department shall reinstate its response to an alarm site as
soon as is practicable after receiving notice of reinstatement from the Alarm
Administrator. The alarm user and monitoring company shall take notice that the
alarm site has been officially reinstated only after receiving notice from the
Alarm Administrator of that fact. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm
user to verify that his, her, or its registration status and future police
response has been properly restored.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.160   Suspension of police response to dispatch requests from certain
alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
   A.   The Police Chief or designee may suspend police response to an alarm
dispatch request from an alarm installation company or monitoring company if it
is determined that:
      1.   There is a violation of this chapter by the alarm installation
company or monitoring company and the condition causing the violation has not
been corrected; and/or
      2.   The alarm installation company or monitoring company has failed to
pay any fee, fine, or other charge assessed under this section, more than 60
days after the fee, fine, or other charge is due.
   B.   The Police Department may not respond to any alarm dispatch request
where the alarm installation company or monitoring company who installed or
monitors that alarm has failed to comply with any licensing requirements or
failed to maintain a valid copy of any required alarm company operators
license.
   C.   A suspension of police response made pursuant to this division is
subject to the appeal process provided for within this chapter. In addition,
the Alarm Administrator has the ability to accept a workable solution from the
affected party prior to an appeal. The affected party has 60 days after the
written notice of suspension before police response is suspended to its alarm
customers.
   D.   The Alarm Administrator shall notify all known alarm users subscribing
to an alarm installation company or an alarm monitoring company that the Police
Department has suspended response to the company’s alarm dispatch requests.
   E.   The city shall assess the alarm installation company or monitoring
company a reinstatement fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council. In addition, if the Alarm Administrator has incurred costs in
notifying alarm users by mail of the suspension of their alarm installation
company or monitoring company, reimbursement to the city of those costs shall
be a condition of reinstatement.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.170   Police Department response.
   A.   Subject to the suspension provisions in §
8.20.130 above and the discretion discussed in §
8.20.190 below, the Police Department at its discretion will respond to all “in
progress” robbery, panic or burglar alarms as promptly as possible, taking into
account pending calls for service and any policy establishing priority of
dispatched calls following notification of the receipt of the alarm from the
monitoring company. Police supervisors may, in their discretion, cancel a
police response to any or all alarms based on weather or other factors
affecting police service needs.
   B.   The Police Chief or his or her designee may re-prioritize assignment of
burglar alarms and response time at any time during a 24-hour period as may be
necessary due to the service needs of the community.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.180   Confidentiality of alarm information.
   All information contained in documents gathered through alarm registrations,
the submission of customer lists, the alarm appeal process and records relating
to alarm dispatch requests must be held in confidence by all employees of the
Alarm Administrator, City of Canby and any third-party alarm administrator.
Such information is proprietary and is hereby declared confidential and not a
public record. Absent special circumstances, such information must not be
released to the public or any person other than a law enforcement agency, third
party administrator or the applicable alarm user, alarm installation company or
alarm monitoring company except pursuant to court order or applicable public
records law.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
§ 8.20.190   Scope of police duty; immunities preserved.
   The issuance of alarm registrations does not create a contract between the
Police Department and/or the city and any alarm user, alarm installation
company or monitoring company, nor does it create a duty or obligation, either
expressed or implied, on the Police Department to respond to any alarm. Any and
all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure of the Police
Department to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed and
full governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an
alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Police Department
response is influenced by the availability of officers, priority of calls,
traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels,
prior response history and administrative actions.
(Ord. 1479, passed 5-16-2018)
TITLE 9:  PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
   Chapter
      
9.04   STATE CRIMINAL STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
      
9.08   WEAPONS
      
9.12   INTERFERING WITH POLICE OFFICER
      
9.24   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
      
9.32   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
      
9.44   GRAFFITI ABATEMENT
      
9.48   NOISE CONTROL
      
9.50   POLICE DUTIES TO INVENTORY PROPERTY
      
9.54   PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
CHAPTER 9.04:  STATE CRIMINAL STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
Section
   
9.04.010   Applicability of State Criminal Code.
   
9.04.020   Applicability of State Criminal Procedure Code.
§ 9.04.010   Applicability of State Criminal Code.
   A.   Violation of provisions in O.R.S. Chapters 162 through 167, 471 and 475
inclusive, as now constituted, is an offense against the city.
   B.   If an ordinance, or provision thereof, of the city is in conflict with
the Oregon Criminal Code, the Oregon Criminal Code shall prevail.
   C.   No person shall engage in any activity violating the Oregon Criminal
Code of city ordinances relating to the public peace, safety, morals and
general welfare as the laws and ordinances provide at the time of the activity.
§ 9.04.020   Applicability of State Criminal Procedure Code.
   A.   The city adopts O.R.S. Chapters 131 through 133, 135 through 138, 153
and 156 through 157 inclusive, as now constituted, as the Criminal Procedure
Code to be followed by the city.
   B.   If any ordinance, or provision thereof, of the city is in conflict with
the Oregon Criminal Procedure Code, the Oregon Criminal Procedure Code shall
prevail.
CHAPTER 9.08:  WEAPONS
Section
   
9.08.010   Discharge of weapons prohibited.
   
9.08.020   Exceptions.
   
9.08.030   Firearm purchaser; background inspection fee.
   
9.08.040   Penalty.
§ 9.08.010   Discharge of weapons prohibited.
   Except at firing ranges, no person other than a peace officer shall fire or
discharge a gun, including spring or air-actuated pellet guns, air guns or
other weapons which propel a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive,
jet or rocket propulsion.
§ 9.08.020   Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the firing
or discharging of any weapon by any person in the defense or protection of
property which that person owns or controls, his or her person or family, or at
any place duly licensed or designated for target practice.  The provisions of
this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the display of fireworks, duly
authorized by the city.
§ 9.08.030   Firearm purchaser; background inspection fee.
   A.   Whenever the Police Department is requested by a firearm dealer to
conduct a background check on a prospective firearm purchaser, the firearm
dealer shall submit a processing fee for each background check requested.  The
background check fee shall be paid by the firearm dealer and shall be used to
defray Police Department expenses incurred in conducting the check. This fee
shall be set forth by resolution.
   B.   Failure by the firearm dealer to submit the proper fee with each
background inspection request is an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not more than $100 per violation.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 9.08.040   Penalty.
   A.   Violation of §
9.08.010 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500, imprisonment not to exceed
30 days, or both fine and imprisonment.
   B.   Violation of §
9.08.030 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
CHAPTER 9.12:  INTERFERING WITH POLICE OFFICER
Section
   
9.12.010   Definitions.
   
9.12.020   Unlawful acts designated.
   
9.12.030   Penalty.
§ 9.12.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Arrest means to place a person under actual or constructive restraint for
the purpose of charging him or her with an offense.
   Custody means to place a person under actual or constructive restraint
pursuant to a court order or for other lawful purposes.
   Police Officer means any sworn member of the Police Department.
   Stop means a temporary restraint of a person’s liberty, by a police officer
lawfully present in any place:
      1.   When the officer reasonably believes that the person is committing
or has committed a criminal offense;
      2.   When the officer reasonably believes that the person is in need of
attention pursuant to O.R.S. Ch. 426; or
      3.   When the officer reasonably believes that the person is the subject
of service of a valid court order.
   To Leave the Area of an Arrest, Custody or Stop means to physically move to
a location not less than 10 feet extending in a radius from where a police
officer is engaged in effecting an arrest, taking a person into custody or
stopping a person; the radius may be extended beyond 10 feet when a police
officer reasonably believes that the extension is necessary because there
exists a substantial risk of physical injury to any person.
§ 9.12.020   Unlawful acts designated.
   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally refuse to leave the area of
an arrest, custody or stop or, having left that area, to reenter it, after
being directed to leave that area by an individual whom the person knows to be
a police officer.
§ 9.12.030   Penalty.
   Violation of §
9.12.020 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500, imprisonment not to exceed
30 days, or both fine and imprisonment.
CHAPTER 9.24:  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Section
   
9.24.010   Obstruction of sidewalks.
   
9.24.020   Riding on trains.
   
9.24.030   Removal of animal carcass.
   
9.24.040   Posted notices.
   
9.24.060   Drinking in public places.
   
9.24.070   Public indecency.
§ 9.24.010   Obstruction of sidewalks.
   No person shall wilfully remain standing, lying or sitting down upon any of
the sidewalks of the city in a manner as to obstruct the free passage of foot
traffic or foot travelers on any portion of the same, or wilfully remain
standing, lying or sitting thereon in that manner after being requested to move
on by any police officer of the city.
§ 9.24.020   Riding on trains.
   No person other than a railroad employee shall get on or off of any railroad
car or train at any place within the corporate limits of the city, or in any
manner interfere with railroad cars or trains within the corporate limits of
the city.
§ 9.24.030   Removal of animal carcass.
   No person who is the owner of any animal which dies shall suffer or permit
the carcass to remain upon the public streets or ways; and no person who is
owner or occupant of any property shall suffer or permit the carcass of any
animal to remain thereon.  It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant to
forthwith cause the carcass to be buried or other disposition made of the same.
§ 9.24.040   Posted notices.
   No person shall wilfully deface or tear down any notice, bulletin or sign
before its date of expiration.
§ 9.24.060   Drinking in public places.
   No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or on a street, alley,
sidewalk, mall, public or private parking lot or parking structure, motor
vehicles, public grounds or other public places unless the place has been
licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission and the owner
of the OLCC licensed premises has obtained a permit from the City of Canby to
operate a sidewalk café or other qualifying event.
(Am. Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009; Am. Ord. 1366, passed 11-21-2012)
§ 9.24.070   Public indecency.
   No person shall, while in or in view of a public place, including public
streets, perform an act of urination or defecation, except in toilets provided
for that purpose.
CHAPTER 9.32:  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
   
9.32.010   Purpose.
   
9.32.020   Definitions.
   
9.32.030   Determination of objects as drug paraphernalia.
   
9.32.040   Offenses and penalties.
   
9.32.050   Exemption.
   
9.32.060   Nuisance.
   
9.32.070   Infraction procedure.
§ 9.32.010   Purpose.
   The City Council finds that certain items designed or marketed for use with
illegal drugs enhance the appeal of and contribute to the illegal use of
controlled substances among its young people.  It therefore desires to ban the
sale and display of these items and to limit the distribution of illegal drug
paraphernalia to individuals.  This chapter is based upon the Model Drug
Paraphernalia Act authorized by the Drug Enforcement Administration of the
United States Department of Justice.
§ 9.32.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Controlled Substance means a drug or its immediate precursor classified in
Schedules I through V under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. §§
811 to 812.45 modified under O.R.S. 475.035.
   Deliver or Delivery means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer,
other than by administering or dispensing, from one person to another of a
controlled substance, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
   Drug Paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
Controlled Substances Act of this state.  It includes but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      2.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances;
      3.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      4.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
      5.   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      6.   Diluents and adulterants such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      7.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
      8.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      9.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      10.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      11.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body;
      12.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         b.   Water pipes;
         c.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         d.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         e.   Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         f.   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
         g.   Chamber pipes;
         h.   Carburetor pipes;
         i.   Electric pipes;
         j.   Air-driven pipes;
         k.   Chillums;
         1.   Bongs; and
         m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis family Moraceae, whether
growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant or
its resin.  It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced
from the stalks, oil or cake made from seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
   Medical Practitioner means licensed pharmacist; licensed and regulated
members of a health care service providing organization able to administer
controlled substances to patients under Oregon law.
§ 9.32.030   Determination of objects as drug paraphernalia.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
   A.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning
its use;
   B.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object, under any municipal, state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
   C.   The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of
this chapter of the State Uniform Controlled Substance Act;
   D.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   E.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   F.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows
intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of municipal or state law;
the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a
violation of this law or state law shall not prevent a finding that the object
is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
   G.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
   H.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use;
   I.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
   J.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   K.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
   L.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   M.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
   N.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
§ 9.32.040   Offenses and penalties.
   A.   Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.  It is unlawful for any person to use
or to possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.  Any
person who violates this subsection is guilty of an infraction and upon
conviction may be fined not more than $500. As of July 1, 2015, it is a valid
defense to this section that a violator of this section is 21 years or older at
the time of the offense, and that the paraphernalia was solely for uses
involving marijuana.
   B.   Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia.  It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent
to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.  Any person who
violates this subsection is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction may be
fined not more than $500. As of July 1, 2015, it is a valid defense to this
section that a violator of this section is 21 years or older at the time of the
offense, and that the paraphernalia was solely for uses involving marijuana by
others also over the age of 21 years.
   C.   Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor.  Any person 18 years of age
or over who violates division B. of this section by delivering drug
paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age is guilty of a misdemeanor
offense and upon conviction may be imprisoned for not more than 1 year, fined
not more than $6,250, or both.
   D.   Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia.  It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any
advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in
part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.  Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction
and upon conviction may be fined not more than $500.
(Am. Ord. 1419, passed 6-17-2015)
§ 9.32.050   Exemption.
   Medical practitioners and agents acting under their supervision in the
course of a professional practice are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 9.32.060   Nuisance.
   A.   Drug paraphernalia are public nuisances.  Any peace officer who has
probable cause to believe these items enumerated above are being possessed in
violation of this chapter shall summarily seize any  paraphernalia and shall
deliver it to the Chief of Police, who shall hold it subject to the order of
the Municipal Court. Officers operating under this section should consider the
new, valid defenses above as of July 1, 2015.
   B.   Whenever it appears to the court that drug paraphernalia has been
possessed in violation of this chapter, the court shall order the Chief of
Police to destroy the paraphernalia.
(Am. Ord. 1419, passed 6-17-2015)
§ 9.32.070   Infraction procedure.
   A violation of §
9.32.040A., B. or D. is an infraction.  Citations shall be issued and court
procedures followed that are in accord with O.R.S. Ch. 153.
CHAPTER 9.44:  GRAFFITI ABATEMENT
Section
   
9.44.010   Definitions.
   
9.44.020   Offenses.
   
9.44.030   Minimum fine.
   
9.44.040   Community service.
   
9.44.050   Parental responsibility.
   
9.44.060   Graffiti nuisance property.
   
9.44.070   Notice procedure.
   
9.44.080   Abatement procedures.
   
9.44.090   Remedies of the city.
   
9.44.100   Penalty.
   
9.44.110   Abatement by the city.
§ 9.44.010    Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Aerosol Paint Container means any aerosol container adapted or made for
spraying paint.
   Felt Tip Marker means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip
which at its broadest width is greater than 1/4 inch.
   Graffiti means any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked,
etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any surface that is not authorized by
the owner or person in charge of the property.
   Graffiti Implement means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker or a
graffiti stick.
   Graffiti Nuisance Property means property to which graffiti has been
applied, if the graffiti is visible from any public right-of-way, any other
public or private property or from any premises open to the public, and if the
graffiti has not been abated within the time required by this chapter.
   Graffiti Stick means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax,
epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by
pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least 1/4 of an inch in
width.
   Owner means the legal owner of property or a person in charge of property.
   Person in Charge of Property means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or
supervision of a construction project.
   Property means any real or personal property and that which is affixed,
incident or appurtenant to real property, including but not limited to any
premises, house, building, fence, structure or any separate part thereof,
whether permanent or not.
(Am. Ord. 1166, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 9.44.020   Offenses.
   Offenses include unlawfully applying graffiti, unlawfully possessing
graffiti implement, and involve seizure, community service and parental civil
liability.
   A.   Unlawfully Applying Graffiti.
      1.   No person may apply graffiti on any real or personal property of
another, whether located on public or privately owned property.
      2.   Unlawfully applying graffiti is a civil infraction punishable by a
maximum fine not to exceed $500.
   B.   Unlawfully Possessing Graffiti Implement.
      1.   No person may possess, with the intent to use in violation of
division A.l. above of this section, any graffiti implement.
      2.   Unlawfully possessing a graffiti implement is a civil infraction
punishable by a maximum fine not to exceed $250.
   C.   Impounding of Implements.  In addition to any citation issued, a
graffiti implement used or possessed in violation of this section may be
immediately seized and impounded by the Police Department.  The court, upon
disposition of the issued citation, shall determine whether the instrument
shall be returned to the defendant or deemed contraband subject to forfeiture
under state law.
§ 9.44.030   Minimum fine.
   A.   Upon conviction for unlawfully applying graffiti, the court shall
impose a minimum fine of at least $100.
   B.   Upon conviction for unlawfully possessing graffiti implement, the court
shall impose a minimum fine of at least $50.
§ 9.44.040   Community service.
   In lieu of any fine that may be imposed for violation of this section, the
court may order community service as follows:
   A.   Upon conviction for unlawfully applying graffiti, the person shall
perform at least 20 hours of community service;
   B.   Upon conviction for unlawfully possessing a graffiti implement, the
person shall perform at least 10 hours of community service;
   C.   The entire period of community service shall be performed under the
supervision of a community service provider approved by the court; and
   D.   Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject person to a type
of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most
rehabilitative effect on the person.  To the extent that the offense giving
rise to the offer of community service constitutes a violation of this section,
reasonable effort shall be made by the court to assign the person to community
service which constitutes in significant part the removal of the graffiti.
§ 9.44.050   Parental responsibility.
   A.   No parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of an
unemancipated minor person under the age of 18 years may allow or permit the
minor to be in violation of §
9.44.020A. or B. of this chapter.
   B.   Upon a subsequent violation by an unemancipated minor person, the
parent, guardian or person having legal custody shall be served with a subpoena
to appear before the court with the minor and show cause why §
9.44.020A. or B. of this chapter has been violated a second time.
   C.   Violating parental responsibility under this section is a Class A
infraction.
§ 9.44.060   Graffiti nuisance property.
   A.   It is hereby found and declared that graffiti creates a visual blight
and property damage.  When graffiti is allowed to remain on property and not
promptly removed, it invites additional graffiti, gang activity and criminal
activity and constitutes a nuisance.
   B.   Any property within the city which becomes graffiti nuisance property
is in violation of this chapter.
   C.   Any owner of property who permits the property to be a graffiti
nuisance property is in violation of this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 1166, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 9.44.070   Notice procedure.
   A.   When the Chief of Police believes in good faith that property within
the city is a potential graffiti nuisance property, the Chief of Police shall
notify the owner in writing that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance
property. The notice shall contain the following information:
      1.   The street address or description sufficient for identification of
the property;
      2.   That the Chief of Police has found the property is a potential
graffiti nuisance property, with a concise description of the conditions
leading to this finding;
      3.   A direction to abate or remove the graffiti, or show good cause to
the Chief of Police why the owner cannot abate or remove the graffiti, within
10 business days from service of the notice;
      4.   That, if the graffiti is not abated or removed, or good cause for
failure to abate or remove is not shown, the Municipal Judge may order
abatement, with appropriate conditions. The Municipal Judge may also employ any
other remedy deemed by him or her to be appropriate to abate the nuisance,
including but not limited to authorizing a civil complaint to be filed in a
court of competent jurisdiction;
      5.   That permitting graffiti nuisance property is a violation punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500, pursuant to §
1.08.010.  Violators may be cited into Canby Municipal Court when charged with
this violation; and
      6.   That the above remedies are in addition to those otherwise provided
by law.
   B.   Service of the notice is completed by personal service or upon mailing
the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner at the
owner’s last known address.
   C.   A copy of the notice shall be served on occupants of the property, if
different from the owner.
   D.   The failure of any person or owner to receive actual notice of the
determination by the Chief of Police shall not invalidate or otherwise affect
the proceedings under this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 1166, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 9.44.080   Abatement procedures.
   A.   Within 10 business days of the personal service or mailing of the
notice the owner shall abate or remove the graffiti or show good cause why the
owner cannot abate or remove the graffiti within that time period.
   B.   Upon good cause shown, the Chief of Police may grant an extension not
to exceed 10 additional business days.
   C.   If the owner does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, the
Chief of Police may refer the matter to the Municipal Judge for hearing in the
Municipal Court.  The Municipal Court Clerk shall give notice of the hearing
date to the owner and occupants, if the occupants are different from the owner.
   D.   At the time set for a hearing, the owner and occupants may appear and
be heard by the Municipal Judge.
   E.   The Municipal Judge shall determine whether the property is graffiti
nuisance property and whether the owner has complied with this chapter.
   F.   The city has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence
that the property is graffiti nuisance property.
   G.   The owner has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence
that there is good cause for failure to abate the nuisance within 10 business
days of the personal service or mailing of the notice.
(Am. Ord. 1166, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 9.44.090   Remedies of the city.
   A.   In the event that the Municipal Judge determines that the property is
graffiti nuisance property, the Judge may order that the nuisance be abated.
This order may include conditions under which abatement is to occur.
   B.   The Municipal Judge may also employ any other legal remedy deemed by it
to be appropriate to abate the nuisance, including but not limited to
authorizing the filing of a civil complaint in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   C.   The remedies provided in this section are in addition to those
otherwise provided by law.
(Am. Ord. 1166, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 9.44.100   Penalty.
   Permitting graffiti nuisance property is a violation punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500, pursuant to §
1.08.010.  Violators may be cited into Canby Municipal Court when charged with
this violation.
(Am. Ord. 1166, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 9.44.110   Abatement by the city.
   If the owner fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the Municipal Judge,
the city may cause the nuisance to be abated as provided in
Chapter 8.12 of this code of ordinances.
(Am. Ord. 1166, passed 1-5-2005)
CHAPTER 9.48:  NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
9.48.010   Standards and definitions.
   
9.48.020   Responsibility and authority.
   
9.48.030   Prohibited acts.
   
9.48.040   Maximum permissible sound levels.
   
9.48.050   Exceptions and variances.
   
9.48.060   Chapter additional to other law.
   
Appendix A:  Table 1: Allowable Sound Levels
§ 9.48.010   Standards and definitions.
   A.   Terminology and Standards.  All terminology used in this chapter that
is not defined below shall be in accordance with the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI).
   B.   Measurement of Sound Level.
      1.   Measurements shall be made with a calibrated sound level meter in
good operating condition, of a standard design and quality that meets the basic
specifications established by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
      2.   Procedures and tests required by this chapter and not specified
herein shall be placed on file with the Code Enforcement Officer.
   C.   Definitions.
      Ambient Noise means all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sounds from any sources near or far.
      Amplifying Equipment means public address systems, musical instruments
and other similar devices which are electronically amplified.
      Commercial Land Use includes land uses zoned C-1, C-2 and C-M, or any use
of an office, service establishment, retail store, park, amusement or
recreation facility, or other use of the same general type, whether publicly or
privately owned.
      Construction means any and all activity necessary or incidental to the
erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing, repair or equipping of
buildings, roadways and utilities.  It shall include land clearing, grading,
excavating and filling, before, during or following that activity.
      Continuous Sound means any steady sound with a deviation no greater than
plus or minus 2 dBA of its mean, or total fluctuation of 4 dBA, during the
period of observation when measured with a sound level meter set on fast
response.
      Day Time Period means 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. of the same day, local
time.
      Domestic Power Tools means any mechanical powered nail gun, stapler, saw,
drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawn mowers, generators or similar
devices generally used out of doors in residential areas.
      Emergency Work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following severe inclement weather and natural disasters, work
required to restore public utilities or work required to protect persons or
property from imminent exposure to danger.
      Industrial Land Use includes land uses zoned M-1 and M-2 or any use of a
warehouse, factory, mine, wholesale trade establishment or other use of the
same general type, whether publicly or privately owned.
      Night Time Period means 10:00 p.m. of one day until 7:00 a.m. the
following day, local time.
      Noise Sensitive Land Use includes property on which residential housing,
apartment buildings, schools, churches, hospitals and nursing homes are
located.
      Off-Road Recreational Vehicle means any self-propelled land vehicle
designed for or capable of traversing over natural terrain, including but not
limited to racing vehicles, mini-bikes, motorcycles, go-karts and dune buggies,
when operated off the public right-of-way for noncommercial purposes.
      Plainly Audible means unambiguously communicated sounds which disturb the
comfort, repose or health of the listener.  Plainly Audible sounds include, but
are not limited to understandable musical rhythms, understandable spoken words,
and vocal sounds other than speech, which are distinguishable as raised or
normal.
      Powered Model Vehicle means any self- propelled airborne, waterborne or
land-borne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designated to carry persons,
including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
      Recreational Park means a facility open to the public for the operation
of off-road recreational vehicles.
      Warning Devices means electronic devices used to protect persons or
property from imminent danger, including but not limited to firearms, civil
defense warning systems and safety alarms required by law.
(Am. Ord. 1450, passed 11-16-2016)
§ 9.48.020   Responsibility and authority.
   A.   Responsibility.  The responsibility for enforcement of this chapter
shall reside with the City Administrator or his or her designee.
   B.   Authority.  In order to implement this chapter and for the general
purpose of sound abatement and control, the City Administrator or his or her
designee shall have, in addition to any other authority vested with him or her,
the following powers:
      1.   Planning.  Implement a noise control strategy in consonance with the
city’s zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan to assure public and private
enterprises do not adversely impact existing noise sensitive properties and
properties designated for noise sensitive use and to prevent the encroachment
of noise sensitive uses into high impact areas, such as industrial zones and
immediately adjacent to major highways or arterials, which are incompatible for
the uses by virtue of existing projected noise impacts.
      2.   Inspection.  Upon presentation of proper credentials, enter and
inspect any private property or place, and inspect any report or record at any
reasonable time when granted permission by the owner, or by some other person
with apparent authority to act for the owner.  The inspection may include
administration of any necessary tests.
      3.   Issue Summons.  Issue summons, notices of violations or other legal
orders to any person in alleged violation of any provision of this chapter.
      4.   Investigate Violations.  In accordance with other provisions of this
chapter, investigate and document violations and take necessary actions
preparatory to enforcement.
      5.   Amendments and Modifications. Develop and recommend amendments and
modifications to this chapter so as to maintain or enhance the effectiveness of
the noise control program.
      6.   Education.  Develop programs for public education regarding the
requirement and remedies available through the noise control chapter.
§ 9.48.030   Prohibited acts.
   A.   No person shall knowingly continue, cause or permit to be made or
continue to make any excessive or unnecessary sounds which are listed in
division B. of this section or §
9.48.040.
   B.  The following acts are declared to create excessive and unnecessary
sounds in violation of the chapter without regard to the maximum sound levels
of §
9.48.040.
      1.   Radios; Phonographs; Tape Players; Television Sets; Stereo Systems. 
The playing, using or operating of any radio, tape player, television set or
stereo system, including those installed in a vehicle, in such a manner so as
to be plainly audible at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day, local time, either:
         a.   Within a noise-sensitive unit which is not the source of the
sound; or
         b.   At a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound.
      2.   Revving Engines.  Operating any motor vehicle engine above idling
speed on or off the public right-of-way, so as to create excessive or
unnecessary sounds within a noise-sensitive area.
      3.   Compression Braking Devices.  Using compression brakes, commonly
referred to as jake brakes, on any motor vehicle, except to avoid imminent
danger to persons or property.
      4.   Exhausts.  Discharging into the open air the exhaust of any steam
engine, internal combustion engine, or any mechanical device operated by
compressed air or steam without a muffler, or with a sound control device less
effective than that provided on the original engine or mechanical device.
      5.   Idling Engines on Motor Vehicles or Compressors on Refrigerated
Trailers.  Idling more than 15 consecutive minutes between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, local time, any motor vehicle with a
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 8,000 pounds or greater which exceeds 50
dBA on the nearest occupied noise- sensitive property.
      6.   Vehicle Tires.  Squealing tires by excessive speed or acceleration
on or off public right- of-way, except when necessary to avoid imminent danger
to persons or property.
      7.   Motorcycles; Go-Karts; Dune Buggies. Operating motorcycles, go-
karts, dune buggies and other off-road recreational vehicles off the public
right-of-way on property not specifically designated as a recreational park for
off-road recreational use in such a manner as to exceed 75 dBA at 50 feet or
more.
      8.   Powered Model Vehicles.  Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles, with the exception of gliders and aircraft propelled by
electric motors, in areas not designated by the City Administrator or City
Council for that use, in such a manner as not to exceed 75 dBA at 50 feet or
more.
      9.   Explosives.  The discharge of fireworks and other explosive devices
unless pursuant to a locally permitted display or program.
      10.   Tampering.  The removal or rendering inoperative for purposes other
than maintenance, repair or replacement of any noise control device.
      11.   Animals.  Owning, possessing or harboring any bird or other animal,
which barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously for a
period of 10 minutes or more, for reasons other than being provoked by a person
trespassing or threatening to trespass.
      12.   Steam Whistles. Blowing any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work.
      13.   Compressed Air Devices.  The use of a mechanical device operated by
compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless the noise thereby created is
effectively muffled.
      14.   Warning Devices.  The sound created by warning devices that are not
reset within 5 minutes after being triggered.
§ 9.48.040   Maximum permissible sound levels.
   A.   No person shall cause or permit sound(s) to intrude onto the property
of another person which exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels set forth
below in this section.
   B.   The sound limitation established herein, as measured at or within the
property boundary of the receiving land use, are as set forth in Table 1
appended to this chapter after any applicable adjustments provided for herein
are applied.  When the sound limitations are exceeded, it shall constitute
excessive and unnecessary sound(s) and shall be violations in their own right
as well as being prima facie evidence of noise.
   C.   This section is violated if any of the following occur:
      1.   Any continuous sound that exceeds the limits of Table 1 for a
cumulative total of greater than 5 minutes in any 10-minute period;
      2.   Any sound that exceeds the limits of Table 1 by 5 dBA for a
cumulative total of greater than 1 minute, but less than 5 minutes in any 10-
minute period;
      3.   Any sound that exceeds the limits of Table 1 by 10 dBA at any point
in time; or
      4.   Any sound that exceeds the ambient noise levels existing by 10 dBA
created by a new industrial or commercial noise source on a previously unused
industrial or commercial site.
§ 9.48.050   Exceptions and variances.
   A.   Exceptions.  The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of
this chapter:
      1.   Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work, vehicles and/or
equipment;
      2.   Aircraft operations in compliance with applicable federal laws or
regulations;
      3.   Railroad activities as defined in Subpart A, Part 201 of Title 40,
CER of the Environmental Protection Agency’s railroad emission standards,
incorporated herein by reference;
      4.   Sounds produced by sound-amplifying equipment at activities
sponsored by Canby School District between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. midnight,
local time;
      5.    Sounds produced by sound-amplifying equipment at activities,
including fireworks and other explosive devices at football games, sponsored by
Canby School District between 7:00 a.m. and midnight, local time;
      6.   Sounds created by domestic power tools during the period 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m., local time, provided sound-dissipating devices on tools so
equipped are maintained in good repair;
      7.   Sounds made by warning devices operating continuously for 5 minutes
or less;
      8.   Idling motor vehicles, including compressors on refrigerated
trailers, within a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (CVWR) of 8,000 pounds or
greater between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., local time, provided they
are equipped with an exhaust system which is in good working order and in
constant operation;
      9.   Sounds created at the Clackamas County Fairgrounds as a result of
events sanctioned by the Clackamas County Fair Board;
      10.   Sounds caused by business operations in the commercial and
industrial zones, provided the sounds result from lawful commercial business
activity or manufacturing operations;
      11.   Construction activities during the period of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m., local time, provided equipment is maintained in good repair and equipped
with sound dissipating devices in good working order;
      12.   Sounds caused by city maintenance equipment between the hours of 7:
00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
      13.   Sounds created from city sanctioned events in the Downtown
Commercial zone; and
      14.   Sounds, including the discharge of fireworks and other explosive
devices, created from City and Canby Fire District sanctioned events.
   B.   Variances.  Any person who owns, controls or operates any sound source
which violates any of the provisions of this chapter may apply, in writing, to
the City Council for a variance from the provisions.  Any person who is
planning a noise source which is expected to violate any provision of this
chapter may apply to the City Council for a variance from the provisions.  Any
person granted a variance under this chapter may apply for renewal of that
variance upon its expiration.  The renewal application shall be processed just
as if it was an initial application.
      1.   Application.  An application for a noise variance shall be  made on
forms provided by the City Recorder’s Office.  The application shall be
accompanied by all the required information and fees.  If more than 1 date is
being requested for a noise variance at 1 location, they can be on 1
application. The written application shall state the provision from which a
variance is being sought, the period of time the variance is to apply, the
reason for which the variance is sought, and any other supporting information
which the City Council may reasonably require.  A list of property owners
within 200 feet of the location of the variance shall be provided by the
applicant with the application.
      2.   Review Standards. In establishing exceptions or granting variances,
the City Council shall consider:
         a.   The protection of health, safety and welfare of citizens as well
as the feasibility and cost of noise abatement;
         b.   The surrounding type of existing land use;
         c.   The acoustical nature of the sound emitted; and
         d.   Whether compliance with the provision would produce a benefit to
the public.
      3.   Time Duration of Variance. Any variance shall be granted for a
specific time interval, not to exceed 1 year.
      4.   Public Notification and Public Hearing.
         a.   Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper at
least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
         b.   Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to all property
owners within 200 feet of the location for the variance at least 10 days prior
to the public hearing.
         c.   The City Council shall hold a public hearing before the granting
of a variance.
      5.   Variances.
         a.   Conditions for Granting.  The City Council may grant specific
variances from the particular requirements of any rule, regulation or order, to
specific persons, class of persons or specific noise source upon those
conditions as it may deemnecessary to protect the public health and welfare, if
it finds that strict compliance with the rule, regulations or order is
inappropriate because of conditions beyond the control of the persons
requesting the variance;  because of special circumstances which would render
strict compliance unreasonable or impractical due to special physical
conditions or cause; because strict compliance would result in substantial
curtailment or closing down of a business, plant or operation; or because no
other alternative facility or method of handling is yet available.  Granting of
the variance shall not be materially detrimental to other property within the
same vicinity and the variance requested shall be the minimum which will
alleviate the hardship.
         b.   Revocation or Modification.  A variance granted may be revoked or
modified by the City Council after a public hearing held upon not less than 20
days’ notice.  The notice shall be served upon the holder of the variance by
certified mail and all persons who have filed with the City Council a written
request for this notification.
      6.   Emergency and Safety Hazard.  In the case of an emergency or safety
hazard, the City Administrator or his or her designee may revoke a variance
immediately by setting forth the nature of the emergency or hazard in a letter
mailed or hand-delivered to the holder of the variance.  A public hearing
before the City Council shall be held at the next regularly scheduled City
Council meeting following the revocation to reverse, affirm or modify the
revocation action.
(Am. Ord. 1373, passed 5-1-2013; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 9-6-2017; Am. Ord. 1489,
passed 8-15-2018)
§ 9.48.060   Chapter additional to other law.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nonexclusive and
shall not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy; not unless
specifically provided shall it be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any law,
ordinance or regulation relating to noise or sound, but shall be deemed
additional to existing legislation and common law on the subject.
APPENDIX A
TABLE 1:  ALLOWABLE SOUND LEVELS
 
Allowable Sound Levels (in dBA) in any 10-minute Period
                      Type of Noise Received by Use
Type of Source by Use Noise Sensitive Commercial* Industrial*
                      Day Night       Day Night   Day Night
Noise sensitive       55  45          70  65      75  70
Commercial            55  50          70  65      75  70
Industrial            55  50          70  65      75  70
* NOTE: Sounds caused by lawful business activity or manufacturing are
exempt. See §
9.48.050.A.10.
 
CHAPTER 9.50:  POLICE DUTIES TO INVENTORY PROPERTY
Section
   
9.50.010   Purpose.
   
9.50.020   Definitions.
   
9.50.030   Inventories of impounded vehicles.
   
9.50.040   Inventories of persons in police custody.
§ 9.50.010   Purpose.
   This chapter is meant to apply exclusively to the process for conducting an
inventory of the personal property in an impounded vehicle and the personal
possessions of a person in police custody and shall not be interpreted to
affect any other statutory or constitutional right(s) that police officers may
employ to search persons or search or seize possessions for other purposes.
§ 9.50.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Closed Container means a container whose contents are not exposed to view.
   Open Container means a container which is unsecured or incompletely secured
in such a fashion that the container’s contents are exposed to view.
   Police Custody means either:
      1.   The imposition of restraint as a result of an arrest, as that term
is defined at O.R.S. 133.005(1);
      2.   The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police
officer pursuant to a court order;
      3.   The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police
officer pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 426;
      4.   The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police
officer for purposes of taking the restrained person to an approved facility
for the involuntary confinement of persons pursuant to state law.
   Police Officer means any officer of the City Police Department.
   Valuable means:
      1.   Cash money of an aggregate amount of $50 or more; or
      2.   Individual items of personal property with a value of over $500.
§ 9.50.030   Inventories of impounded vehicles.
   A.   The contents of all vehicles impounded by a police officer will be
inventoried.  The inventory shall be conducted before constructive custody of
the vehicle is released to a third-party towing company except under the
following circumstances:
      1.   If there is reasonable suspicion to believe that the safety of
either the police officer(s) or any other person is at risk, a required
inventory will be done as soon as safely practical; or
      2.   If the vehicle is being impounded for evidentiary purposes in
connection with the investigation of a criminal offense, the inventory will be
done after the investigation is completed.
   B.   The purpose for the inventory of an impounded vehicle will be to:
      1.   Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid
spurious claims to property;
      2.   Assist in the prevention of theft of property;
      3.   Locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances; or
      4.   Reduce the danger to persons and property.
   C.   Inventories of impounded vehicles will be conducted according to the
following procedures:
      1.   An inventory of personal property and the contents of open
containers will be conducted throughout the passenger and engine compartments
of the vehicle, including but not limited to accessible areas under or within
the dashboard area, in any pockets in the doors or in the back of the front
seat, in any console between the seats, under any floor mats and under the
seats;
      2.   In addition to the passenger and engine compartments as described
above, an inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers
will also be conducted in the following locations:
         a.   Any other type of unlocked compartments that are a part of the
vehicle, including but not limited to unlocked vehicle trunks and unlocked car-
top containers; and
         b.   Any locked compartments, including but not limited to locked
vehicle trunks, locked hatchbacks and locked car-top containers, if either the
keys are available to be released with the vehicle to the third-party towing
company or an unlocking mechanism for the compartment is available within the
vehicle.
      3.   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, closed containers located
either within the vehicle or any of the vehicle’s compartments will not be
opened for inventory purposes;
      4.   Upon completion of the inventory, the police officer will complete a
report as directed by the Chief of that officer’s department; and
      5.   Any valuables located during the inventory process will be listed on
a property receipt. A copy of the property receipt will either be left in the
vehicle or tendered to the person in control of the vehicle if the person is
present.  The valuables will be dealt with in a manner as directed by the Chief
of the police officer’s department.
§ 9.50.040   Inventories of persons in police custody.
   A.   A police officer will inventory the personal property in the possession
of a person taken into custody and this inventory will be conducted whenever:
      1.   The person will be either placed in a secure police holding room or
transported in the secure portion of a police vehicle; or
      2.   Custody of the person will be transferred to another law enforcement
agency, correctional facility or treatment facility as that phrase is used in
O.R.S. Ch. 426 or other lawfully approved facility for the involuntary
confinement of persons pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes.
   B.   The purpose of the inventory of a person in police custody will be to:
      1.   Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid
spurious claims to property;
      2.   Fulfill the requirements of O.R.S. 133.455 to the extent that the
statute may apply to certain property held by the police officer for
safekeeping;
      3.   Assist in the prevention of theft of property;
      4.   Locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances;
      5.   Locate weapons and instruments that may facilitate an escape from
custody or endanger law enforcement personnel; or
      6.   Reduce the danger to persons and property.
   C.   Inventories of the personal property in the possession of the persons
will be conducted according to the following procedures:
      1.   An inventory will occur prior to placing the person into a holding
room or a police vehicle, whichever occurs first.  However, if reasonable
suspicion to believe that the safety of either the police officer(s) or the
person in custody or both are at risk, an inventory will be done as soon as
safely practical prior to the transfer of custody to another law enforcement
agency or facility.
      2.   To complete the inventory of the personal property in the possession
of the person, the police officer will remove all items of personal property
from the clothing worn by the person.  In addition, the officer will also
remove all items of personal property from all open containers in the
possession of the person.
      3.   A closed container in the possession of the person will have its
contents inventoried only when:
         a.   The closed container is to be placed in the immediate possession
of the person at the time that person is placed in the secure portion of a
custodial facility, police vehicle or secure police holding room; or
         b.   The person requests that the closed container be with them in the
secure portion of a police vehicle or a secure police holding room; or
         c.   The closed container is designed for carrying money and/or small
valuables on or about the person, including but not limited to closed purses,
closed coin purses, closed wallets and closed fanny packs.
   D.   Valuables found during the inventory process will be noted by the
police officer in a report as directed by the Chief of the officer’s
department.
   E.   All items of personal property neither left in the immediate possession
of the person in custody nor left with the facility or agency accepting custody
of the person, will be handled in the following manner:
      1.   A property receipt will be prepared listing the property to be
retained in the possession of the respective police department, and a copy of
that receipt will be tendered to the person in custody when the person is
released to the facility or agency accepting custody of the persons; and
      2.   The property will be dealt with in such manner as directed by the
Chief of that officer’s department.
   F.   All items of personal property neither left in the immediate possession
of the person in custody nor dealt with as provided in division E. above, will
be released to the facility or agency accepting custody of the person so that
they may:
      1.   Hold the property for safekeeping on behalf of the person in
custody; and
      2.   Prepare and deliver a receipt, as may be required by O.R.S. 133.455,
for any valuables held on behalf of the person in custody.
CHAPTER 9.54:  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
Section
   
9.54.010   Designated.
   
9.54.020   Affirmative defense.
   
9.54.030   Restitution.
   
9.54.040   Parent effectiveness program.
   
9.54.050   Penalty.
§ 9.54.010   Designated.
   A person commits the offense of failing to supervise a minor if the person
is the parent, legal guardian or person with legal responsibility for the
safety and welfare of a child under 18 years of age and the child has been
found on private property or premises open to the public in violation of any
provision of this Municipal Code.
§ 9.54.020   Affirmative defense.
   A.   It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense of failure to
supervise a minor if the child’s violation of the code occurred in the presence
of the person.  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense of failure to
supervise a minor if the violation occurred on private property of the person.
   B.   It shall be a further affirmative defense that the person:
      1.   Took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child at the
time the person is alleged to have failed to supervise; or
      2.   Reported the act to the appropriate authorities.
§ 9.54.030   Restitution.
   In addition to any or all fines or penalties imposed pursuant to this
chapter, the court may order the person to pay any restitution to a victim of
the minor’s conduct.  The amount of restitution ordered pursuant to this
chapter shall not exceed $2,500.
§ 9.54.040   Parent effectiveness program.
   The first time a person is convicted of any offense described in §
9.54.010, the person shall not be required to pay a fine exceeding $100 if the
person successfully participates and completes a parent effectiveness program
to the satisfaction of the court.
§ 9.54.050   Penalty.
   Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.
TITLE 10:  VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
   Chapter
      
10.04   CITY TRAFFIC CODE
      
10.08   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
10.12   IMPOUNDING UNINSURED VEHICLES
CHAPTER 10.04:  CITY TRAFFIC CODE
Section
   
10.04.010   Applicability of state traffic laws.
   
10.04.020   Definitions.
   
10.04.030   U-turns.
   
10.04.040   Sleds behind cars.
   
10.04.050   Removing glass and debris after accidents.
   
10.04.060   Parades and processions.
   
10.04.070   Method of parking.
   
10.04.075   Parking time limits.
   
10.04.080   Prohibited parking; failure to pay fines and post bail.
   
10.04.085   Failure to pay; notice of hearing; order to immobilize vehicle.
   
10.04.090   Boot installation.
   
10.04.095   Boot removal.
   
10.04.100   Parking, storage or abandoning of vehicles on streets.
   
10.04.125   Penalty.
   
10.04.130   Public Works Director; duties.
   
10.04.140   Existing signs.
   
10.04.145   Trucks prohibited on restricted streets.
§ 10.04.010   Applicability of state traffic laws.
   A.   Violations of provisions in O.R.S. Chapters 153, 743 and 801 through
823, inclusive as now constituted, is an offense against the city.
   B.   If an ordinance or provision thereof of the city is in conflict with
the motor vehicle laws of the state, the motor vehicle laws of the state shall
prevail.
   C.   Violation of a provision identical to a state statute is punishable by
a fine or imprisonment not to exceed the penalty prescribed by the state
statute.
§ 10.04.020   Definitions.
   In addition to the definitions contained in the Oregon Revised Statutes,
including all amendments, the following words and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the following meaning, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Highway, as used in this chapter and in the sections of the state motor
vehicle laws, includes all streets and alleys in the city.
   Loading Zone means that space adjacent to the curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
   Local Delivery Only. Truck deliveries permitted only to on street adjacent
properties or properties connected by a driveway access.
   Local Truck. Any Truck that begins or ends a trip within the city limits of
the City of Canby.
   Parking means to stop and stand, with or without a driver, or to leave a
motor vehicle upon any street, alley or public place in the city.
   Truck. Any commercial motor vehicle with a gross combination weight rating
over 26,001 pounds or more, and as defined in O.R.S. 801.208.
   Truck Route. Any street as designated by signing upon which the unrestricted
use of trucks is permitted.
(Am. Ord. 1497, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 10.04.030   U-turns.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to reverse the direction of any motor
vehicle by making a U- turn upon any street in the city except at street
intersections; provided, however, that no reverse turns shall be made by the
driver of any vehicle at any street intersection where any type of sign or
marker is erected prohibiting any such reverse turn.
§ 10.04.040   Sleds behind cars.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tie to any motor vehicle which is
operated on the streets of the city any sled, toboggan or similar contrivance
or thing; and it shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to
permit any sled, toboggan or similar contrivance or thing to be attached or
tied to any motor vehicle being driven by the operator; provided, that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to trailers, bus trailers or pole or
pipe dolly, nor to cars being towed, when the same are attached or towed in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 10.04.050   Removing glass and debris after accidents.
   Any party to a collision or other motor vehicle accident upon any street,
alley or public place in this city shall immediately remove or cause to be
removed from the street, alley or public place all glass and foreign substance
resulting from the collision or accident, as well as the motor vehicle which
the party was driving at the time of the collision or accident.
§ 10.04.060   Parades and processions.
   A.   During parades, the police may clear the streets and prohibit vehicles
and pedestrians from crossing the streets. 
   B.   No pedestrian or vehicle  shall  break  through the line of a funeral
procession.
§ 10.04.070   Method of parking.
   A.   Whenever any motor vehicle is parked upon any street in the city, it
shall be headed as though proceeding upon the right side of the street.
   B.   Where parking space markings are placed on a street, in a parking lot
or in a parking structure, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than
in the indicated direction, other than in a marked space and, unless the size
or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible, other than within a single
marked space.
   C.   Where no mode of parking is indicated by a painted stripe or other
marking, any and all vehicles parked in any unmarked area shall be parked
parallel with the street curb, and with the tires or wheels on the right-hand
side of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb.
   D.   Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers that his or her vehicle is
parked close to a building to which the Fire Department or ambulance service
has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the
area unless otherwise directed by police, ambulance or fire officers.
§ 10.04.075   Parking time limits.
   A.   1.   The lawful time allowed for parking vehicles other than motor
trucks engaged in the actual loading or unloading of freight or merchandise
shall, in any section of any street, be as indicated by lettering upon the face
of painted signs placed at the top of standards placed along the curbline of
any section of any street or by parking meters.  The time limits and the
indication thereof may be changed from time to time by the City Administrator. 
The time limits shall mean the continuous aggregate of time of all parking of
any 1 vehicle within any 1 block or any blocks adjacent thereto within the
daily time limits.
      2.   This shall not prohibit removing a vehicle from the above designated
area and returning the vehicle to the area after expiration of 1 hour.
   B.   Time limits shall be applicable between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.  These time limits shall not apply on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial
Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas.
   C.   It is unlawful to erase, remove or obliterate any marking that has been
placed on a vehicle for the purpose of monitoring parking time limits.
§ 10.04.080   Prohibited parking; failure to pay fines and post bail.
   No operator shall stand or park a vehicle and no owner shall allow a vehicle
to stand or park on a street, city property, property controlled by the city or
property for which the city is contracted to enforce parking regulations, when
there are 3 or more unpaid parking violations of this code and the time for
appearing or posting bail in Municipal Court specified on the citation(s) has
passed or the time for payment of the fine has passed.
§ 10.04.085   Failure to pay; notice of hearing; order to immobilize vehicle.
   A.   Upon the failure of the owner or operator of a vehicle to pay unpaid
bail, fines or a combination of bail or fines for 3 or more parking violation
(s) under this chapter, notice of the delinquency shall be given to the
registered owner of the vehicle as shown by the Department of Motor Vehicles by
certified mail.  The registered owner will be given 15 days from the date of
the notice to either post the bail, pay the fine(s), or request a hearing
before the Municipal Judge to contest the parking citation(s) received.
   B.   Upon failure of the registered owner to post bail, pay the fine(s), or
request a hearing within 15 days, the Municipal Judge shall issue an order
directing the parking control officer or any other police officer so designated
to immobilize the vehicle should the vehicle be found on a city street, city
property, property controlled by the city, or property for which the city is
contracted to enforce parking regulations as provided in this chapter.
§ 10.04.090   Boot installation.
   A.   When a driver, owner or person in charge of a vehicle is cited for
violation of §
10.04.080, fails to respond to notice given as required above, and an order
authorizing immobilization has been signed by the Municipal Judge, the parking
officer or any police officer so designated shall:
      1.   Immobilize the vehicle temporarily until 11:00 a.m. of the following
day by installing on or attaching to the vehicle a device designed to restrict
the normal movement of the vehicle;
      2.   Conspicuously affix to the vehicle the written notice prescribed in
division B. of this section; and
      3.   Unless release of the vehicle is arranged by 11:00 a.m. of the
following day, remove the vehicle from the street or other public property as
provided in this chapter.
   B.   The notice required by division A. of this section shall contain:
      1.   The name of the Municipal Judge ordering the temporary
immobilization;
      2.   A description of the vehicle and its location;
      3.   A statement of the reason for the temporary immobilization of the
vehicle, including a reference to the section of this chapter violated;
      4.   Where to go and how to obtain release of the vehicle;
      5.   The date and time when the city will have the vehicle towed and
stored at the owner’s expense, resulting in the sale of the vehicle to satisfy
these expenses and unpaid bail and fines if the owner fails to redeem the
vehicle; and
      6.   The statement that attempting to remove the immobilization device or
removing it, or attempting to remove or removing the vehicle before it is
released as authorized by this chapter, is an offense.
   C.   The parking restrictions of the city shall not apply to a vehicle that
has been temporarily immobilized as provided in this section.
   D.   There shall be assessed a charge for booting a vehicle in addition to
any outstanding fines or other expenses assessed against the vehicle. This fee
shall be set forth by resolution.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 10.04.095   Boot removal.
   A.   No person other than an officer of the city may remove or attempt to
remove a temporary immobilization device, or move or attempt to move the
vehicle, before it is released by the Police Department or the Clerk of the
Municipal Court in accordance with this section.
   B.   A vehicle shall be released and the temporary immobilization device
removed when the owner, operator or person in charge of the vehicle either:
      1.   a.   Posts bail and pays all fines and bail for parking citations
issued against the vehicle, its operator or owner; and
         b.   Pays the booting charge.
      2.   Presents clear and convincing information to any employee of the
city designated by the Municipal Judge to receive the information, that the
present owner of the vehicle did not own the immobilized vehicle at the time
the parking citations were issued that established the violation of §
10.04.080, or that the bail and fines for parking citations that establish the
violation of §
10.04.080 have been paid before the vehicle was temporarily immobilized.
   C.   The city employee designated by the Municipal Judge as provided in
division B. of this section may for good cause extend the time limit the
temporary immobilization device is left attached to a vehicle before it is
towed and stored, provided the owner, in writing, assumes all risk of damage to
the vehicle while it remains immobilized.  The extension of the time limit
shall not exceed an additional 24 hours, excluding Sundays and holidays.
   D.   In lieu of proceeding under divisions B. and C. of this section, the
owner, operator or person in charge of the vehicle may request that the
Municipal Judge rather than his or her designee conduct a hearing in regard to
the relevant issues contained in divisions B. and C. hereof.  The hearing shall
be conducted in an informal manner and as promptly as the court’s docket
permits.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 10.04.100   Parking, storage or abandoning of vehicles on streets.
   A.   1.  No person, firm or corporation shall park, store or permit to be
stored on a street or other public property therein, without the permission of
the City Police Department, a vehicle or personal property for a period in
excess of 72 hours.  The continuity of the time shall not be deemed broken by
movement of the vehicle elsewhere on the block unless the movement removes the
vehicle from the block where it is located before it is returned.
      2.  No person, firm or corporation shall abandon a vehicle upon a street
or upon any other public or private property.
   B.   When a vehicle is found in violation of division A. of this section,
the officer responsible for the enforcement of this section shall follow the
procedures provided in O.R.S. Chapter 819 dealing with the custody, removal and
disposal of vehicles.
(Am. Ord. 1485, passed 7-18-2018)
§ 10.04.125   Penalty.
   A.   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500 for each violation.
   B.   For a second or subsequent conviction within 1 year, a person shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $750.
   C.   Violation of a provision identical to state statute is punishable by a
fine not to exceed the penalty prescribed by the state statute.
§ 10.04.130   Public Works Director; duties.
   Subject to the approval of the City Council by resolution or motion, the
Public Works Director shall:
   A.   Designate stop streets;
   B.   Designate 1-way streets;
   C.   Designate crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes;
   D.   Designate areas in which no parking shall be permitted and areas in
which the time of parking is to be limited;
   E.   Direct the placing and maintenance of those traffic signs, markers and
signals as may be reasonably necessary to carry the above powers into effect
and for the regulation and safety of traffic;
   F.   Exercise a general supervision over the administration and enforcement
of all traffic ordinances; and
   G.   Require the pruning or trimming of trees and shrubs along streets and
highways so that they will not obstruct the view for traffic; and order the
removal or alteration of any signs, fences or other objects along streets and
highways that are an obstruction of the view for traffic.
§ 10.04.140   Existing signs.
   All official traffic signs, signals and markers existing at the time of the
adoption of this chapter shall be considered official under the provisions of
this chapter; provided, however, that the City Council may by resolution or
motion at any time have the official traffic signs, signals or markers removed
or changed, or the same may be done at the direction of the Public Works
Director; and provided further, that any additional official traffic signs,
signals or markers erected, installed or painted shall first be authorized by
resolution or motion of the City Council or by order of the Public Works
Director.
§ 10.04.145   Trucks prohibited on restricted streets.
   A.   Streets or parts of streets in the city that are appropriately signed
for no truck, local delivery only, local truck only, or with a gross vehicle
weight restriction are designated as restricted streets.
   B.   When appropriate signs are erected on streets establishing a truck
route, no person shall operate, drive or cause or permit to be operated or be
driven, any truck not otherwise exempted under division A. of this section, on
any restricted street.
(Ord. 1497, passed 1-2-2019)
CHAPTER 10.08:  ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
10.08.010   Unlawful vehicle storage designated; time limit.
   
10.08.020   Nuisance declared; removal or enclosure required.
   
10.08.030   Notice to remove or enclose; time limit for compliance.
   
10.08.040   Failure to comply with notice.
   
10.08.050   Removal and impoundment by city.
   
10.08.060   Impounded vehicle; payment of charges prerequisite to release.
   
10.08.070   Repair or dismantling vehicle prohibited; emergency service.
§ 10.08.010   Unlawful vehicle storage designated; time limit.
   A.   It is unlawful to park, store or leave or permit the parking or storing
of any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind or of any motor vehicle
trailer, or of motor vehicle parts either licensed or unlicensed, of any kind,
for a period of time in excess of 15 days within any one 12-month period, which
is in a rusted, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, or inoperative or
abandoned condition, whether attended or not, upon private property within the
city, unless it is in connection with a business enterprise lawfully licensed
by the city and properly operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to
the zoning laws of the city.
   B.   It is unlawful to park, store or leave or permit the parking or storing
of any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind or of any motor vehicle
trailer, either licensed or unlicensed, of any kind for a period of time in
excess of 48 hours, which is in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled,
inoperative or abandoned condition, whether attended or not, upon public
property within the city without prior permission of the City Police
Department.
§ 10.08.020   Nuisance declared; removal or enclosure required.
   The accumulation and storage of 1 or more of these vehicles or of motor
vehicle parts, as defined in §
10.08.010, on private property beyond the 15-day limit, shall constitute
rubbish and unsightly debris and a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.  It shall be the duty of the
registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles, and it shall also be the duty of
the owner of the private property or the lessee or other person in possession
of the private property upon which the vehicle is located, to remove the same
from the city within 15 days or to have the same completely enclosed within a
building where it will not be visible from a street or adjacent property.
§ 10.08.030   Notice to remove or enclose; time limit for compliance.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to give written notice to the
registered owner of any motor vehicle or motor vehicle trailer which is in
violation of this chapter, as described in §
10.08.010, and to further give the notice to the owner or lessee of the private
land upon which the motor vehicle, motor vehicle trailer or motor vehicle parts
is or are situated, giving notice that the vehicle violates this chapter and
demanding that the motor vehicle or motor vehicles be removed from the city
within 72 hours, or that within 72 hours the same is to be housed within a
building where it will not be visible from a street or adjacent property.  The
notice may be given by personal service or by registered mail, with return
receipt requested.
§ 10.08.040   Failure to comply with notice.
   If the notice is given as provided in §
10.08.030, and the person upon whom the notice demand is made fails to remove
as required by the notice the vehicle or vehicles, as the case may be, or fails
to cause the same to be placed in a building where it will not be visible from
the street or adjacent property, then that person shall be in violation of this
section and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$500.  A second or subsequent violation within a 12-month period shall be, upon
conviction thereof, punishable by a fine of not less than $500.
§ 10.08.050   Removal and impoundment by city.
   As an alternate procedure, the Chief of Police may, after giving the notice
required by §
10.08.030, and after waiting 72 hours, cause the vehicle or vehicles to be
removed by a city truck or by a commercial tow truck to a commercial garage or
an automobile wrecking yard or any other suitable place for storage of the
vehicles as may be designated by the Chief of Police.  Within 48 hours after
removal and storage of the vehicle by the Chief of Police, he or she shall give
the notice in the manner prescribed in §
10.08.030 to the registered owner of the vehicle and also to the owner, lessee
or person in possession of land from which the vehicle was or vehicles were
removed, that the vehicle or vehicles have been impounded and stored for
violation of this chapter and notice that the vehicles shall be deemed to have
been abandoned and will thereafter be discarded as junk or may, at the
discretion of the Chief of Police, be sold as an abandoned vehicle in the
manner prescribed in this chapter after giving not less than 30 days’ notice by
a registered letter addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle at his or
her latest address shown on the records in the office in the Motor Vehicles
Division of the state, with the owner given the right to reclaim the vehicle
within the 30 days by paying all the costs and expenses incurred in the
removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle for a period not in excess of
90 days; and if not so reclaimed, then to be sold, with the Chief of Police to
execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, with a copy of the certificate of
sale to be delivered to the purchaser and the original to be retained by the
Chief of Police; and the money so received from the sale thereof to be applied
first to the payment of the costs and expenses incurred in the removal,
preservation and custody of the vehicle and the remainder to be retained by the
city and deposited in the General Fund.
§ 10.08.060   Impounded vehicle; payment of charges prerequisite to release.
   If any vehicle is impounded or stored by the Chief of Police under the
provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, or pursuant to
any other lawful authority of the Police Department, the vehicle or vehicles or
other personal property shall not be released by the appointed keeper thereof
until all charges connected with the removal, towing, and storage of the
vehicle, vehicles or personal property have been fully paid as evidenced by the
City Recorder’s paid receipt.
§ 10.08.070   Repair or dismantling vehicle prohibited; emergency service.
   It is unlawful to disassemble, construct, reconstruct, repair and/or service
motor vehicles or motor vehicle trailers of any kind upon private property
where visible from a street or the property of adjoining owners for a period of
time longer than 15 days within any one 12-month period.  When emergency
repairs are required to be made in a street, road, alley or other public
thoroughfare, emergency service shall not extend over a period of 2 hours, and
shall not interfere with or impede the flow of traffic.  The violation of this
section shall also constitute a public nuisance and violation, which shall be
punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $500.
CHAPTER 10.12:  IMPOUNDING UNINSURED VEHICLES
Section
   
10.12.010   Impounding of uninsured vehicles authorized.
   
10.12.020   Notice after removal.
   
10.12.030   Hearing before tow hearings officer, procedure and costs.
§ 10.12.010   Impounding of uninsured vehicles authorized.
   A.   A police officer who reasonably believes that a person is operating a
motor vehicle on any highway or premises open to the public without either of
the following may, without prior notice, order the vehicle impounded until a
person with right to possession of the vehicle complies with the conditions
for  release or the vehicle is ordered released by the tow hearings officer: 
      1.   Being insured while driving the vehicle under a motor vehicle
liability insurance policy that meets the requirements described under O.R.S.
806.080; or
      2.   The person or the owner of the vehicle providing the Department of
Transportation with other satisfactory proof of compliance with the financial
responsibility requirements of this state in violation of O.R.S. 806.010.
   B.   A vehicle impounded under this chapter shall be released to a person
entitled to lawful possession upon proof of compliance with financial
responsibility requirements for the vehicle, payment to the police agency of a
fee and payment of any towing and storage charges.  Proof shall be presented to
the City Police Department, which shall authorize the person storing the
vehicle to release it upon payment of the charges. This fee shall be set forth
by resolution.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 10.12.020   Notice after removal.
   A.   If the City Police Department takes custody of a vehicle pursuant to
this chapter, it shall provide, either personally or by certified mail within
48 hours of the removal, written notice with an explanation of procedures
available for obtaining a hearing under §
10.12.030 of this chapter to the owners of the vehicle and any lessors or
security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of
Transportation.  The notice shall state that the vehicle has been taken into
custody and shall give the location of the vehicle and describe procedures for
the release of the vehicle and for obtaining a hearing under §
10.12.030 of this chapter.  The 48-hour period under this section does not
include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.
   B.   Any notice given under this section after a vehicle is taken into
custody and removed shall state all of the following:
      1.   That the City Police Department took the vehicle into custody and
removed the vehicle and the statute, ordinance or rule under which the vehicle
has been taken into custody and removed;
      2.   The location of the vehicle or the telephone number and address of
the City Police Department that will provide the information;
      3.   That the vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges, the
amount of charges that have accrued to the date of the notice and the daily
storage charges;
      4.   That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for payment
of the towing and storage charges and that the vehicle and its contents will be
sold to cover the charges if the charges are not paid by  a date specified by
the City Police Department;
      5.   That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the
vehicle and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to contest the
validity of taking the vehicle into custody and removing it and to contest the
reasonableness of the charges for towing and storage if a hearing is timely
requested;
      6.   The time within which a hearing must be requested and the method for
requesting a hearing; and
      7.   That the vehicle impounded under this chapter shall be released to a
person entitled to lawful possession upon proof of compliance with financial
responsibility requirements for the vehicle, payment to the police agency of a
fee and payment of  any  outstanding  towing and storage charges. This fee
shall be set forth by resolution.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
§ 10.12.030   Hearing before tow hearings officer, procedure and costs.
   A.   A person entitled to lawful possession of a vehicle impounded under
this chapter may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the validity of the
impoundment.  The written request must be made within 5 calendar days of the
impoundment.  The request shall be made to the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.
   B.   When a timely request for a hearing is made, a hearing shall be held
before the tow hearings officer designated by the city.  The hearing shall be
set within 4 calendar days after the request is received, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, but may be postponed at the request of the person asking
for the hearing.
   C.   The City Police Department shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that there were reasonable grounds to believe
that the vehicle was being operated in violation of O.R.S. 806.010.  The police
officer who ordered the vehicle impounded may submit an affidavit to the tow
hearings officer in lieu of making a personal appearance at the hearing.
   D.   If the tow hearings officer finds that the impoundment of the vehicle
was proper, he or she shall enter an order supporting the removal and shall
find that the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle is liable
for usual and customary towing and storage costs.  The tow hearings officer may
also find the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle liable for
costs of the hearing.
   E.   If the tow hearings officer finds that impoundment of the vehicle was
improper, the hearings officer shall order the vehicle released to the person
entitled to possession and shall enter a finding that the owner or person
entitled to possession of the vehicle is not liable for any towing or storage
costs resulting from the impoundment.  If there is a lien on the vehicle for
towing and storage charges, the hearings officer shall order it paid by the
city.
TITLE 11
(RESERVED)
 
TITLE 12:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
   Chapter
      
12.04   STREET NAMING
      
12.08   STREET EXCAVATIONS
      
12.12   SIDEWALK DISPLAYS
      
12.13   SIDEWALK CAFÉS
      
12.16   SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE
      
12.20   ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
      
12.24   CITY PARKS
      
12.28   CITY CEMETERY
      
12.32   TREE REGULATIONS
      
12.36   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
      
12.40   BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND ROLLER BLADES
CHAPTER 12.04:  STREET NAMING
Section
   
12.04.010   Reference to thoroughfares.
   
12.04.020   Division of city into areas.
   
12.04.030   Authority of Planning Commission; general classification.
   
12.04.040   Extension of system
   
12.04.050   Northwest area: Streets extending east and west.
   
12.04.060   Northwest area: Streets extending north and south.
   
12.04.070   Northeast area: Streets extending east and west.
   
12.04.080   N.E. 4th Avenue.
   
12.04.090   Northeast area: Streets extending north and south.
   
12.04.100   Southwest area: Streets extending east and west.
   
12.04.110   Southwest area: Streets extending north and south.
   
12.04.120   Southeast area: Streets extending east and west.
   
12.04.130   Southeast area: Streets extending north and south.
   
12.04.140   N.W. Baker Drive.
   
12.04.150   Street signs.
   
12.04.160   Defacing or damaging street signs.
   
12.04.170   Naming of new thoroughfares.
   
12.04.180   Linking together of 2 thoroughfares.
§ 12.04.010   Reference to thoroughfares.
   The names of all public thoroughfares in the city including, though not
exclusively, those commonly called or designated as street, avenue, road, lane,
drive, court, place, way, boulevard or circle, shall henceforth be named,
designated and known as set forth in this chapter, and shall be referred to
collectively in this chapter as thoroughfares, or singly in this chapter as
thoroughfare.
§ 12.04.020   Division of city into areas.
   The city, as divided into 4 areas by Building Numbering Ord. 501, codified
in
Chapter 15.08, shall remain so divided for the purposes of this chapter, and
the street previously designated and now known as Ivy Street shall remain named
as Ivy Street.
§ 12.04.030   Authority of Planning Commission; general classification.
   The City Planning Commission is authorized to name all thoroughfares in
accordance with the following guidelines and shall be responsible for
designating the thoroughfares in a manner that will not duplicate nor cause
confusing similarity of Clackamas County thoroughfare designations in the city
postal district and immediate adjacent areas:
   A.   Thoroughfares parallel with Ivy Street shall be called streets or
courts.  The nomenclature of these thoroughfares shall be oriented to plants,
trees, shrubs and the like, and shall be sequenced in alphabetical order,
originating at Ash Street and extending easterly.  Directional prefixes of
these thoroughfares shall be north or south, depending on whether they are
north or south of the Southern Pacific Company right- of-way.  The following
named thoroughfares shall be exceptions to this nomenclature:
      1.   S.W. Berg Parkway;
      2.   N.W. Baker Drive;
      3.   N.W. Dahlia Place;
      4.   N.E. Country Club Drive.
   B.   Thoroughfares parallel with the Southern Pacific Company right-of-way
shall be called avenues or places.  These thoroughfares shall be numbered in
sequence, starting at N.E. 1st Avenue and N.W. 1st Avenue and extending
northerly; and starting at S.E. 1st Avenue and S.W. 1st Avenue and extending
southerly.  Directional prefixes for these thorough- fares shall be related to
the quadrant in which located: N.E., N.W., S.E. and S.W. The following named
thoroughfares shall be exceptions to this nomenclature:
      1.   N.W. Knights Bridge Road;
      2.   N.W. Territorial Road;
      3.   N.E. Territorial Road;
      4.   N.E. Fairway Lane;
      5.   N.E. Greenview Way; and
      6.   S.E. Township Road.
   C.   Thoroughfares parallel with section lines and not extensions of streets
or avenues shall be called roads.
   D.   Any thoroughfare not named in this chapter and which cannot be
designated under any of the foregoing classifications shall be designated by
the Planning Commission as either drive, way, lane, circle or any other
appropriate designation.
§ 12.04.040   Extension of system.
   The Planning Commission is authorized to extend the city grid of
thoroughfare nomenclature and numbering to those limits as are agreeable with
the County Planning Commission.
§ 12.04.050   Northwest area: Streets extending east and west.
   Thoroughfares in the northwest area of the city which extend east and west
shall be named consecutively, commencing with the first avenue north of the
Southern Pacific Company right-of-way, as follows (the names in parentheses in
this and all other sections of this chapter are existing names and now changed
by this chapter):
   N.W. 1st Avenue;
   N.W. 2nd Avenue;
   N.W. 3rd Avenue;
   N.W. 4th Avenue;
   N.W. 5th Avenue;
   N.W. 6th Avenue  (N.W. 8th);
   N.W. 6th Place  (N.W. 9th);
   N.W. 7th Avenue;
   N.W. Knights Bridge Road;
   N.W. 9th Avenue (N.W. Virginia Avenue);
   N.W. 10th Avenue (N.W. Wait Avenue);
   N.W. 11th Avenue (N.W. Kyllo Avenue);
   N.W. 12th Avenue (N.W. Boe Avenue, N.W. Memorial);
   N.W. 13th Avenue (N.W. Westwood); and
   N.W. Territorial Road.
§ 12.04.060   Northwest area: Streets extending north and south.
   Thoroughfares in the northwest area of the city which extend north and south
and commencing with and including Ivy Street are named consecutively as
follows:
   N. Ivy Street;
   N. Holly Street (Ferry Road);
   N. Hawthorne Court (N. Washington Street);
   N. Grant Street;
   N. Fir Street;
   N. Elm Street;
   N. Douglas Street;
   N. Cedar Street;
   N. Birch Street (Pendleton Drive, Dahlia Court);
   N. Aspen Street (Eileen Drive); and
   N. Ash Street.
§ 12.04.070   Northeast area: Streets extending east and west.
   Thoroughfares in the northeast area of the city which extend east and west
shall be named consecutively commencing with the first avenue north of the
Southern Pacific Company right-of-way, as follows:
   N.E. 1st Avenue;
   N.E. 2nd Avenue;
   N.E. 3rd Avenue;
   N.E. 4th Avenue;
   N.E. 5th Avenue;
   N.E. 9th Avenue  (N.E. Virginia Avenue);
   N.E. 9th Place (Wait Lane);
   N.E. 10th Avenue (Wait Avenue);
   N.E. 11th Avenue (Kyllo Avenue, Kyllo Lane);
   N.E. 12th Avenue (Boe Avenue, N.E. Locust Place);
   N.E. 13th Avenue (Greta Avenue);
   N.E. 14th Avenue (Evelyn);
   N.E. 15th Avenue (Faith);
   N.E. 16th Avenue (Garden View);
   N.E. Territorial Road;
   N.E. 20th Avenue (Libee);
   N.E. 22nd Avenue (Bouncy); and
   N.E. 23rd Avenue (Country Club Way).
§ 12.04.080   N.E. 4th Avenue.
   The thoroughfare extending east and west parallel and adjacent to the south
line of Clackamas County fairgrounds from N.E. 4th Avenue across the Southern
Pacific Company right-of-way and to the intersection of U.S. 99E shall be named
N.E. 4th Avenue.
§ 12.04.090   Northeast area: Streets extending north and south.
   Thoroughfares in the northeast area of the city  which  extend  north  and 
south and commencing with the first street east of Ivy Street are named
consecutively as follows:
   N. Juniper Court;
   N. Juniper Street;
   N. Knott Street;
   N. Locust Street;
   N. Lupine Court (N. Ellen Drive);
   N. Manzanita Street (Aneta Street);
   N. Maple Lane;
   N. Maple Street (N. Amrine Street);
   N. Noble Street (Florence Street);
   N. Oak Street; and
   N. Pine Street (N. Neff Street).
§ 12.04.100   Southwest area: Streets extending east and west.
   Thoroughfares now in the southwest area of the city which extend east and
west shall be named consecutively commencing with the first avenue (Highway
99E) south of the Southern Pacific Company right-of-way as follows:
   S.W. 1st Avenue;
   S.W. 2nd Avenue;
   S.W. 3rd Avenue;
   S.W. 4th Avenue;
   S.W. 5th Avenue;
   S.W. 6th Avenue;
   S.W. 7th Avenue; and
   S.W. 13th Avenue (S.W. Mundorff Road).
§ 12.04.110   Southwest area: Streets extending north and south.
   Thoroughfares in the southwest area of the city which extend north and south
and commencing with and including Ivy Street are named consecutively as
follows:
   S. Ivy Street;
   S. Holly Street;
   S. Grant Street;
   S. Fir Street;
   S. Elm Street;
   S. Douglas Street;
   S. Birch Street;
   S. Aspen Street (S. Ash Street); and
   S. Berg Parkway.
§ 12.04.120   Southeast area: Streets extending east and west.
   Thoroughfares in the southeast area of the city which extend east and west
and commencing with the first avenue (Highway 99E) south of the Southern
Pacific Company right-of-way are named consecutively as follows:
   S.E. 1st Avenue;
   S.E. 2nd Avenue;
   S.E. 4th Avenue;
   S.E. Township Road; and
   S.E. 13th Avenue (S.E. Mundorff Road).
§ 12.04.130   Southeast area: Streets extending north and south.
   Thoroughfares in the southeast area of the city which extend north and south
and commencing with the first street east of Ivy Street are named consecutively
as follows:
   S. Juniper Street;
   S. Knott Street; and
   S. Locust Street.
§ 12.04.140   N.W. Baker Drive.
   The thoroughfare which extends north and south immediately east of the
Molalla River shall be named  N.W. Baker Drive.
§ 12.04.150   Street signs.
   The City Superintendent is directed to procure, erect and maintain, within
the limits of funds budgeted annually for those purposes, appropriate name
signs for all public city thoroughfares in the city.  These signs shall be
known as street signs, which term shall include the name sign, post, column or
standard and supporting brackets and hardware.
§ 12.04.160   Defacing or damaging street signs.
   Any person who maliciously, wantonly or wilfully destroys, defaces or
damages in any manner any street sign shall be punished, upon conviction, by a
fine of not more than $500. Any person acting as informer, in case of
conviction under this section, is entitled to 1/2 of the fine imposed.
§ 12.04.170   Naming of new thoroughfares.
   New public thoroughfares hereafter constructed in the city (including those
in platted subdivisions where names are suggested by the subdivider and
recommended by the City Planning Commission) shall be assigned names or numbers
in accordance with §§
12.04.030 and
12.04.040, and except names of new thoroughfares, which are shown in a
subdivision plat approved by the Planning Commission, all new thoroughfare
names shall be designated by resolution of the City Council after considering
the recommendations of the Planning Commission.
§ 12.04.180   Linking together of 2 thoroughfares.
   On the linking together of 2 thoroughfares bearing different names, 1 name
only shall designate the entire length of the thoroughfare, and that name shall
be designated by the Planning Commission.
CHAPTER 12.08:  STREET EXCAVATIONS
Section
   
12.08.010   Permission to make excavation.
   
12.08.020   Authorized official.
   
12.08.030   Permit applications.
   
12.08.040   Applicant’s verification.
   
12.08.045   Exemptions from requirements.
   
12.08.050   Construction schedule.
   
12.08.060   Construction permit fee.
   
12.08.070   Issuance of permit.
   
12.08.080   Notice of construction.
   
12.08.090   Compliance with permit.
   
12.08.100   Noncomplying work.
   
12.08.110   Completion of construction.
   
12.08.120   As-built drawings.
   
12.08.130   Restoration of public rights-of- way and city property.
   
12.08.140   Filing of bond.
   
12.08.150   Specifications for work.
   
12.08.160   Acceptance or rejection of replacement work.
   
12.08.170   Responsibility for underground utilities.
   
12.08.180   Claims for defective work.
   
12.08.190   Water seepage.
   
12.08.200   Penalty.
§ 12.08.010   Permission to make excavation.
   No person, firm or corporation, nor any employee, agent or representative of
any person, firm or corporation shall dig any hole or make any excavation in or
upon any rights-of-way, street or alley of the city; change, alter or destroy
the surface of any street or alley; obstruct the reasonable use of pedestrian
travel over and upon the rights-of-way, street or alley; or cause or attempt to
cause any or all of the same to be done by any other person, firm or
corporation, employee, agent or representative whosoever, without first having
applied to the City Council and having first received from the City Council, or
its duly appointed and authorized official, its written consent and permission
for the activity.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1313, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 12.08.020   Authorized official.
   The City Administrator is designated and appointed as the authorized
official referred to in §
12.08.010 who is delegated with full power and authority to act for the City
Council in the matter of the consent and permission.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.030   Permit applications.
   Applications for permits to make excavations within rights-of-way or street
cuts within the city shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city
and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient
detail to demonstrate:
   A.   That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations;
   B.   That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with a franchise
agreement, if applicable;
   C.   The location and route of all facilities to be installed aboveground or
on existing utility poles;
   D.   The location and route of all new facilities on or in the public
rights-of-way to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line
and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are
within the public rights-of-way.  Existing facilities shall be differentiated
on the plans from new construction;
   E.   The location of all of applicant’s existing underground utilities,
conduits, ducts, pipes, mains, and installations which are within the public
rights-of- way along the underground route proposed by the applicant.  A cross-
section shall be provided showing new or existing facilities in relation to the
street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way; and
   F.   The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing
structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-
way, and description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily
or permanently remove or relocate.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1313, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 12.08.040   Applicant’s verification.
   Unless exempted under §
12.08.045 of this code, all permit applications shall be accompanied by the
verification of a registered professional engineer, or other qualified and duly
authorized representative of the applicant, that the drawings, plans and
specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical
codes, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.045   Exemption from requirements.
   A.   The City Administrator or designee may exempt applications for permits
from the requirements of §§
12.08.040 and
12.08.120 through
12.08.160, when in his or her discretion:
      1.   The amount of work to be done in city streets does not warrant the
imposition of these requirements; and
      2.   The public interest in the city’s streets and ways is adequately
safeguarded.
   B.   The City Administrator may develop administrative regulations and
policies to implement the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.050   Construction schedule.
   All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction
schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction.  The
construction schedule is subject to approval by the city.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.060   Construction permit fee.
   Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, if applicable, prior to
issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee of
$100, or as otherwise determined by resolution of the City Council.  The fee
shall be designed to defray the costs of city administration of the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.070   Issuance of permit.
   If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply
with all requirements of this code and the franchise agreement, if applicable,
the city shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities,
subject to further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time,
place and manner of performing the work as the city may deem necessary or
appropriate.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.080   Notice of construction.
   Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the city not
less than 2 working days in advance of any excavation or construction in the
public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.090   Compliance with permit.
   All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the
permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities.  The
city and its representatives shall be provided access to the work site and any
further information as they may require to ensure compliance with the
requirements.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.100   Noncomplying work.
   All work which does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected
plans and specifications for the work or the requirements of this chapter shall
be removed at the sole expense of the permittee.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.110   Completion of construction.
   The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to
minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private
property.  All construction work within the city rights- of-way, including
restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the
construction permit, unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been
approved pursuant to the schedule submitted and approved by the appropriate
city official as contemplated by §
12.08.050 above.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.120   As-built drawings.
   If requested by the city, the permittee shall furnish the city with 2
complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately
depicting the location of all facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. 
These plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer or designee within 60 days
after completion of construction, in a format mutually acceptable to the
permittee and the city.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.130   Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.
   A.   When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in
or affecting any public rights-of-way or city property, he or she shall, at his
or her own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore the
ways or property to good order and condition unless otherwise directed by the
city and as determined by the City Engineer or designee.
   B.   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration
required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected
rights- of-way or property.  This temporary restoration shall be at the
permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and
complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other
conditions no longer prevent the permanent restoration.  Any corresponding
modification to the construction schedule shall be subject to approval by the
city.
   C.   If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to good
order and condition, the city shall give the permittee written notice and
provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to
restore the rights-of-way or property.  If, after the notice, the permittee
fails to restore the rights-of- way or property to as good a condition as
existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall cause the restoration to
be made at the expense of the permittee.
   D.   A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as
required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent
injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of the work in or
affecting the rights-of-way or property.  A permittee shall also take
appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation
work, traffic conditions as near normal as practicable shall be maintained at
all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants
of the abutting property and to the general public. 
   E.   For a period of 12 months following the completion of the work and the
restoration of a street, the person who opened the street shall be responsible
for the condition of the fill and replacement, and of the resurfacing.  Should
the trench settle during this period, it is the responsibility of the permittee
to bring the street back to proper grade, notwithstanding the fact the work may
have previously been approved and the bond canceled.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.140   Filing of bond.
   Any person, firm or corporation making an application for excavations or a
street cut shall, at the time and place of filing of the application and before
a permit is issued, file with the City Recorder a bond executed by a surety
company authorized to transact surety business in this state, or by 1 or more
sufficient personal sureties approved by the City Administrator. A personal
surety must be a resident of this state.  The bond shall be for the security
and benefit of the city and shall be conditioned upon the applicant faithfully
performing the excavation or street cut work in a careful, good and workmanlike
manner to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works and within the
time limit as prescribed by the permit.  The amount of the bond shall be set by
the City Administrator, but in no event shall it be less than $1,000.  In
setting the amount of the bond, the City Administrator shall consider the
nature and extent of the work to be done, the location of the street, usual
traffic, kind and use of adjoining property, and probable costs to the city for
replacement and restoration.  The bond shall remain in force until 12 months
after substantial completion of the work as determined by the city.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.150   Specifications for work.
   All portions of an excavation or street cut which lie within the curb lines
of the street or other actual traveled portion of the street as designated by
the City Administrator shall be back-filled according to standard public works
specifications.  On streets having asphaltic paving and/or impregnated
surfaces, a minimum of 4 inches of compacted hot-mix asphaltic concrete shall
be placed in the upper portions of the pavement cut and rolled and/or tamped to
the grade of the surrounding pavement.  The same standards shall be applied to
sidewalks except when the sidewalk is composed of poured concrete, in which
case the sidewalk, where cut, shall be replaced with concrete. On surfaced
streets and on the shoulders of paved and surface streets, the permittee shall
place a minimum of 8 inches of compacted crushed rock having a gradation of 1
minus, which shall be rolled and/or tamped to the grade of the surrounding
surfacing.  If the full depth of the cut exceeds 8 inches, it shall be entirely
filled with a granular material of 1 minus gradation and rolled and/or tamped
to the grade of the surrounding surfacing.  All backfilling and resurfacing
shall be inspected and approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.160   Acceptance or rejection of replacement work.
   All bonds filed by applicants shall be retained by the city until the City
Administrator gives approval of the replacement.  The City Administrator shall,
within 45 days of the completion date stated on the permit or any extension
thereof, if an extension is granted, either approve or reject the replacement.
If the replacement is rejected, the permittee shall be informed in writing of
the rejection and must, within 30 days of the notification, correct the
replacement to the standards in effect.  If the permittee fails to make the
necessary corrections, his or her bond will be forfeited to the city to apply
on its costs, and the city will proceed to make the necessary correction either
by contract or city construction method, or a combination of both.  In either
case, the permittee shall be responsible for paying the city’s costs of making
or having corrections made, including engineering and any legal publication
costs.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.170   Responsibility for underground utilities.
   The permittee shall inform himself or herself as to the existence and
location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.  The
permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private
property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewers, gas pipes,
electric conduits or other utility facilities.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.180   Claims for defective work.
   Acceptance or approval by the city of any excavation work and the
replacement thereof and resurfacing, if any, shall not prevent the city from
asserting a claim against the permittee for incomplete or defective work, if
discovered within 12 months from the completion of the work.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.190   Water seepage.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, using or operating
any water main, irrigation or drainage pipeline or ditch, flume or other
structure to permit any water from the water main, pipeline, ditch, flume or
other structure to flow, waste or seep into any street or alley of the city in
a manner as to damage or injure the street or alley, or as to interfere with
traffic thereon.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.08.200   Penalty.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 1035, passed 11-3-1999)
CHAPTER 12.12:  SIDEWALK DISPLAYS
Section
   
12.12.010   Space for displays.
   
12.12.020   Shelves to be removed during nighttime.
   
12.12.030   Obstructions prohibited.
   
12.12.040   Penalty.
§ 12.12.010   Space for displays.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in business or otherwise
within the corporate limits of the city to cause or permit any display of
groceries, vegetables or merchandise of any character whatsoever to occupy a
space of more than 14 inches on the inside of the sidewalks. A display shall be
not less than 2 feet in height, as measured from the sidewalk surface, so as
not to create a tripping hazard.  When a display is placed in front of a
window, such display shall be no greater than three feet in height, as measured
from the sidewalk surface, to ensure that windows are not blocked above that
height.
(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 10-15-2008)
§ 12.12.020   Shelves to be removed during nighttime.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow display shelves to remain upon
the sidewalks after the displays are removed within the places of business,
during the night, unless the shelves are on hinges and can be dropped against
the sides of the buildings when not used without extending or protruding so as
to make them dangerous.
(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 10-15-2008)
§ 12.12.030   Obstructions prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wholly or partially obstruct the
sidewalks with displays, boxes, tables and the like which interfere with
pedestrians passing along the sidewalks, except in the case of temporary
construction authorized pursuant to a building permit or as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 10-15-2008)
§ 12.12.040   Penalty.
   Any person or persons violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon
conviction thereof may be fined up to $100 per each day of the violation.
(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 10-15-2008)
CHAPTER 12.13:  SIDEWALK CAFÉS
Section
12.13.010   Purpose.
12.13.020   Permit required.
12.13.030   Definitions.
12.13.040   Permit fee.
12.13.050   Permit application.
12.13.070   Location rules and review criteria.
12.13.080   Liability and insurance.
12.13.090   Forms and conditions of permit.
12.13.100   Denial, revocation or suspension of permit.
12.13.110   Consumption of alcoholic beverages.
12.13.120   Penalties.
§ 12.13.010   Purpose.
   The purpose hereof is to permit and encourage sidewalk vending that is
compatible with other uses of the City of Canby public sidewalks. The city
finds that sidewalk cafés encourage a pedestrian-oriented environment, help to
create a visually attractive atmosphere and streetscape, and promote overall
commerce.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.020   Permit required.
   Private commercial use of public sidewalks for the purpose of operating a
sidewalk café in the city is prohibited unless a permit is obtained from the
City Administrator or designee as provided herein.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.030   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Abutting property owners and occupants means any owner or occupant of
property which abuts the subject sidewalk café site excluding public right-of-
way.
   Accessible route means a continuous unobstructed path of travel connecting
all publicly accessible elements and spaces of a building or facility.
   Adjacent sidewalk area means that portion of the public sidewalk between the
curb line and the property line demarcated by extending the side building lines
of the premises until they intersect the curb.
   Clearances as referenced in this section are measured horizontally from the
outside edge of the sidewalk café delineation to any obstruction on the ground
greater than one-half inch in height, or to an adjacent projection such as tree
limbs, tree wells, banners, signs, bike racks, lamp posts, or any other
fixtures. Accessible route clearances shall be no less than 4 feet in width and
no less than 7 feet in height for the entire length of the accessible route.
Radiuses along an accessible route shall be no less than 4 feet in width.
   Operate a sidewalk café means serving food or beverage from a restaurant to
patrons seated at tables located within the adjacent sidewalk area, including,
in the case of a permittee in possession of a valid license for the sale of
alcohol beverages covering such sidewalk area, the service of such beverages,
or providing seating for patrons in the adjacent sidewalk area.
   Substantiated means witnessed and recorded by city staff.
   Tree well means a defined area adjacent to a required street tree which
provides a buffer for protection of the tree. The grade level surface of the
tree well may contain movable tree pavers, steel grates, wood, dirt or other
materials. With respect to measuring clearances, the area and surface materials
within the tree well shall not be included. Any clearance shall be measured
horizontally from the outside edge of the tree well, and/or projecting tree
limbs.
   Vision clearance triangle is that area which abuts streets, alleys or
driveway intersections whether on the subject property or the abutting
property. The vision clearance triangle is determined by measuring the
appropriate distance in both directions from the intersecting curb lines along
the edge of the right-of-way and/or the edge of driveways and alleyways as
determined by the zoning district and type of intersecting roadways as
indicated within the Land Development and Planning Ordinance.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.040   Permit fee.
   A.   Applicants for a sidewalk café shall pay a permit fee and a rental fee
for the use of the public right-of-way.
   B.   The fee for the permit and the rental fee as described in §
12.13.020 shall be as specified in a resolution adopted by the Canby City
Council. Fees are annual and shall be payable upon renewal date. An initial
non-refundable permit fee is payable upon application. The initial right-of-way
rental fee is payable upon permit issuance.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.050   Permit application.
   A.   Application for a permit to operate a sidewalk café shall be made to
the City of Canby on a form provided by the City Administrator or designee.
Application for a permit will minimally contain:
      1.   A completed application;
      2.   A scaled plan of the proposed public sidewalk area for sidewalk café
use, with dimensions shown to include at a minimum:
         a.   total square foot area of outside café area,
         b.   café entrance location and size,
         c.   ADA clearances into and throughout the café,
         d.   all clearances to fixtures, lights, tree wells, signs, news
racks, bike racks, planters and any other obstructions,
         e.   size and location of tables and chairs, and
         f.   location of outdoor café waste receptacles;
      3.   If requested by the applicant any delineation must meet city
standards and application must also contain:
         a.   location and type of café delineation,
         b.   cross section of any fence or other delineation showing the
construction materials and heights,
         c.   if applicable, details reflecting approved method of semi-
permanent fence anchoring to the sidewalk or building; and
      4.   A certificate of insurance and endorsement form;
      5.   A copy of the alcohol control plan filed with the OLCC.
   B.   Information shall be provided as required by the City Administrator or
designee to carry out the purpose hereof.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.070   Location rules and review criteria.
   A.   The City Administrator or designee shall review the application for
compliance with the following criteria:
      1.   The operation of a sidewalk café shall be located such that there is
at least a minimum of 4 feet of clear and unobstructed accessible route to a
height of 7 feet measured vertically from grade between the sidewalk café
delineation and tree wells, tree limbs, bike racks, lamp posts, sign posts and
any other fixtures or obstructions. Radiuses along an accessible route shall be
no less than 4 feet in width.
      2.   Additional restroom facilities may be required if the additional
seating capacity created by a sidewalk café causes an increase in the required
fixtures under Chapter 29 of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.
      3.   The location of the sidewalk café operation shall be approved by the
City Administrator or designee.
      4.   Accessible routes into, throughout, and adjacent to a sidewalk café
shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 11 of the Oregon Structural
Specialty Code.
      5.   The operation of a sidewalk café requires that trash containers be
provided on site.
   B.   The City Administrator or designee will forward all applications for
review by the Planning Director, Public Works Director and Police Chief or
their designees for any business who holds a valid liquor license, or in which
alcoholic beverages are intended to be served.
      1.   The Planning Director, Public Works Director and the Police Chief or
their designees upon review of the application will sign the application for
concurrence with granting the license, or,
      2.   Submit a memorandum of concerns to be forwarded to City Council for
consideration, signing the application in a location that acknowledges review
of application.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.080   Liability and insurance.
   A signed statement that the permittee shall hold harmless the city, its
officers and employees, and shall indemnify the city, its officers and
employees for any claims for damages to property or injury to persons which may
occur in connection with an activity carried on under the terms of the permit.
Permittee shall furnish and maintain such public liability, liquor liability,
food products liability, and property damages insurance as will protect
permittee and city from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury,
including death, which may arise from operations under the permit or in
connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than
the amount of municipal tort liability under the Oregon Tort Claims Act. The
permittee shall name the City of Canby as an additional insured by attaching an
endorsement to the certificate of insurance (provided by the city). Such
insurance shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing therein,
and shall name as additional insured the city, its officers, and employees, and
shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior
to the expiration of the permit without 30 days written notice to the city.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.090   Forms and conditions of permit.
   The permit issued shall be in a form deemed suitable by the City
Administrator or designee. In addition to naming the permittee and other
information deemed appropriate, the permit shall contain the following minimum
conditions.
   A.   Requirements for all sidewalk cafés.
      1.   Each permit issued shall terminate 1 year after the anniversary
date.
      2.   The permit issued shall be personal to the permittee only and is not
transferable in any manner without first obtaining permission from the City
Administrator or designee. The permittee will be responsible for compliance
with all conditions of approval.
      3.   The permit may be temporarily suspended by the City Administrator or
designee if the public interest requires use of the right-of-way for a public
event, construction, repair, or any other purpose.
      4.   The permit is specifically limited to the area approved or as
modified by the City Administrator or designee, and will include a site plan as
required by §
12.13.050 indicating the area approved for the sidewalk café and the location
of the tables and materials permitted to be in the right-of- way. If requested
by applicant, each business operating a sidewalk café shall utilize an approved
method in accordance with city standards, to clearly delineate the café.
      5.   The operation of a sidewalk café shall be located such that there is
at least a minimum of 4 feet of clear and unobstructed accessible route between
the café delineation and tree wells, tree limbs, bike racks, lamp posts, sign
posts and any other fixtures or obstructions, to a height of 7 feet measured
vertically from grade. Radiuses along an accessible route shall be no less than
4 feet in width.
      6.   The sidewalk and all things placed thereon shall at all time be
maintained in a clean and orderly condition. Only those things authorized by
the permit and shown on the site plan may be stored in the public right-of-way
when the sidewalk café is not in operation. The operation of a sidewalk café
requires that trash containers be provided on site.
      7.   All required building modifications or parking improvements shall be
completed prior to the commencement of the operation of the sidewalk café.
      8.   No signs shall be attached to any furniture or any other structure
related to the operation of the sidewalk café.
      9.   The permittee shall notify the City Administrator or designee in
writing when operation of the sidewalk café commences.
      10.   No use of city fixtures will be allowed.
      11.   Sidewalk cafés shall not occupy or obstruct the visual clearance
triangle.
      12.   Council has the right to repeal or amend this chapter and thereby
terminate or modify all sidewalk café operations. No permittee shall obtain any
property right in the continued private commercial use of the public sidewalk.
      13.   Sidewalk café hours of operation will discontinue by 11:00 p.m.
nightly.
   B.   Businesses which intend to serve alcoholic beverages at the sidewalk
café must additionally meet the following requirements:
      1.   The business shall provide verification that they hold a valid
Oregon Liquor Control Commission liquor license.
      2.   Except for bottles, pitchers, and carafes that are being served to
customers of the café, storage of all other containers must be kept inside the
business. No taps, kegs, coolers, or other alcoholic beverage storage devices
are allowed outside on the sidewalk.
      3.   Sidewalk cafés where alcoholic beverages are served and consumed
require supervision by employees of the licensed business, as required by the
Oregon Liquor Control Commission liquor license.
      4.   If requested by the applicant, each business serving alcoholic
beverages at the sidewalk café shall utilize an approved method in accordance
with city standards, to clearly delineate the café.
      5.   All service and consumption of alcoholic beverages at sidewalk cafés
will discontinue by 11:00 p.m. nightly.
      6.   All alcoholic beverage service providers must also provide food
service in the licensed area.
      7.   Sidewalk cafés shall designate 1 access/exit point for the exterior
service area and this point shall be located near a business entrance; and
shall post signage at the access/exit point prohibiting the removal of
alcoholic beverages from the licensed sidewalk café area.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.100   Denial, revocation or suspension of permit.
   A.   The City Administrator or designee may deny, revoke, or suspend the
permit upon finding that any provision herein or condition of approval will be
or has been violated.
   B.   Upon denial, revocation, or suspension, the City Administrator or
designee shall give notice of such action to the applicant or permittee in
writing stating the action which has been taken and the reason therefor. The
action shall be effective immediately, but the applicant or permittee may make
written request, within 10 calendar days after the notice is issued, for a
hearing by the City Administrator or designee. Upon hearing the matter, the
City Administrator or designee shall render a final decision concerning the
permit.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.110   Consumption of alcoholic beverages.
   The provisions of §
9.24.060 of the CMC notwithstanding, patrons, while seated at a sidewalk café
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, may possess and consume such beverages.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
§ 12.13.120   Penalties.
   In addition to the remedies set out below, violations of the provisions of
this section may be subject to other appropriate legal or equitable actions to
restrain, correct, or abate the violations. These remedies are intended to be
cumulative and not exclusive. The following violations are infractions
punishable by a penalty in accordance with this section. Any violation of this
section may be prosecuted as a Class A infraction under the procedures of
O.R.S. Chapter 153 and Canby Municipal Code §
1.08.010. The City Administrator or designee is authorized to issue a citation
or written notice of violation to any person violating the provisions herein.
In addition:
   A.   Any sidewalk café operating without a valid permit for the year shall
be notified by the city that it is in violation of this section, and will be
allowed up to 10 business days to file an application. If no application is
filed within 10 days, the operator of the café shall be notified and a civil
penalty of $500 per day shall be levied.
   B.   Any sidewalk café operating with a valid license, but found by the city
to have a substantiated instance of failing to be in compliance with the other
provision of this section of the Canby Municipal Code shall be given up to 2
written notices per year, warning that it is operating out of compliance and in
violation of this section. On the third investigated and substantiated instance
of non-compliance, notice of the non-compliance may be delivered and penalties
may be levied as follows:
      1.   first levy (third substantiated violation) $500;
      2.   second levy (fourth substantiated violation) $1,000;
      3.   third levy (fifth substantiated violation) $1,500.
      4.   Penalties shall continue to accrue in $500 increments for each
additional substantiated violation.
   C.   In accordance with §
12.13.100, the City Administrator or designee may deny, revoke, or suspend the
permit upon finding more than 3 separate instances of substantiated violations
that result in fines.
   D.   Levies of civil penalties and revocations of permits may be appealed to
the municipal court judge within 10 days of date written notice of the levy of
penalty or revocation is deposited in the United States Mail with first class
postage addressed to the café or delivered to an employee of the café or posted
at the café. If no appeal is filed within 10 days of the notice, the levy of
penalty shall be final and failure to pay the levy shall be a separate
violation of this section.
   E.   Any appeal must be in writing, signed by the owner or operator of the
café, and must state the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be accompanied
by a deposit in the amount of the levy and an appeal fee of $50. The appeal
must be filed with the municipal court. The appeal must be served upon the City
Attorney. Failure to comply with any of these requirements within 10 days of
the date of notice shall result in a dismissal of the appeal, a forfeiture of
the appeal fee, and entry of judgment in the amount of the levy by the
municipal court in its register.
   F.   Rules of conduct for hearing and final order. The Municipal Judge shall
develop any rules, procedures or regulations that may be necessary for the
proper conduct of the appeal. The only issue to be decided by the Municipal
Judge is a determination of whether or not the café was in violation of CMC §
12.13.120(1) or (2) as alleged in the notice of penalty. If the Municipal Judge
finds that it is more likely than not that the café was in violation as
specified in the notice of penalty, the Municipal Judge shall issue an order
affirming the levy of penalty and enter a judgment for the amount of the levy
of penalty into the register of the Municipal Court. The order and judgment
shall contain a provision for court costs to be paid by the violator in the
amount of $250. If the Judge finds that it is more likely than not that the
café was in compliance and not in violation as specified in the notice of
penalty, the Judge shall void the notice of penalty. The Judge's order is final
and is not subject to appeal. It shall not be a defense that the café owner or
operator did not receive notice of the penalty if mailed to the address of the
café or delivered to an employee of the café. It shall not be a defense that
the café owner or operator was not aware of the permit requirements.
   G.   Failure to pay levy penalty. Unless the full amount of the levy of
penalty is paid within 10 days after notice of penalty or the order becomes
final by operation of law, or after appeal, each day that the penalty is not
paid shall constitute a further violation.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-19-2009)
CHAPTER 12.16:  SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE
Section
   
12.16.010   Responsibility of landowners.
   
12.16.020   Permit to make repairs.
   
12.16.030   Notice to make repairs.
   
12.16.040   Expense of repairs; manner and time limits.
   
12.16.050   Failure of landowner to make repairs.
   
12.16.060   Liability for damages.
§ 12.16.010   Responsibility of landowners.
   It shall be the duty of all landowners in the city to maintain in good
repair all sidewalks now existing or hereafter constructed in front of, along
or abutting their land.
§ 12.16.020   Permit to make repairs.
   Before making any sidewalk repairs, the landowner responsible therefor shall
apply to the City Superintendent, or City Engineer as the case may be, for a
permit to make repairs.  The permit shall describe the location of the sidewalk
to be repaired, a description of the property abutting the sidewalk, the name
of the owner or reputed owner thereof, the type or kind of repairs to be made,
the material to be used in making the repairs, and a time limit in which the
repairs are to be completed, not exceeding 60 days from the date of the
permit.  No charge shall be made for the issuance of the permit.
§ 12.16.030   Notice to make repairs.
   If any landowner responsible for repairing any sidewalk shall fail or refuse
to apply for a sidewalk repair permit, then it shall be the duty of the City
Superintendent, or City Engineer as the case may be, to deliver a notice to
repair to the owner, if he or she is a resident of or can be found in the
city.  If the owner is not a resident of the city or cannot be found in the
city, the notice shall be sent by either registered or certified mail (with
return receipt requested) to the last known address of the owner as may appear
in the records of the City Recorder.  The notice shall contain the name or
names of the owners or reputed owners of the property responsible for making
any sidewalk repairs, the location of the sidewalk to be repaired, a
description of the property abutting the sidewalk, the type or kind of repairs
to be made, the materials to be used in making the repairs, the time limit
within which the repairs are to be made, a reference to this chapter, the date
of the notice, and the signature of the city official giving the notice.  A
copy of the notice shall be filed with the City Recorder.  If any notice which
is mailed is not receipted for by the owner or is returned by the post office
department because the owner cannot be located, then the City Superintendent or
City Engineer shall post a copy of the notice for a period of not less than 10
days in a conspicuous place on the property of the owner.  The City
Superintendent or City Engineer shall indicate on the copy of the notice filed
with the City Recorder the date that the original notice was delivered or
mailed, the name and address of the person to whom it was delivered or mailed,
and the date and place the notice was posted, if posting is required.
§ 12.16.040   Expense of repairs; manner and time limits.
   All sidewalk repairs shall be made at the expense of the landowner
responsible for making the repairs, and all repairs shall be made in accordance
with the requirements set forth in the sidewalk repair permit or the sidewalk
repair notice, and within the time limited therefor.  Time limits for making
sidewalk repairs may be extended by the City Council on application of the
landowner or his or her lawful agent, and on good cause being shown for the
granting of an extension.
§ 12.16.050   Failure of landowner to make repairs.
   If any landowner responsible for making sidewalk repairs shall fail to make
the repairs in the manner and within the time required by either the repair
permit or the notice of repairs, then the City Council shall direct the City
Superintendent or City Engineer to make the repairs, or the Council may, if it
elects, let a contract for making the repairs.  After the costs of making the
repairs have been determined, the City Superintendent or City Engineer shall
report the same to the City Council, and the Council shall by resolution direct
the City Recorder to enter the amount plus 15% for administrative, legal and
engineering expenses in the docket of city liens as an assessment against the
property together with the date of entry, the name of the owner and a
description of the property assessed.  The assessment shall thereafter be
collected in the manner prescribed by O.R.S. 223.505 through 223.595, and all
assessments docketed as liens shall draw interest at the rate of 6% per year
from the date of the entry in the city lien docket until paid.
§ 12.16.060   Liability for damages.
   The owners of all property responsible for repairing sidewalks as provided
by this chapter shall be liable in damages to individuals injured because of
any negligence of the owners in failing to keep a sidewalk in good condition. 
No liability shall be imputed to or imposed upon the city, its officers or
employees because of injuries sustained by any person by reason of any defect
in any sidewalk; nor because of any extension of time having been granted by
the City Council for repairing any defects in sidewalks.
CHAPTER 12.20:  ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
Section
   
12.20.010   Encroachments within public rights-of-way, easements and public
property.
   
12.20.020   Application; standards of approval
   
12.20.030   Recording of permits
   
12.20.040   Revocation of permit
   
12.20.050   Removal of encroachment
   
12.20.060   Liability
   
12.20.070   Penalty
§ 12.20.010   Encroachments within public rights-of-way, easements and public
property.
   A.   Permits Required for Encroachment.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to erect or cause to be erected any structure, or to place or maintain any
vegetation and/or landscaping materials in public rights-of-way, on easements
or on public property without first having obtained a revocable permit from the
city authorizing the action.
   B.   Application and Fee Required.
      1.   Any person desiring to locate or maintain an encroachment within any
public right-of-way, easement or public property shall submit an application to
the Community Development Director (hereinafter referred to as Director).  The
application shall include a description of the proposed encroachment, a scale
drawing describing the nature and extent of the encroachment and its
relationship to adjoining properties.  If the applicant is not the owner of the
property, the owner of the property shall also sign the application as a co-
applicant.  The Director may require an actual survey to determine the exact
location of any public or private improvements or significant vegetation.
      2.   A fee in the amount of $50 shall be paid at the time of the
application.  This fee may be changed by resolution of the City Council as
needed.
(Ord. 1054, passed 9-6-2000)
§ 12.20.020   Application; standards of approval.
   The Director shall review the application for encroachment permit to
determine its compliance with the following standards:
   A.   The encroachment complies with all applicable city codes with regard to
structural safety, traffic, sanitation and fire safety requirements;
   B.   No adverse impact on adjoining properties;
   C.   No interference with use of the public property for roadway, walkway,
existing or proposed utilities and other authorized uses; and
   D.   The encroachment will be maintained in good order.
(Ord. 1054, passed 9-6-2000)
§ 12.20.030   Recording of permits.
   Approved encroachment permits shall be recorded against the title of the
benefitting property and the costs of the recording shall be paid by the
applicant.
(Ord. 1054, passed 9-6-2000)
§ 12.20.040   Revocation of permit.
   All right-of-way, easement or public property encroachment permits shall be
revocable by the city at any time the revocation would be in the public
interest.  No grant of any permit, expenditure of money in reliance thereon or
lapse of time shall give the permittee any right to the continued existence of
an encroachment or to any damages or claims against the city arising from a
revocation.
(Ord. 1054, passed 9-6-2000)
§ 12.20.050  Removal of encroachment.
   A.   Upon revocation, the permittee or any successor permittee shall, at the
permittee’s own cost, remove the permitted encroachment within 30 days after
written notice has been provided by the city, unless a shorter period is
specified in the notice of revocation due to an emergency situation.
   B.   If the permittee does not remove the encroachment and return the right-
of-way, easement or public property area to a condition satisfactory to the
Director, the city may do so and the costs of returning the right-of-way,
easement or public property to a satisfactory condition, shall be imposed as a
lien upon the property on the city lien docket.
(Ord. 1054, passed 9-6-2000)
§ 12.20.060   Liability.
   The permittee, and owner of the benefited property if different than the
permittee, shall be liable to indemnify and defend any claim or legal action
brought against the city by reason of the existence of any approved right-of-
way, easement or public property encroachment.
(Ord. 1054, passed 9-6-2000)
§ 12.20.070   Penalty.
   Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine up to $500.
(Ord. 1054, passed 9-6-2000)
CHAPTER 12.24:  CITY PARKS
Section
   
12.24.010   Regulations designated.
   
12.24.020   Penalty provision for § 12.24.010.
   
12.24.030   Posting of rules.
   
12.24.040   Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited in
parks.
   
12.24.050   Parks employees authorized to regulate parks.
   
12.24.060   Trespass and exclusion from parks.
   
12.24.065   Appeal.
§ 12.24.010   Regulations designated.
   A.   The city adopts O.R.S. 390.005 through 390.124 and Administrative Rules
Chapter 736, Divisions 10 and 15, as now constituted, to be followed by the
city. 
   B.   Wherever in state law reference is made to state parks, that shall mean
city parks.
§ 12.24.020   Penalty provision for § 12.24.010.
   Any person found to be violating the provision of §
12.24.010 shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 12.24.030   Posting of rules.
   The City Superintendent shall cause to be printed and posted in convenient
places within all city parks the foregoing rules and regulations.
§ 12.24.040   Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited in
parks.
   A.   No person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages in the municipal
parks.
   B.   Violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor.
§ 12.24.050   Parks employees authorized to regulate parks.
   The city parks employees have jurisdiction of and may enforce park and
recreation infractions established under this section in the manner provided
under O.R.S. 8.665 and Ch. 153 for the enforcement of infractions.
§ 12.24.060   Trespass and exclusion from parks.
   A.   In addition to other measures provided for violation of this code, or
any of the laws of the state, any peace officer, as defined by O.R.S. 133.005
(3), as amended, or any park official or employee may exclude any person who
violates any provision of this code, any city ordinance, any laws of the state
or any rule or regulation duly made and issued by the Parks Department or by
the City Council from any city park for a period of not more than 30 days.
   B.   1.   Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any city
park.  The notice shall specify the dates and places of exclusion.  It shall be
signed by the issuing party.  Warning of consequences for failure to comply
shall be prominently displayed on the notice.
      2.   A person receiving the notice may appeal to the Municipal Judge in
accordance with §
12.24.065 of this chapter to have the written notice rescinded or the period
shortened.  The appeal must be filed within 5 days of receipt of the exclusion
notice, unless extended by the Municipal Judge for good cause shown.
      3.   At any time within the 30 days, a person receiving an exclusion
notice may apply in writing to the Parks Director for a temporary waiver from
the effects of the notice for good reason.
(Ord. 1110, passed 2-5-2003)
§ 12.24.065   Appeal.
   A.   Appeal of an exclusion notice shall be to the Municipal Judge.
   B.   Initiation of an appeal of an exclusion notice shall be filed within 5
days from the date of the exclusion notice with the Municipal Court Clerk.  The
Municipal Judge may waive this requirement for good cause shown.
   C.   The request for an appeal hearing shall be in writing and shall contain
either a copy or a full and complete description of the notice of exclusion and
a statement of the grounds upon which it is contended that the decision to
exclude is invalid, unauthorized or otherwise improper.
   D.   Upon receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the Municipal Court
Clerk shall schedule a hearing before the Judge within 14 days after receipt of
the request.  Notice of the hearing time and date shall be given to the person
requesting the hearing and to the person issuing the exclusion notice.
   E.   At the hearing, the Judge may determine the matter without hearing upon
the record. The Judge may sustain, reverse or modify the exclusion notice
appealed from in his or her judgment.
   F.   The determination of the Municipal Judge is a quasi-judicial decision
and is not appealable to the City Council: appeals from any determination by
the Municipal Judge shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of
Clackamas County, Oregon as provided in O.R.S. 34.010 through 34.100.
(Ord. 1110, passed 2-5-2003)
CHAPTER 12.28:  CITY CEMETERY
Section
   
12.28.010   Rules adopted.
   
12.28.020   Duties of Cemetery Sexton and City Recorder.
   
12.28.030   Operation and maintenance.
   
12.28.040   Permits for interment, removal and transfer of bodies.
   
12.28.050   Prices and charges.
   
12.28.060   Conveying title to lots.
   
12.28.070   Privileges and restrictions on owners of lots and graves.
   
12.28.080   Cremain lots.
   
12.28.090   Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund.
   
12.28.100   Penalty.
§ 12.28.010   Rules adopted.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the rules and regulations of
the Zion Cemetery Association of Canby, Oregon, adopted January 10, 1938 and
revised in July 1949 and 2006, shall be the rules and regulations for the use,
control, operation and management of the city’s cemetery which is now known as
Zion Memorial Park Cemetery.  The rules and regulations may be revised and
amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council to the extent not
inconsistent with this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 1395, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 12.28.020   Duties of Cemetery Sexton and City Recorder.
   The Cemetery Sexton shall receive, issue proper receipts for all monies due
the city from the sale of lots, services furnished and all other sources. Said
funds will be placed in appropriate cemetery funds by the Finance Department.
The City Recorder shall issue in the name of the city all titles required and
shall keep complete records of all matters pertaining to the cemetery as
required by the State of Oregon Mortuary and Cemetery Board.
(Am. Ord. 1395, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 12.28.030   Operation and maintenance.
   The operation and maintenance of the cemetery shall be the responsibility of
the Cemetery Sexton, subject to the general supervision of the City
Administrator. The Cemetery Sexton shall keep on the cemetery premises a record
of all interments as required by the State of Oregon Mortuary and Cemetery
Board.  The records to be kept at the cemetery shall be duplicates of the
original records to be kept by the City Recorder at the City Hall. The Cemetery
Sexton shall provide the City Recorder with all records required for permanent
retention.
(Am. Ord. 1395, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 12.28.040   Permits for interment, removal and transfer of bodies.
   A.   No person shall be allowed to have their dead interred in the cemetery
without first obtaining verification of ownership from the Cemetery Sexton or
producing a certificate of title to the grave in which they desire to inter the
remains.
   B.   Upon receiving proper documentation for interment, as required by the
State of Oregon Mortuary and Cemetery Board, the Cemetery Sexton shall issue an
invoice which shall also act as a permit.
   C.   In case of interment of a deceased owner of a lot, the invoice shall
state the informant's name.
   D.   A permit from a funeral home must also be secured prior to the removal
of any body from the cemetery or the transfer of any body from one part of the
cemetery to another.
   E.   No cremains may be scattered on top of burial sites.
(Am. Ord. 1395, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 12.28.050   Prices and charges.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish the schedules of prices to
be charged for lots, graves, grave openings and other services and privileges;
provided, however, that the charges now being made shall be continued until
changed by resolution of the Council.
§ 12.28.060   Conveying title to lots.
   Every conveyance of a lot in the cemetery shall be by certificate of title,
executed by the City Recorder, but the conveyance shall only have the effect of
giving the perpetual use of a lot for burial purposes, subject to the laws of
the state and the ordinances of the city.  No grave or lot which has been
conveyed by the city can be sold, transferred, assigned or exchanged for other
graves except with the consent of the Cemetery Sexton and upon those terms and
conditions as the Cemetery Sexton may provide.  The City Recorder shall issue a
new certificate of title after the conveyance has been approved.
(Am. Ord. 1395, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 12.28.070   Privileges and restrictions on owners of lots and graves.
   The owner of a grave in any improved portion of the cemetery will be allowed
to remove the body from the grave and reinter it in any other grave in the
cemetery which he or she may own and will be allowed the price paid for the
relinquished grave, provided it is not more than the price of the grave
selected for reinterment.  The original certificate of title must be returned
to the city for the relinquished grave.  The owner of a lot may, with the
approval of the Cemetery Sexton, allow the burial of a friend or any other
person in the lot, but to allow the burial for any compensation is strictly
forbidden.  The price of all graves includes the perpetual care of the same and
is payable in advance before interment is permitted.  Subdivisions of graves or
lots by owners is not allowed; however, the burial of cremains within the
graves of immediate family members shall be permitted, provided that not more
than 1 marker or headstone is installed per grave.  Planting of trees or shrubs
shall be prohibited in locations other than areas designated for such
landscaping.
(Am. Ord. 1395, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 12.28.080   Cremain lots.
   Additional to the provisions for cremain burial delineated in §
12.28.070, other areas may be specifically portioned off for the purpose of
cremain burials.  Not more than 1 cremain burial shall occur on each cremain
lot.
§ 12.28.090   Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund.
   A.   The Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund shall be maintained and allowed to
continue to grow in both principal and interest.
   B.   The City Council shall cause the Fund to be properly invested and the
income therefrom shall be devoted exclusively to the permanent maintenance or
perpetual care of the city’s Zion Memorial Park Cemetery and as hereinafter
provided.
   C.   The obligation to be assumed by the city under the provisions of this
section is to expend the income from the Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund in the
care, maintenance and beautification of the cemetery and all lots or graves
therein as far as the income from the Fund shall justify or permit, and in the
following manner and no other:  in the irrigation of the lots; in keeping the
graves green and properly mowed; in reseeding the grass when necessary; in
trimming and pruning the trees and the flowers and shrubbery permitted to be
grown on the lots under the terms of this chapter; in filling in and keeping up
the general level of the graves as may cave in or sink; and in keeping in good
working order and repair, and renewing when worn out, the water pipes and
hydrants now or hereafter installed in the cemetery.  The city shall not use
any of the revenue derived from the Fund to dig any graves, erect or repair any
tombstones or monuments, repair any fences or other enclosures, or place or
replace any flowers or shrubs which are killed or die through no fault of the
city or its agents.
   D.   Amounts to be taken from the cemetery rates or charges and placed in
the Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
(Am. Ord. 1395, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 12.28.100   Penalty.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter or the rules of Zion Memorial
Park is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
CHAPTER 12.32:  TREE REGULATIONS
Section
   
12.32.010   Definitions.
   
12.32.020   Purpose and scope.
   
12.32.030   City Forester.
   
12.32.040   Creation of a Tree Committee.
   
12.32.050   Planting and maintenance of trees.
   
12.32.060   Maintenance and removal of trees.
   
12.32.070   City may act on notice.
   
12.32.080   Interference with the city.
   
12.32.090   Service of orders.
   
12.32.100   Compliance.
   
12.32.110   Appeal.
   
12.32.120   Failure to comply.
   
12.32.130   Special assessment.
   
12.32.140   Penalty.
§ 12.32.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Bush means a low growing and densely branched woody plant.
   City Forester means the Director of Public Works of the city or his or her
authorized agent.
   Drip Line means the outermost extension of the tree canopy.
   Immediate Danger means a situation that represents a hazard to life or
property without interval of time.
   Noxious Species means one that is physically harmful or destructive to
living beings or public utilities and public investments.
   Park Tree means a tree, shrub or bush located in public parks or other area
owned by the city having an individual name, and all other areas owned by the
city, or to which the public has free access as a park.
   Private Tree means a tree, shrub or bush located on private property other
than a dedicated right-of-way, utility easement or public parks and grounds.
   Pruning means cutting or removing less than 20% of the branching structure
of a plant in either the crown, trunk or root zones.
   Public Improvement means a change made with public money or by public
employees.  It can also happen with private money or private employees then be
dedicated for public ownership or use.
   Public Places means a location owned by the public, a dedicated right-of-way
or public way and easement generally dedicated for utilities.
   Public trees are defined as those trees which are located within the public
right-of-way or on land under the jurisdiction of the city.
   Removal means cutting or removing the crown, trunk and root system of a
plant.
   Shrub means a low-growing, usually several-stemmed woody plant.
   Street Tree means a tree that is located within the public right-of-way for
vehicular access, or associated public utility easement.
   Top or Topped means cutting or removing the terminal leaders in the crown of
an ornamental shade or flowering tree or conifer to an extent that removes the
normal canopy and disfigures the tree.
   Tree means a woody perennial plant having a single elongated main stem from
which the brances extend.
   Utility means a service such as sewer, electricity,  water,  storm
drainage,  gas,  telephone or television provided by either a publicly owned
company or privately owned company.  If publicly owned, it is a Public Utility
and if privately owned, it is a Private Utility.
(Am. Ord. 1385, passed 10-16-2013)
§ 12.32.020   Purpose and scope.
   The purpose of
Chapter 12.32 is to preserve trees in the public right-of-way or on public
property as an important natural resource, to enhance the appearance of the
city and private property values, to clearly define responsibility for the
maintenance of trees in the public right-of-way and city property and to adopt
professional standards for planting and maintenance for use by the city and by
private property owners alike, all for purposes of the general public welfare.
(Ord. 1385, passed 10-16-2013)
§ 12.32.030   City Forester.
   A.   Established.  There is established in the Department of Public Works of
the city the Office of City Forester.  The Director of Public Works, or his or
her authorized agent, shall serve as City Forester in the  administration  and
enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   Scope.  The City Forester shall have exclusive jurisdiction and
supervision over all trees and other plants planted or growing in public places
and authority over all trees and other plants planted or growing in private
places as hereinafter set forth.
   C.   Preserve or Remove.  The City Forester shall have the authority to
oversee the planting, trimming, spraying with general notice, preservation and
removal of trees and other plants in public places to ensure safety or preserve
the symmetry and beauty of the public places.
   D.   Order to Preserve or Remove.  The City Forester shall have the
authority to order the spraying with general notice, trimming, preservation or
removal of trees or other plants upon private property when it is found that
that action is necessary to protect the public  safety or  to prevent the
spread of disease or insects to public trees and places.
   E.   Supervision.  The City Forester shall have the authority to supervise
all work done under the terms of this chapter.
§ 12.32.040   Creation of a Tree Committee.
   A.   Established.  There is hereby established a Tree Committee and it is
the same as the Site and Design Review Board established by Ord. 848.
   B.   Scope. The Committee shall study, investigate and develop, and/or
update annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation,
pruning, replanting, removal or disposition of street trees and park trees. 
The plan shall be presented to the City Council, and upon its acceptance and
approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree program of the
city.  The Committee, when requested by the City Council or the City Forester
shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any
special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
   C.   Tree List.  The official Canby Tree List of acceptable species of
trees, shrubs and bushes shall be maintained by the Committee and made
available to the public as set forth by resolution.  No person, without the
written permission of the city, shall plant a street tree of a species other
than those included on the list or approved by the City Forester.
(Am. Ord. 1385, passed 10-16-2013)
§ 12.32.050   Planting and maintenance of trees.
   A.   No person shall plant or remove any tree in the public right-of-way or
on city property except as allowed by this chapter.
   B.   The owner or occupant, or an agent for the owner or occupant, of
property abutting the right-of-way may plant, treat, prune or replace any tree
in that portion of the right-of-way abutting the property only in accordance
with current tree maintenance standards established by the National Arborist
Association, International Society of Arboriculture, or under the supervision
of a person having a current, valid certification as an arborist by the
International Society of Arboriculture.
   C.   The owner of property abutting the public right-of-way shall be
responsible for maintenance of all trees planted in the right-of-way between
the edge of the roadway and the property line in accordance with the standards
issued under this chapter.  As to trees planted in the right-of-way in
conjunction with new development of property, the obligation imposed by this
section shall commence after the city determines, and notifies the abutting
owner, that the tree(s) is/are established.
   D.   The city shall be responsible for maintenance of trees located in the
right-of-way along that portion of property which abuts a major arterial, minor
arterial or major collector street as designated on the city's transportation
system plan, if the abutting portion of such right-of-way:
      1.   Is separated from the property by a permanent barrier (such as a
sound wall or fence) at least 4 feet in height;
      2.   Does not have direct pedestrian or vehicular access (such as a
driveway) to the property;
      3.   Does not allow parking along the property allowing safe access for
private maintenance; and
      4.   Abuts property used for single-family residential purposes and not
commercial, industrial, multi-family, and homeowner or unit owner common area
uses.
   E.   The obligation to maintain those trees as well as trees planted in the
median of such roadway shall remain with the governmental unit which is
obligated to maintain such roadway arterial or major collector.
   F.   Except as otherwise allowed under a tree preservation or landscape plan
submitted as part of a development or subdivision application, any person
desiring for any purpose to plant a tree in or upon any right-of-way shall
perform such work according to the standards of the city's Tree Planting and
Maintenance Policy.
(Ord. 1385, passed 10-16-2013)
§ 12.32.060   Maintenance and Removal of Trees.
   A.   Trees within the public right-of-way or on city property shall be
pruned, damaging insects shall be controlled, disease shall be treated and the
trees otherwise shall be maintained following the procedures and according to
the standards of the city's Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy.  Trees within
and without the public right-of-way shall be maintained so as not to obstruct
the vision clearance area at intersections provided for in Title 16 of the
Canby Municipal Code.
   B.   Trees within the public right-of-way shall be maintained so that no
part of the tree occupies any portion of the area that is 14 feet or less above
the surface of an arterial roadway as designated on the transportation system
plan, or 12 feet or less above the surface of any roadway not designated on the
transportation system plan as an arterial, or 8 feet or less above the surface
of a sidewalk or bicycle or pedestrian path.
   C.   No tree within the public right-of-way or on city property shall be
topped unless the tree interferes with overhead utility wires or street lights
as determined by the owner of the utility or street lights, or unless topping
is necessary to limit further damage to a tree already damaged by other causes
as determined by the City Forester.
   D.   A tree within the public right-of-way or on city property that presents
an imminent risk of bodily injury or property damage may be removed on order of
any public official having authority to enforce motor vehicle laws or fire or
life safety codes at the location of the risk. As to emergency removal by any
other person, it is an affirmative defense that a person removed or caused to
be removed a tree within the right-of-way without obtaining permit or direction
to do so from an appropriate public official, because such removal was
necessary as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent public or private
injury; and the threatened injury was of such gravity that, according to
ordinary standards of intelligence and morality, the desirability and urgency
of avoiding the injury clearly outweighed the desirability of protecting the
public's interest in the tree.
   E.   Except as provided by division D. of this section, no person shall
remove or destroy a tree within the public right-of-way without a permit issued
by the city upon the person's application, on a form prescribed by the city,
and payment of the required fee. Such permits shall obligate the person to
replace the removed tree with a species approved by the City Forester and to
plant and maintain same according to the city Tree Planting and Maintenance
Policy, unless the City Forester upon request by the permittee determines it
would not be in the public interest to do so.  The city may require a person
seeking a permit to remove or destroy a tree within the public right-of-way to
give security for the cost of replacement and establishment
   F.   No person shall excavate, place fill or compact the soil within the
drip line of any tree in the public right-of-way except as expressly allowed by
the City Forester.
   G.   No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of
pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city without
first applying for and procuring permission from the city.  Before permission
is granted, an arborculturist shall file evidence of possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $100,000 for bodily injury and $300,000
property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged
resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as described in this section.
Bonding and insurance are not required of city employees or utility employees
in pursuit of similar services requested of them as employees of the city or
the utility.
   H.   Arborist.  No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation
of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city without
first applying for and procuring permission from the city.  Before permission
is granted, an arborculturist shall file evidence of possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $100,000 for bodily injury and $300,000
property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged
resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as described in this section. 
Bonding and insurance are not required of city employees or utility employees
in pursuit of similar  services  requested of them as employees of the city or
the utility.
(Ord. 1385, passed 10-16-2013)
§ 12.32.070   City may act on notice.
   A.   Upon notice to the City Forester that any tree within the public right-
of-way or on city property is infected with disease or infested with damaging
insects or otherwise presents an imminent risk of personal injury or property
damage or threatens the health of other trees, the city shall inform the
abutting property owner responsible for maintenance of the tree(s), if any, of
the person's obligation to take appropriate measures under the city's Tree
Planting and Maintenance Policy to limit or remove the risk, including but not
limited to destruction or removal of the tree under the terms of a permit to be
issued by the city upon the measures under the same Policy with regards to
trees that it maintains as provided by this chapter.
   B.   Public or private trees that present a risk of personal injury or
property damage or that threaten the health of other trees, as described in
division A. of this section, and that are not maintained, or the risk or threat
is not remedied, according to the Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy are
declared to be a public nuisance and are subject to the provisions of §§
12.32.080 through 12.32.140.  Trees that present an unreasonable risk of such
injury or damage or an immediate threat to the health of other trees may be
summarily abated without prior notice to the abutting property owner.
   C.   No permit fee shall be charged for permits to remove trees as required
by division A. of this section.
   D.   The city in its discretion may, from time to time, cause the
maintenance, destruction, removal or replanting of trees within the public
right-of-way that are a nuisance partially or wholly at the city's, not the
abutting property owner's, initiative and expense when it deems that the public
interest so requires.
(Ord. 1385, passed 10-16-2013)
§ 12.32.080   Interference with the city.
   No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the city, a utility or any
of their agents, while engaging in the planting, cultivating, mulching,
pruning, spraying or removal of any street trees, park trees or private trees
as authorized by this chapter.
§ 12.32.090   Service of orders.
   A.   When the City Forester shall find it necessary to order the spraying
with general notice, trimming, preservation or removal of trees or plants upon
public or private property, as authorized in this chapter, he or she shall
serve a written order to the owner, operator, occupant or other person
responsible for its existence to correct the dangerous condition.
   B.   The order required in this section shall be served in 1 of the
following ways:
      1.   By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible;
      2.   By leaving the order with some persons of suitable age and
discretion upon the premises;
      3.   By affixing a copy of the order to the door of the entrance of the
premises in violation;
      4.   By mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the
owner of the premises by certified mail; or
      5.   By publishing a copy of the order in the Canby Herald once a week
for 2 successive weeks.
(Am. Ord. 1385, passed 10-16-2013)
§ 12.32.100   Compliance.
   The order required in this chapter shall set forth a time limit for
compliance dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the violation.  In
case of immediate danger to persons or public property, the City Forester shall
have the authority to require compliance upon service of the order.
§ 12.32.110   Appeal.
   A person to whom an order under this chapter is directed shall have the
right within 14 days of the service of the order to appeal to the City Council,
which shall review the order at its next regular meeting or special meeting
called for that purpose.  Unless the order is revoked or modified by the City
Council, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to whom
directed.  No person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply with the
order within 30 days after an appeal shall have been determined.
§ 12.32.120   Failure to comply.
   When a person to whom an order is directed fails to comply within the
specified time, the City Forester shall remedy the condition or contract with
others for that purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom the
order is directed.  The person remedying the condition under a contract made
under this chapter shall be authorized to enter premises for that purpose.
§ 12.32.130   Special assessment.
   If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid within 90 days after
receipt of a statement therefor from the City Recorder, the costs shall be
levied against the property upon which the hazard exists as a special
assessment.  The levying of the assessment shall not affect the liability of
the person to whom the order is directed to fine and imprisonment as provided
in this chapter.  This special assessment shall be certified by the City
Forester to the City Recorder, and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon
the property, and shall be recorded in the city lien docket by the City
Recorder.
§ 12.32.140   Penalty.
   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500.
CHAPTER 12.36:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section
   
12.36.010   Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.
   
12.36.020   Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.
   
12.36.030   Definitions.
   
12.36.040   Registration of providers.
   
12.36.050   Construction standards.
   
12.36.060   Location of facilities.
   
12.36.070   Telecommunications franchise.
   
12.36.080   General franchise terms.
   
12.36.090   General provisions.
§ 12.36.010   Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.
   A.   The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all
public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the City Charter and
state law.
   B.   Public rights-of-way include but are not limited to streets, roads,
highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all
other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and airspace over
these areas.
   C.   The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each
public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement or other legal
interest in the right-of-way.  The city has jurisdiction and regulatory
management of each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way
was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation,
annexation, foreclosure or other means.
   D.   No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the
permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by
franchises and permits.
   E.   The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a public
right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and
does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.
   F.   The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the
city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in
response to a public health or safety emergency.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999)
§ 12.36.020   Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.
   A.   The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation
charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this
chapter, are separate from and in addition to any and all federal, state, local
and city charges as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications
provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale,
delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.
   B.   The city has determined that any fee provided for by this chapter is
not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b
of the Oregon Constitution.  These fees are not imposed on property or property
owners, and these fees are not new or increased fees.
   C.   The fees and costs provided for in this chapter are subject to
applicable federal and state laws.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1387, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 12.36.030   Definitions.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
      1.   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
      2.   The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive.
    B.   Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the
Communications Policy Act of 1934, being 47 USC §§ 201 and 521 et seq. as
amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, being 47 USC § 521 et
seq., the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
being 47 USC §§ 201 and 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996,
being 47 USC § 151 et seq.  If not defined there, the words shall be given
their common and ordinary meaning.
   Aboveground Facilities, see overhead facilities.
   Affiliated Interest shall have the same meaning as O.R.S. 759.010.
   Cable Act shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C.
§ 521 et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
   Cable Service is to be defined consistent with federal laws and means the 1-
way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming
service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the
selection or use of the video programming or other programming service.
   City means the City of Canby, an Oregon municipal corporation, and
individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.
   City Council means the elected governing body of the city.
   City Property means and includes all real property owned by the city, other
than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein,
and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not
subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this chapter.
   Conduit means any structure, or portion thereof, containing 1 or more ducts,
conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts or other facilities used for any
telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical or communications
conductors, or cable right-of-way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by
1 or more public utilities.
   Construction means any activity in the public rights-of-way resulting in
physical change thereto, including excavation or placement of structures, but
excluding routine maintenance or repair of existing facilities.
   Control or Controlling Interest means actual working control in whatever
manner exercised.
   Days means calendar days unless otherwise specified.
   Duct means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.
   Emergency has the meaning provided for in O.R.S. 401.025.
   Federal Communications Commission or FCC  means the federal administrative
agency or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
   Franchise means an agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a
privilege to use public right-of-way and utility easements within the city for
a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.
   Grantee means the person to whom or which a franchise is granted by the
city.
   Oregon Public Utilities Commission or OPUC  means the statutorily created
state agency in the State of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and
administration of certain telecommunications carriers as set forth in state
law, or its lawful successor.
   Overhead or Aboveground Facilities means utility poles, utility facilities
and telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including
the underground supports and foundations for the facilities.
   Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock
company or association, firm, partnership or limited liability company.
   Private Telecommunications Network means a system, including the
construction, maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a
service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a
person for his, her or its use and not for resale, directly or indirectly.
Private Tele- communications Network includes services provided by the state
pursuant to O.R.S. 190.240 and 283.140.
   Public Rights-of-Way include but are not limited to streets, roads,
highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all
other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and airspace over
these areas.  This definition applies only to the extent of the city’s right,
title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use the areas
for telecommunications facilities.  Public Rights- of-Way shall also include
utility easements as defined below.
   State means the State of Oregon.
   Telecommunications Act means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as
amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996
(47 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) and as hereafter amended.
   Telecommunications Provider means any provider of telecommunications
services and includes, but is not limited to, every person that directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages telecommunications facilities
within the city.
   Telecommunications Facilities means the plant and equipment, other than
customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications provider to provide
telecommunications services.
   Telecommunications Service means any service provided for the purpose of the
transmission of information, including, but not limited to voice, video or
data, without regard to the transmission protocol employed, whether or not the
transmission medium is owned by the provider itself.  Telecommunication service
includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video, data or information
transport, but does not include: (1) cable service; (2) open video system
service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. 76; (3) private communications system services
provided without using the public rights-of-way; (4) over-the-air radio or
television broadcasting to the public-at-large from facilities licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; (5) direct-to-home
satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications
Act; and (6) commercial mobile radio services as defined in 47 C.F.R. 20.e
Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; (5) direct-to-home
satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications
Act; and (6) commercial mobile radio services as defined in 47 C.F.R. 20.
   Telecommunications System, see telecom- munications facilities above.
   Telecommunications Utility has the same meaning as O.R.S. 759.005(1).
   Underground Facilities means utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations
or supports for overhead facilities.
   Usable Space means all the space on a pole, except the portion below ground
level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety
clearance space between communications and power circuits.  There is a
rebuttable presumption that 6 feet of a pole is buried below ground level.
   Utility Easement means any easement granted to or owned by the city and
acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes.
   Utility Facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but
not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant
and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
public right-of-way of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of
providing utility or telecommunications services.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1336, passed 11-3-2010; Am. Ord. 1387,
passed 11-20-2013)
§ 12.36.040   Registration of providers.
   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of registration is:
      1.   To assure that all telecommunications providers who have facilities
and/or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the city;
      2.   To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning
the telecom-munications providers who offer to provide telecommunications
services within the city, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities
within the city; and
      3.   To assist the city in the enforcement of this code and the
collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.
   B.   Registration Required.
      1.   Except as provided in division D. of this section, all
telecommunications providers having telecommunications facilities within the
corporate limits of the city, and all telecommunications providers that offer
or provide telecommunications services to any customer within the city, shall
register within 45 days of the effective date of this section.  Any
telecommunications provider that desires to have telecommunications facilities
within the corporate limits of the city or to provide telecommunications
services to any customer within the city after the effective date of this
section shall register prior to such installation or provision of service.
      2.   After registering with the city pursuant to the above section B.1.,
the registrant shall, by December 31st of each subsequent year, file with the
city a new registration form if it intends to provide telecommunications
services at any time in the following calendar year. Registrants that file an
initial registration after September 30th shall not be required to file an
annual registration until December 31st of the following year.
      3.   The appropriate application and license from either the Oregon
Public Utility Commission (PUC) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
qualify as necessary registration information.  Applicants also have the option
of providing the following information:
         a.   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including the
name, address and telephone number of the duly authorized officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration information;
         b.   The name, address and telephone number for the duly authorized
officer, agent or employee to be contacted in case of an emergency;
         c.   A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the city, a description of the
telecommunications facilities that the registrant intends to construct, and a
description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to
offer or provide to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the city;
and
         d.   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any business license requirements.  A copy of the business license or the
license number must be provided.
   C.   Registration Application Fee. Each application for registration as a
telecommunications provider shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
registration application fee in the amount established by resolution of the
City Council.
   D.   Annual Registration Fee.  Every telecommunications provider shall pay
an annual registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the
City Council. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city, the fee shall
be paid within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment
shall be accompanied by an accounting of gross revenues and a calculation of
the amount payable. The telecommunications provider shall pay interest at the
rate of 9% per year for any payment made after the due date. The annual
registration fee required by this section shall be subject to all applicable
limitations imposed by federal or state law.
   E.   Exceptions to Registration.  The following telecommunications providers
are excepted from registration:
      1.   Telecommunications providers that are owned and operated exclusively
for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state; and
      2.   A private telecommunications network, provided that the network does
not occupy any public rights-of-way of the city.
   F.   Deductions. A registrant may deduct from the annual registration fee
required herein the amount of any payments made or accrued to the city for the
same respective period upon which the annual registration fee is computed,
under any provision of franchise, permit, or ordinance in lieu of franchise
granted by the City Council. A registrant may not deduct amounts paid to the
city for application fees, interest charges, or penalties. This division shall
not relieve any registrant from paying in accordance with the provisions of a
franchise, temporary revocable permit, Charter provision or ordinance when the
amount to be paid thereunder exceeds the amount of the annual registration fee
under this chapter. A registrant may not deduct from the annual registration
fee the value of any right given to the city to use poles, conduits, or ducts
to other facilities in common with the registrant. A registrant may not deduct
from the annual registration fee any permit or inspection fee imposed under any
code provision or ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1387, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 12.36.050   Construction standards.
   A.   General.  No person shall commence or continue with the construction,
installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within a public
right-of-way except as provided in this code and in compliance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations.
   B.   Construction Codes. Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed,
installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal,
state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical
Code and the National Electrical Safety Code.
   C.   Construction Permits. No person shall construct or install any
telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way without first
obtaining a construction permit and paying the construction permit fee.  No
permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way:
      1.   Unless the telecommunications provider has first filed a
registration statement with the city pursuant to §
12.36.040B. of this code; and, if applicable,
      2.   Unless the telecommunications provider has first applied for and
been granted a franchise pursuant to §
12.36.070 of this code.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1387, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 12.36.060   Location of facilities.
   A.   Location of Facilities.  All facilities located within the public
right-of-way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the
following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a franchise
agreement:
      1.   Whenever all existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public right-of-
way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public right-of-
way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
      2.   Whenever all new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public right-of-way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same
public right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground concurrently with
the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public right-of-way,
absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city
and consistent with applicable state and federal law.
   B.   Interference with the Public Rights-of-Way. No grantee may locate or
maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with
the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by
other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-
way.  All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes,
ordinances and regulations.
   C.   Relocation or Removal of Facilities.  Except in the case of an
emergency, within 90 days following written notice from the city a grantee
shall, at no expense to grantor, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the
public rights- of-way whenever the city shall have determined that the removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
      1.   The construction, repairs, maintenance or installation of any city
or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way;
      2.   The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon
the public rights-of-way; and/or
      3.   The public interest.
   D.   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities.  Within 30 days following written
notice from the city, any grantee, telecommunications provider or other person
that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system,
facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the city
shall, at its own expense, remove the facilities or appurtenances from the
public rights-of-way of the city.  A telecommunications system or facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee’s
telecommunications franchise;
      2.   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of
the city.  A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out
of service or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of
90 days or longer.  A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is
temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is
being replaced;
      3.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
appropriate prior authority at the time of installation; or
      4.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location
not permitted by the grantee’s telecommunications franchise or other legally
sufficient permit.
   E.   Coordination of Construction Activities.  All grantees are required to
make a good-faith effort to cooperate with the city.
      1.   By January 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a
schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public rights-of-way.
      2.   If requested by the city, each grantee shall meet with the city
annually or as determined by the city, to schedule and coordinate construction
in the public rights-of-way.  At that time, city will provide available
information on plans for local, state and/or federal construction projects.
      3.   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the City Engineer or designee, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1387, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 12.36.070   Telecommunications franchise.
   A.   Required.  A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any
telecommunications provider who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the
city.
   B.   Application.  Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise
must register as a telecommunications provider and shall file an application
with the city which includes the following information:
      1.   The identity of the applicant;
      2.   A description of the telecommunications services that are to be
offered or provided by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities;
      3.   Engineering plans, specifications, and a network map in a form
customarily used by the applicant of the facilities located or to be located
within the public rights-of-way in the city, including the location and route
requested for applicant’s proposed telecommunications facilities;
      4.   The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a
preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area;
      5.   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the tele- communications services proposed; and
      6.   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or
lease.
   C.   Franchise Application and Review Fee.
      1.   Subject to applicable state law, franchise applicant shall reimburse
the city for such reasonable costs as the city incurs in entering into the
franchise agreement.
      2.   A franchise application and review fee of $2,000 shall be deposited
with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to division B. above.
Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused
portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the
determination granting or denying the franchise.
   D.   Determination by the City.  The city shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application, in whole or in part.  If the
application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for
denial.
   E.   Rights Granted. No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall
convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be
deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of- way for the limited
purposes and term stated in the franchise agreement.
   F.   Term of Grant.  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a
telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of
5 years.
   G.   Franchise Territory.  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise
agreement, a tele- communications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited
to a specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchise grantee
and the public rights- of-way necessary to serve the areas, and may include the
entire city.
   H.   Franchise Fee.
      1.   A telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall require the
grantee to pay the franchise fee in an amount determined by resolution of the
City Council.
      2.   Every telecommunications provider that uses the public rights-of-way
in the city to provide telecommunications services without a franchise, whether
or not the provider owns the telecommunications facilities used to provide its
services or whether or not the provider is required to obtain a franchise
pursuant to this chapter, shall pay a right-of-way use fee in the amount
determined by resolution of the City Council. The duty to provide information
set forth in this chapter shall apply to information of telecommunications
providers subject to the right-of-way use fee in this division sufficient to
demonstrate compliance with this division.
      3.   Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city, the fee shall be
paid within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall
be accompanied by an accounting of gross revenues and a calculation of the
amount payable. The communications provider shall pay interest at the rate of
9% per year for any payment made after the due date.
      4.   The franchise fee and/or the right-of-way use fee required by this
section shall be subject to all applicable limitations imposed by federal or
state law.
   I.   Amendment of Grant. Conditions for amending a franchise:
      1.   A new application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications provider that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way of the city which are not
included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.
      2.   If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted
franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.
      3.   A new application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications provider that desires to provide a service which was not
included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.
   J.   Renewal Applications.  A grantee that desires to renew its franchise
under this chapter shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the
current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its
franchise which shall include the following information:
      1.   The information required pursuant to §
12.36.040.B of this code; and
      2.   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between
the city and the grantee.
   K.   Renewal Determinations.  Within 90 days after receiving a complete
application, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying
the
renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards.  If
the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the
reasons for nonrenewal:
      1.   The financial and technical ability of the applicant;
      2.   The legal ability of the applicant;
      3.   The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate
the applicant’s existing and proposed facilities;
      4.   The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this code and
the franchise agreement;
      5.   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules
and policies; and
      6.   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to
use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest.
   L.   Obligation to Cure As a Condition of Renewal.  No franchise shall be
renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance
of the agreement, or of the requirements of this code, have been cured, or a
plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been
approved by the city.
   M.   Assignments or Transfers of System or Franchise.  Ownership or control
of a majority interest in a telecommunications system or franchise may not,
directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease,
merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or
otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on reasonable conditions as may
be prescribed in the consent.
      1.   Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or
system shall agree, in writing, to assume and abide by all of the provisions of
the franchise.
      2.   No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has
the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold
and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this code.
      3.   Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee
shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs and expenses
reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign
a telecommunications franchise.
      4.   Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications franchise, system
or integral part of a system without prior approval of the city under this code
or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation
of the franchise.
   N.   Revocation or Termination of Franchise.  A franchise to use or occupy
public rights-of-way of the city may be revoked for the following reasons:
      1.   Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way
of the city without a construction permit;
      2.   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location;
      3.   Failure to comply with division M. above with respect to sale,
transfer or assignment of a telecommunications system or franchise;
      4.   Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to
the city;
      5.   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public rights-
of-way;
      6.   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this code;
      7.   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due
the city under this code;
      8.   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee;
      9.   Violation of material provisions of this code; and
      10.   Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement.
   O.   Notice and Duty to Cure.  In the event that the city believes that
grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the city shall give the grantee
written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short
and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or
noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not
exceeding 30 days, to furnish evidence that:
      1.   Corrective action has been or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
      2.   Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or
      3.   It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
   P.   Public Hearing.  In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence
reasonably satisfactory to the city of its compliance with the franchise or
with this code, the city staff shall refer the apparent violation or
noncompliance to the City Council.  The Council shall provide the grantee with
notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
   Q.   Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions.  If persuaded that the
grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this code,
or of a franchise agreement, the City Council shall determine whether to revoke
the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the
nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by 1 or
more of the following factors; whether:
      1.   The misconduct was egregious;
      2.   Substantial harm resulted;
      3.   The violation was intentional;
      4.   There is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements;
      5.   There is a history of overall compliance; or
      6.   The violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
   R.   Other City Costs.  All grantees shall, within 30 days after written
demand therefor, reimburse the city for all reasonable direct and indirect
costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification,
amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement
consistent with applicable state and federal laws.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1387, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 12.36.080   General franchise terms.
   A.   Facilities.  Upon request, each grantee shall provide the city with an
accurate map or maps certifying the location of all of its telecommunications
facilities within the public rights-of-way.  Each grantee shall provide updated
maps annually.
   B.   Damage to Grantee’s Facilities.  Unless directly and proximately caused
by wilful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, the city shall not be
liable for any damage to or loss of any tele- communications facility within
the public rights-of- way of the city as a result of or in connection with any
public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling
or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or
for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom.
   C.   Duty to Provide Information. Within 10 business days of a written
request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information
sufficient to demonstrate:
      1.   That grantee has complied with all requirements of this code; and
      2.   All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the
grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way, shall
be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals.
   D.   Service to the City.  If the city contracts for the use of
telecommunication facilities, telecommunication services, installation, or
maintenance from the grantee, the grantee shall charge the city the grantee’s
most favorable rate offered at the time of the request charged to similar users
within Oregon for a similar volume of service, subject to any of grantee’s
tariffs or price lists on file with the OPUC.  With the city’s permission, the
grantee may deduct the applicable charges from fee payments. Other terms and
conditions of the services may be specified in a separate agreement between the
city and grantee.
   E.   Compensation for City Property.  If any right is granted, by lease,
franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation
of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid for the right and
use shall be fixed by the city.
   F.   Cable Franchise. Telecommunication providers providing cable service
shall be subject to the separate cable franchise requirements of the city and
other applicable authority.
   G.   Leased Capacity.  A grantee shall have the right, without prior city
approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided
that the grantee shall notify the city that the lease or agreement has been
granted to a customer or lessee.
   H.   Grantee Insurance.  Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement,
each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city,
and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as
coinsured:
      1.   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
         a.   Three million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         b.   Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any 1
accident; and
         c.   Three million dollars for all other types of liability.
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, non- owned and hired vehicles with a
limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident;
      3.   Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s
liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000;
      4.   Comprehensive form premises; operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not
less than $3,000,000;
      5.   The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications
franchise, and other period of time during which the grantee is operating
without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its
telecommunications facilities.  Each insurance policy shall contain the
following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the city,
by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the city of the intent to
cancel or not to renew.”
      6.   Within 60 days after receipt by the city of the notice, and in no
event later than 30 days prior to the cancellation, the grantee shall obtain
and furnish to the  city evidence that the grantee otherwise meets the
requirements of this section; and
      7.   As an alternative to the insurance requirements contained herein, a
grantee may provide evidence of self-insurance subject to review and acceptance
by the city.
   I.   General Indemnification.  Each franchise agreement shall include, to
the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify
and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including
reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of,
resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent,
careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal
of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering
telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether the acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this code or by a franchise
agreement made or entered into pursuant to this code.
   J.   Performance Surety.  Before a franchise granted pursuant to this code
is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a
performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for
the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this code,
including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because
of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes,
ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in
addition to the performance surety required for construction of facilities.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999; Am. Ord. 1387, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 12.36.090   General provisions.
   A.   Governing Law. Any franchise granted under this code is subject to the
provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the State of
Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the City.
   B.   Written Agreement.  No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the
agreement is in writing.
   C.   Nonexclusive Grant.  No franchise granted under this code shall confer
any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the
public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or
any other purposes.
   D.   Severability and Preemption.  If any article, section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of
this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of
competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules,
regulations or decision, the remainder of the code shall not be affected
thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision;
and the holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof,
and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision,
condition, covenant and portion of this code shall be valid and enforceable to
the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws,
rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a
provision of this code, then the provision shall be read to be preempted to the
extent and/or the time required by law.  In the event the federal or state law,
rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer
preempted, the provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and
shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the
part of the city, and any amendments hereto.
   E.   Penalties.  Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than  $1,000 for each offense.  A
separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a
violation occurs.  The enforcement of this provision shall be consistent with
the provisions of this code regulating code enforcement.
   F.   Other Remedies.  Nothing in this code shall be construed as limiting
any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for
enforcement of this code.
   G.   Captions. The captions to sections throughout this code are intended
solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions
contained herein.  These captions shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of this code.
   H.   Compliance with Laws.  Any grantee under this code shall comply with
all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any
administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules
and regulations of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted or established
during the entire term any franchise granted under this code, which are
relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a
telecommunications system.
   I.   Consent.  Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantee is
specifically required by this code or in a franchise granted, the consent will
not be unreasonably withheld.
   J. Application to Existing Agreements.  To the extent that this code is not
in conflict with and can be implemented with existing franchise agreements,
this code shall apply to all existing franchise agreements for use of the
public right-of-way for tele- communications.
   K.   Confidentiality.  The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve
the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent
permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-3-1999)
CHAPTER 12.40:  BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND ROLLER BLADES
Section
   
12.40.010   Regulated riding activity.
   
12.40.020   Definitions.
   
12.40.030   Prohibited riding areas.
   
12.40.040   Prohibited riding.
   
12.40.050   Duty to yield.
   
12.40.060   Duty to obey traffic laws and control devices.
   
12.40.070   Prohibited riding times.
   
12.40.080   Penalty.
§ 12.40.010   Regulated riding activity.
   This chapter regulates the riding of bicycles, skateboards and other similar
devices defined below.
(Ord. 1082, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 12.40.020   Definitions.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      Bicycles means any wheeled bicycle, unicycle or tricycle.
      Riding means propelling bicycles, skate- boards or similar devices by
having 1 or more feet on any part of the device.
      Skateboards includes roller skates, in-line skates, blades, scooters,
coasters, roller-skis or any similar device.
   B.   Wheelchairs and similar devices used by persons with physical
disabilities are excepted from this chapter.
(Ord. 1082, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 12.40.030   Prohibited riding areas.
   A.   Riding as described in §
12.40.010 is pro- hibited on any sidewalk or other city property in the area
within the following boundaries:
      1.   North side of 3rd Street between N.W. Elm and N. Ivy;
      2.   South side of 1st Street between N.W. Elm and N. Ivy;
      3.   N. 2nd Street east of N. Ivy through to its terminus in the 300
block;
      4.   East side of N. Elm between 1st and 3rd Streets N.W.; and
      5.   East side of N. Ivy between 1st and 3rd Streets N.W.
   B.   The Traffic Safety Commission may designate additional prohibited
riding areas.
(Ord. 1082, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 12.40.040   Prohibited riding.
   No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard or similar device as defined in §
12.40.020, in any area designated as a prohibited riding area, as described in
§
12.40.030A.
(Ord. 1082, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 12.40.050   Duty to yield.
   Any person riding on a sidewalk shall at all times yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians using the sidewalks and shall give an audible warning before
overtaking and passing a pedestrian.
(Ord. 1082, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 12.40.060   Duty to obey traffic laws and control devices.
   Any person riding upon a public street shall obey all state traffic laws and
traffic control devices, including but not limited to:
   A.   No person, while riding or operating any bicycle, skateboard or similar
device upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public highways of the city shall
hold on to any other vehicle.
   B.   Riders shall ride in single file on the right- hand side of the street
in bike lanes, where available, or as close as practicable to the right curb or
edge of the roadway, where unavailable, unless overtaking and passing another
rider or pedestrian.
(Ord. 1082, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 12.40.070   Prohibited riding times.
   No person shall ride upon any street or sidewalk between the 1 hour after
sunset and 1 hour before sunrise, unless the device or rider is equipped with
lighting equipment, including a white light visible from a distance of 600 feet
to the front of the device and a rear red reflector or light device visible
from 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of a vehicle’s headlights.
(Ord. 1082, passed 11-21-2001)
§ 12.40.080   Penalty.
   Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 1082, passed 11-21-2001)
TITLE 13:  PUBLIC SERVICES
   Chapter
      
13.04   AUTHORITY AND INTENT
      
13.08   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
13.12   RATES AND CONNECTION FEES
      
13.16   SEWER USE
      
13.20   IMPLEMENTATION
CHAPTER 13.04:  AUTHORITY AND INTENT
Section
   
13.04.010   Designated.
§ 13.04.010   Designated.
   A.   Pursuant to the statutes of the State of Oregon and powers granted in
the Charter of the City of Canby, the city does hereby declare its intention to
own, construct, equip, operate and maintain sanitary sewers, sewage pump
stations, sewage treatment plants and outfall sewers; to extend and expand the
existing sewage system of the city; and to reconstruct existing sanitary
sewers, sewage pump stations and sewage treatment plants as may be deemed
proper by the City Council.  It is further declared to be the policy of the
city to provide and offer sewage disposal service for those areas adjacent to
the city limits as may, in the judgment of the City Council, be feasibly
severed upon those terms, conditions and rates as the City Council shall
determine.
   B.   The rules and regulations hereinafter set forth shall be applicable to
the disposal of sewage into the city sewage system, whether delivered from
within or from without the city limits.
CHAPTER 13.08:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
13.08.010   Definitions.
   
13.08.020   Use of public sewers required.
   
13.08.030   Private sewage disposal.
   
13.08.040   Construction plans; review and approval.
   
13.08.050   Construction standards.
   
13.08.060   Type of sewage system.
   
13.08.070   Flow allowances.
   
13.08.080   General.
   
13.08.090   Inspection.
   
13.08.100   Powers and authority of inspectors.
   
13.08.110   Building sewers and connections.
   
13.08.120   Building sewer requirement and standards.
   
13.08.130   License of sewer and septic tank worker.
   
13.08.140   Separate building sewer.
   
13.08.150   Basement service and backflow prevention.
   
13.08.160   Building sewers and laterals.
   
13.08.170   Point of connection.
   
13.08.180   Restricted connections.
   
13.08.190   Unauthorized connections.
   
13.08.200   Residential.
   
13.08.210   Building sewer costs.
§ 13.08.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT shall mean the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) as amended.
   ANSI Specifications shall mean the standard specifications or methods of the
American National Standards Institute of the serial designation indicated by
the number and, unless otherwise stated, refer to the latest adopted revision
of the specifications or method.
   Applicable Pretreatment Standards shall mean for any specified pollutant,
city prohibitive discharge standards, city’s specific limitations on discharge,
state pretreatment standards, or the national categorical pretreatment
standards (when effective), whichever standard is most stringent.
   ASTM Specifications shall mean the standard specifications or methods of the
American Society for Testing Materials of the serial designation and indicated
by the number and, unless otherwise stated, refer to the latest adopted
revision of the specification or method.
   Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under a standard laboratory
procedure in 5 days at a temperature of 20º Centigrade, expressed in milligrams
per liter, or parts per million by weight.  Laboratory determinations shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   Branch Sewer shall mean a conduit extending from the plumbing or drainage
system of a building or buildings to and connecting with a public or private
sanitary or storm sewer, within a street right-of-way.
   Building Drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning 5 feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   Building Sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
property line or right-of-way line and connection with the public sewer service
lateral.
   Categorical Industry shall mean any business or industry listed by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as such.
   Categorical Pretreatment Standard shall mean national pretreatment standards
and are limitations on pollutant discharges to publicly owned treatment works
(POTWs) promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in
accordance with the Clean Water Act, that apply to specified process wastewater
of particular categories.
   City or City of Canby shall mean the municipality of Canby, Oregon, a
municipal corporation of the State of Oregon, acting through its City Council
or any board, committee, body, official or person to whom the Council shall
have lawfully delegated the power to act for or on behalf of the city.  Unless
a particular board, committee, body, official or person is specifically
designated in these rules and regulations, wherever action by city is
explicitly required or implied herein, it shall be understood to mean action by
the Superintendent of Public Works of Canby, Oregon, or his or her duly
authorized deputy or agent.
   City Limits shall mean the area contained within the boundaries of the city,
as now or hereafter constituted.
   Combined Sewer or System shall mean a conduit or system of conduits in which
both sewage and stormwater are transported.
   Commercial Building shall mean all buildings or premises used for any
purpose other than a dwelling unit, but not an industrial user.
   Commercial User shall mean a business establishment other than an industrial
plant, and shall include multi-family dwelling units.
   Compatible Pollutant shall mean wastes having biochemical demand, suspended
solids and pH within tolerable limits, fecal coliform bacteria, and additional
pollutants which the city treatment works are designed to treat.
   Domestic Sanitary Wastes/Wastewater shall mean wastewater discharged from a
residential user.
   Dwelling Units shall mean buildings and structures  that  are  constructed
and used primarily for residential purposes.
   Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food, and  from  handling,  storage  and sale of produce.
   Industrial Discharger/User shall mean any discharger who discharges wastes
other than domestic wastewater directly or indirectly into the city sewer
system.
   Industrial Waste shall mean liquid, solid or gaseous substances or
combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
commercial food processing, business, agriculture, trade or research, including
but not limited to the development, recovering or processing of natural
resources and leachate from landfills or other disposal sites, and any other
discharge other than domestic sanitary waste.
   Industrial Waste Discharge Permit shall mean a permit to discharge
industrial wastes into the city sewer system issued under the authority of this
title and which prescribes certain discharge requirements and limitations.
   Interceptor shall mean a sanitary sewer which receives the flow from a
number of trunk, main or lateral sewers and transports it to a treatment plant
or other point of disposal.  Generally, an Interceptor collects the flow from a
number of trunks, mains or laterals which would otherwise discharge to a
natural outlet.
   Interference shall mean an inhibition or disruption of the POTW, its
treatment process or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal
caused by a discharge or discharges from other sources that results in either a
violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or to the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or
more stringent state or local regulations):
      1.   The Clean Water Act (CWA);
      2.   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and
including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA);
      3.   The CWA; and
      4.   The Toxic Substances Control Act.
   Lateral shall mean a sanitary sewer which will receive the flow from service
connections and discharge into a main, trunk or interceptor.
   Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) shall mean the lowest concentration of a gas-in-
air mixture at which the gas can ignite.
   Main shall mean a sanitary sewer which receives the flow from 1 or more
laterals and which discharges into a trunk or interceptor.
   Multi-Family shall mean 2-family or multi-family occupancy.
   Natural Outlet shall mean an outlet into a pond, lake, stream, river, ditch,
watercourse or other body of surface water.
   New Source shall mean:
      1.   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after
the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under the CWA which will be
applicable to those sources if the standards are thereafter promulgated  in 
accordance with that section, provided that:
         a.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         b.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at the existing source; or
         c.    The production of wastewater generating process of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site.  In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
      2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meet ing the
criteria of divisions l.b. or 1.c. of this definition but otherwise alters,
replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      3.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is defined herein
has commenced if the owner or operator has done either of the following:
         a.   Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            i.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            ii.   Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is
necessary for placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or
equipment.
         b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time.  Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation.
   Pass-Through shall mean the occurrence of an indirect discharge which exits
the POTW into waters of the United States in qualities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
   pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of the hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.  pH shall be determined by 1 of the
procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
   Pollutant shall mean any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection
system, which is prohibited or limited by sections herein.  Pollutants shall be
classified as follows:
      1.   Conventional Pollutants.  Organic biodegradable pollutants such as
BOD, TSS, TDS, COD, phosphorous, ammonia, oil and grease, organic and inorganic
nitrogen and any others defined by resolution as Conventional Pollutants.
      2.   Nonconventional Pollutants.  Heavy metals, EPA-listed hazardous and
acutely hazardous pollutants, priority pollutants, pesticides, toxic pollutants
as defined herein and any other defined by resolution.
   POTW shall mean publicly operated treatment works.
   Pressure Sewer shall mean a sewer receiving flow directly from a pump
station and discharging under pressure into an interceptor, trunk, main,
lateral, another pumping station or treatment plant.
   Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing the pollutants into the city sewerage
system.
   Pretreatment Requirement shall mean any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national categorical
pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
   Private Sewer shall mean a sanitary sewer, storm sewer or combined sewer,
exclusive of building sewers, which is not owned or operated by the city or
another local government agency.
   Properly Shredded Garbage  shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to the degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow and conditions normally
prevailing in  public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension.
   Public Sewer shall mean a sanitary sewer, storm sewer or combined sewer,
exclusive of building sewers, owned or operated by the city or another local
government agency.
   Residential User shall mean a person or persons occupying a dwelling house
as a single family.
   Sanitary Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit designed or used to transport
sewage and to which stormwater, surface and groundwaters are not admitted
intentionally.
   Service Connection shall mean a public sewer which has been constructed to
the approximate property line or right-of-way line from a public sewer for the
sole purpose of providing a connection for the building sewer.
   Sewage shall mean a combination of the water- carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with any ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.
   Sewage Pretreatment Agreement shall mean the agreement between the city and
any local government agency or person, providing for the delivery or receipt of
sewage to or from the city sewage system and the acceptance or delivery by the
city of the sewage.
   Sewage Treatment Plant shall mean an arrangement of devices, structures and
equipment for treating sewage.
   Sewer User shall mean any person using any part of the city sewage system.
   Sewerage System shall mean the entire sewage collection and treatment
systems, exclusive of branch sewers.  This includes all conduits, pumps,
treatment equipment and any other components involved in the transportation,
collection, treatment and disposal of sanitary and industrial wastewater and
sludge.  This includes both sanitary and stormwater systems.
   Significant Industrial Discharger/User shall mean any discharger into the
wastewater collection system and/or wastewater treatment facility who:
      1.   Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards
promulgated by EPA under the Clean Water Act (CWA);
      2.   Has industrial waste containing significant concentrations and/or
quantity of toxic pollutants as defined herein;
      3.   Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons or more per day of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) to the POTW;
      4.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic, organic or solids handling load to the city’s
wastewater treatment system; satisfies other or more restrictive criteria of
the permittee’s formal pretreatment program;
      5.   Is determined by the EPA, DEQ or the city to have a significant
impact or potential for significant impact to adversely affect the wastewater
treatment facility and/or wastewater collection system by either upset,
inhibition, pass-through of pollutants, sludge contamination, or receiving
water quality (Willamette River).
   Slugload shall mean any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or
concentration which causes interference to city sewerage or disposal systems.
   Standard Methods shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   Storm Sewer shall mean a conduit designed or used exclusively to transport
stormwater.
   Superintendent of Public Works shall mean the person duly appointed by the
city, a local government agency or the owner of private sewers, to supervise
and direct the design and construction of local sewage facilities, acting
personally or through agents or assistants duly authorized by him or her, the
agents or assistants acting within the scope of their particular duties.
   Suspended Solids shall mean total suspended matter that is in suspension in
water or wastewater and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
   Toxic Pollutants shall mean those substances listed by EPA and DEQ.  The
list is based upon the priority pollutant list prepared by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and any additional information available which
indicates toxicity or hazard level of particular substances.
   Trunk shall mean a major sanitary sewer into which more than 2 laterals or
mains discharge, and which transports the flow collected from laterals and
mains to an interceptor, pumping station or treatment plant.
   Upset shall mean an exceptional incident in which a discharge is
unintentionally and temporarily in a state of noncompliance with the discharge
requirements set forth in this title due to factors beyond reasonable control
of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation thereof.
   Wastewater shall mean industrial waste or sewage, or any other waste
including that which may be combined with any groundwater, surface water or
stormwater, that may be discharged to the city sewerage systems.
§ 13.08.020   Use of public sewers required.
   A.   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city
limits and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is a
public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his or her expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect those facilities
directly with the proper public sewer, either by gravity or with approved
pumping facilities, in accordance with the provisions of this title, within 90
days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer
is available to or on the property and/or at a property line of the property,
and the structures or buildings are within 100 feet of the public sewer.  In
the event that, during the period of 90 days, the owner shall file his or her
written objections with the Superintendent of Public Works against so being
required to install the facilities, the city shall not enforce the provisions
of this section upon the owner so filing his or her objections, until the City
Council shall have, at a meeting thereof, heard the objections of the owner and
rendered its decision thereon.  The meeting of the Council shall be held not
less than 10 days nor more than 45 days and after the date set by the filing of
the objections with the Superintendent of Public Works.  Not less than 7 days
prior to the date set by the Council for the meeting, the Superintendent of
Public Works shall give due notice of the date set therefor to the owner. The
decision of the Council shall be final, and no appeal shall be taken therefrom
by the owner except as is provided by law.
   B.   At the time that the public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer in compliance with this title; and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilitates shall be abandoned
and filled with approved granular material.
§ 13.08.030   Private sewage disposal.
   A.   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the
requirements of the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality,  the
Plumbing Code of the State of Oregon and Clackamas County.
   B.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of the requirements of general law.
§ 13.08.040   Construction plans; review and approval.
   Detailed construction plans and specifications for proposed public and
private sewers shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Oregon, and shall be subject to review and approval by the city and
Department of Environmental Quality. Each person shall notify the city in
writing of his or her intention to prepare construction plans and
specifications delineating the boundaries of the areas to be served by map,
sketch or written description.  Within 10 calendar days following receipt of
the notice, the city shall make a written request for the submission of these
plans and specifications.  The person shall submit 2 sets of plans and
specifications and shall obtain approval thereof and a permit to construct
prior to advertising for bids.  Within 21 calendar days following receipt of
the plans and specifications, the city shall review same and return 1 set
thereof to the person with approval or required changes indicated.  If the
plans and specifications are disapproved, the required changes shall be made by
the person and all required revisions of plans and specifications resubmitted
in the same  manner  as  provided for the initial submittal.  In the event no
communication is received from the city by the person within 21 calendar days
of the date of submission of the plans and specifications, it shall be deemed
that the city has not approved the plans and specifications and will not issue
a construction permit.
§ 13.08.050   Construction standards.
   Construction of private sanitary sewers within the city shall conform to
these rules and regulations and to the Standards for Sanitary Sewer
Construction in the city (construction standards), together with all amendments
thereof or hereafter adopted.  Copies of the construction standards are
available at the office of the Superintendent of Public Works for viewing.
§ 13.08.060   Type of sewage system.
   New public sewers, private sewers and extensions of existing sewers shall be
designed as separate sanitary sewers or storm sewers. Construction of combined
sewers will not be permitted.
§ 13.08.070   Flow allowances.
   The design criteria for new public sewers, private sewers and extension of
existing sewers shall be such that the total daily flow other than sewage shall
be 1,500 gallons per acre per day.
§ 13.08.080   General.
   The construction of new public sewers, private sewers and extensions of
existing sewers shall, under the jurisdiction of the city, fully conform to
these rules and regulations, construction standards and the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Quality.  In the event of conflict, the highest
applicable standard shall govern.
§ 13.08.090   Inspection.
   A.   The city will provide an inspector or inspectors on all new sanitary
sewer construction within the city to ensure compliance with these rules and
regulations and the specifications under which they are to be constructed.  The
inspector(s) will make diligent efforts to guard the city against defects and
deficiencies in the work of the contractor(s) and to help determine if the
provisions of these rules and regulations and the construction standards are
being fulfilled.  Day-to-day inspection will not, however, cause the city to be
responsible for those duties and responsibilities which belong to the
construction contractor and which include but are not limited to full
responsibility for the techniques and sequences of construction and the safety
precaution incidental thereto, and for performing the construction work in
accordance with these rules and regulations and the construction standards.
   B.   The city will notify the local government agencies or person
responsible for the construction when, in the opinion of the Superintendent of
Public Works, the construction work does not comply with these rules and
regulations.  Upon receipt of notification from the city that any sewer
construction work is not being performed in compliance with these rules and
regulations and the construction standards therefor, the person shall
immediately take actions as may be necessary to ensure compliance.
   C.   Each person shall inform the city a minimum of 10 but not more than 20
days in advance of the start of any sewer construction.
   D.   The city shall be reimbursed for the cost of providing inspection
services by the person installing new sanitary sewers.  The cost for inspection
services shall be on a per-diem basis determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works at the time the permit is issued to perform the work.
   E.   The construction of the sewers shall be under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works.  At the completion of the construction, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall certify, in writing, to the city that the
construction complies with these rules and regulations and the plans and
specifications therefor.
§ 13.08.100   Powers and authority of inspectors.
   The Superintendent of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of
the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
title.
§ 13.08.110   Building sewers and connections.
   A.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit, signed by the
Superintendent of Public Works.  The application for the permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the city, which applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
   B.   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Public Works.  The city shall be allowed to inspect the work
at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit
shall notify the Superintendent of Public Works when the work is ready for 
final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made forthwith upon receipt of notice that the work is
ready for final inspection.
   C.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent of Public Works when the building sewer is ready for inspection,
and shall specify in the notice the location of the premises.  In the event
that the work or material used is not in accordance with the provisions of this
title, the Inspector shall notify the person doing the work and also the owner
of the premises by posting a written notice upon the premises; and the posted
notice shall be all the notice that is required to be given of the defects in
the work or material found in the inspection; and a copy of the notice shall be
kept on file in the office of the Superintendent of Public Works.  In the event
the defects are not corrected within 30 days of the posted notice, the
Superintendent of Public Works or his or her representative, if in his or her
opinion the defective work is detrimental to the public sewer or public sewage
system, may order or cause the defects to be corrected; and the actual cost of
the correction shall be chargeable to the owner as a service charge, and shall
be a lien upon the property served by the building sewer.  No trench shall be
filled nor any connecting sewer covered until the work from the place where the
same connects with the public sewer or other outlet to the point where it
connects with the building drain or other plumbing of the building or premises
to be connected shall have been inspected or approved by or under the direction
of the Superintendent of Public Works and until the same shall have been made
in all respects to conform to the provisions of this title.
   D.   In any case, the owner or agent shall make application on a special
form furnished by the city; and upon the filing of the application, the owner
or agent shall pay to the city a permit fee for the right of the applicant to
hook to the public sewer.
§ 13.08.120   Building sewer requirement and standards.
   Construction of building sewers shall conform to this title and to the State
Plumbing Code and any other applicable regulations or codes as may be adopted.
Copies of the State Plumbing Code and other applicable regulations or codes are
available at the office of the Superintendent of Public Works for viewing.
§ 13.08.130   License of sewer and septic tank worker.
   No person shall construct or attempt to construct a sewer connection within
the city until he or she has first obtained a license as a sewer worker.  No
person shall engage in septic tank cleaning, construction or repair within the
city until he or she has first obtained a license as a septic tank worker. 
State  requirements  for licensing shall be followed.
§ 13.08.140   Separate building sewer.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where 1 building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as 1 building sewer; provided, however, that apartment courts,
motels and similar structures held under a single ownership shall be permitted
to use a single sanitary sewer connection while the single ownership shall
continue, the single connection to be a size and type approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 13.08.150   Basement service and backflow prevention.
   A.   Building sewers serving buildings with a basement shall, whenever
possible, be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drain shall be lifted by
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.  Backflow devices shall be
installed in all building sewers serving new buildings with basements or new
sewers serving existing buildings with basements, and the cost will be borne by
the owner.
   B.   If an existing plumbing outlet or fixture has been installed or is
planned to be installed at an elevation or location which could cause the
outlet or fixture to overflow by reason of backflow from a main line sewer, a
backflow prevention device of a type approved by the city shall be installed
between the outlet and the public sewer in a manner as to prevent sewage from
flowing back into the outlet or plumbing fixture.  The property owner shall be
responsible for installation and maintenance of backflow prevention devices.
   C.   If the property owner fails to install a backflow prevention device or
maintain it in good working condition when required to do so by this code or
other rules, regulations and charges governing water and sewer service, the
city may order and require the plumbing fixture to be disconnected and removed
and the outlet be plugged or capped.
   D.   The city shall not be held responsible for any property damage or other
costs caused by plumbing outlets or fixtures located in violation of this
section or by improperly installed or maintained backflow prevention devices.
(Am. Ord. 1151, passed 8-18-2004)
§ 13.08.160   Building sewers and laterals.
   A.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings or new
building sewers only when they are found, on examination and testing by the
Superintendent of Public Works, to meet all requirements of this title.
   B.   Building sewers shall be of a material and type approved by the Oregon
State Specialty Plumbing Code and shall meet the same requirements with regard
to quality of materials and workmanship as the rest of the sanitary system.  A
clean-out shall be installed to within 12 inches of the ground surface and
connected at the joint of the building sewer and the city lateral.  The invert
of the building sewer shall be at the same or higher elevation than the invert
of the lateral at the point of connection.
   C.   No trees shall be planted or allowed to mature in that portion of a
city right-of-way within 10 feet of a sewer lateral.
   D.   All building sewers shall be laid on not less than 2% grade; shall be
not less than 5 feet from any building, unless otherwise approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works; shall have not less than 4 feet, 6 inches of
cover at the curb line, 18 inches at the property line and 12 inches inside the
property line, and shall be not less than 6 inches in diameter from the public
sewer to the property line, nor less than 3 inches in diameter inside the
property line; provided, the Superintendent of Public Works may, where
conditions in the opening require, specify larger building sewers than herein
provided.  Not more than 1 building shall be connected with a building sewer;
except where the connection is made inside the property line and the owner or
owners of the premises connected shall make and file in the office of the City
Recorder an easement for the purpose; or except where connection is to an
existing building sewer within a public street and written permission from the
owner or owners of the premises served by the building sewer has been filed
with the Superintendent of Public Works and approved by him or her.  All
excavation for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with a
barricade and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.  Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public
Works at the expense of the property owner.
   E.   All excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall
be open trench work, unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works.  Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with
regulations of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Oregon State
Plumbing Code and other applicable codes.
   F.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at a service connection lateral extended to the right-of-way line of a
public thoroughfare.  If no lateral already exists from a sewer main, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall cause the installation of 1 or more
laterals in keeping with the following standards:
      1.   Previously Developed Lots.  The city shall install, at its expense,
a service connection lateral to each previously developed lot where the
existing development has utilized an on-site sewage disposal system and the
other requirements for sewer connection have been met.
      2.   Vacant Lots.  The city will install, by request, at the expense of
the owner, laterals to undeveloped lots.  Owners will be billed for all costs
including labor, equipment, materials, bookkeeping, and any other costs
directly attributable to the requested installation.  An exception shall be
made in the case of any vacant lot in a subdivision where it is found that the
construction of laterals did not conform to the construction plans or “as-
built” plans on file in the Public Works Department.  In these cases  the 
Superintendent  shall  authorize the construction of a lateral at city expense.
      3.   Vacant Tracts.  The Superintendent of Public Works shall, in order
to avoid later street cuts and related construction difficulties, cause the
construction of sewer laterals to serve vacant tracts and large undeveloped
areas.  To determine the correct number and proper location of the laterals,
the Superintendent shall utilize the land use map of the comprehensive plan to
determine the probable ultimate development of the site.  The Superintendent of
Public Works shall file with the City Recorder a statement of costs for this
lateral construction.  These costs, plus interest at the rate of 8% per annum,
shall be added to the city’s customary sewer connection charge.
   G.   The city shall be responsible for the general maintenance of service
connection laterals but shall bear no responsibility for the repair or
maintenance of private building sewers.  In any case where city crews are
called upon to make repairs to a lateral and the repairs also include work done
on the building sewer, the property owner shall be billed for any and all work
undertaken as a result of a blockage which was located on private property.
§ 13.08.170   Point of connection.
   Building sewer connections shall be made on the house side of the septic
tank.
§ 13.08.180   Restricted connections.
   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other source of surface run-off or groundwater,
either directly or indirectly, to a sanitary sewer.
§ 13.08.190   Unauthorized connections.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereto; and no
person, firm or corporation shall make any connection to any part of the sewer
system without first making an application and securing a permit therefor.
§ 13.08.200   Residential.
   A residential permit shall be issued for single- family dwellings.
§ 13.08.210   Building sewer costs.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the applicant for the development.  The
applicant shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation.
CHAPTER 13.12:  RATES AND CONNECTION FEES
Section
   
13.12.010   Sewer connection charges levied and imposed.
   
13.12.020   Rates for connection charges.
   
13.12.030   Deferral of sewer connection charges.
   
13.12.040   Charges for sewer service levied and imposed.
   
13.12.050   Rates for sewer service.
   
13.12.060   Special rates and other fee schedules.
   
13.12.065   In-lieu-of franchise fee.
   
13.12.070   Collection.
   
13.12.080   Prohibited practices.
   
13.12.090   Interference with operation of sewerage system.
   
Appendix A: Service Connection Mortgage
§ 13.12.010   Sewer connection charges levied and imposed.
   A.   What is a Connection Charge?  All sewer connection charges and any
other development-related charges shall be imposed in accordance with the
city’s most current systems development ordinance and implementing resolutions.
   B.   What the Connection Charge is Based On.  The service connection charge
is levied upon a property based upon the existing or intended use of the
property at the time of application for connection. If the property is
improved, expanded, subdivided or otherwise modified so as to increase the
connection charge due from that property, a service connection charge shall be
levied for the modified portion of the property based upon connection charges
in effect at the time of modification.
   C.   Dwellings That Cannot Be Served.  Dwellings that cannot be served by
gravity flow to the sanitary sewer shall not be subject to the sewer connection
charges provided by this chapter, unless lesser charges for the dwelling are
enacted by resolution of the City Council.
   D.   Abutting a Right-of-Way with Sanitary Service.  Any dwelling that is on
property abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a
sanitary sewer of the city and that, by reason of ordinance, resolution or
motion duly adopted by the City Council is not required to connect to the
sewage system, shall not be subject to the sewer connection charges provided by
this chapter.
§ 13.12.020   Rates for connection charges.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish appropriate rates and
methodologies to be charged for connecting to the city sewer system.  The rates
shall differentiate between various types of users or activities with discharge
into the sewage system.
§ 13.12.030   Deferral of sewer connection charges.
   Requirements and procedures for the deferral of sewer connection and
collection sewer charges shall be in accordance with the following:
   A.   Eligibility.  The developer of any property whose connection charge, if
any, exceeds the sum of $5,000 shall be eligible to apply to pay the charges
for that property in installments on a schedule appended to this section as
Table I, below; provided, however, that if the collection sewer charge is
payable by the city to someone other than the city, pursuant to an agreement
between the city and that person to reimburse the person for all or a portion
of the cost of constructing a sewer line extension, the collection sewer charge
shall not be eligible to be paid in installments, nor shall it be considered in
determining whether the connection charge is eligible to be paid in
installments.  The city reserves the right to reject any application for
deferral of the connection charge.
   B.   Application.  Any eligible developer of property desiring deferral of
the payment of the connection charge shall, at the time of application for
connection, submit to the city an application requesting deferral on a form
provided by the city.
   C.   Title Report.  Upon receipt of an application, the applicant shall
order a preliminary title report from a title insurance company doing business
in Clackamas County, Oregon.
   D.   Lienholders.  The applicant, at his or her expense, shall furnish the
city with a current statement of amounts due to each lienholder disclosed by
the preliminary title report of the title insurance company, and for property
proposed for improvement, an MAI appraisal certified by the appraiser as to the
estimated fair market value upon completion of the proposed improvement.  The
applicant shall answer questions as the city deems proper regarding the
applicant’s ability to pay the deferred connection charge and any other
lienholder  regarding applicant’s payment history.
   E.   Appraisal.  If, upon examination of the title to the property and the
appraisal report, the city is satisfied as set out in the following divisions
1. and 2., the applicant shall execute a mortgage in the form appended to this
chapter as Appendix A and the city shall issue a connection permit.  This lien
shall be enforced in the manner provided by O.R.S. Chapter 223:
      1.   That the total unpaid amount of all liens disclosed, together with
the amount of connection charge sought to be deferred, does not exceed the
appraised value of the property as determined by the current appraisal of the
County Assessor; or if the city elects, based upon the appraisal or other
evidence of value acceptable to the city, the total unpaid amount of all liens
disclosed, together with the amount of the connection charge sought to be
deferred, does not exceed the estimated fair market value of the property when
the proposed improvement is completed; and
      2.   That the applicant can execute a mortgage covering the property
which will be a valid lien on the fee thereof.
   F.   Evaluation of Value.  If the city determines that the amount of
connection charge, together with all other unpaid liens, exceeds the appraised
value or anticipated appraised value of the property, or that the applicant
cannot execute a mortgage which will be a valid lien, or that the applicant
cannot make the required payments, it shall so advise the applicant.
   G.   Due and Payable.  The deferred connection charge shall be due and
payable January 1 and July 1 of each year together with interest on deferred
principal balances at the rate of 10% per annum, which interest shall be the
full and only compensation to the city for its administrative costs.  Interest
shall be paid in addition to each principal payment on the dates the principal
payments are made.  If the applicant is approved for a deferred payment
schedule, a minimum of $1,200 shall be paid immediately upon connection to the
sewer.  The remaining balance of the initial assessment shall then be computed
into equal semiannual payments, per schedule set forth in Table I, with the
first payment  due 6 months after the initial connection.
   H.   Table I.  The following schedule shall apply to deferred payment for
sewer connection charges:
 
Table I
Amount to be Financed (Initial Maximum Amount of Semi-annual Payments
Assessment)
$5,000 - $10,000               14
$10,001 - $15,000              16
$15,001 - $20,000              18
over $20,000                   20
 
§ 13.12.040   Charges for sewer service levied and imposed.
   A.   Rates.  All users of the city’s sewage system shall pay to the city the
rates for sewer service as provided by this chapter.
   B.   Not Serviceable.  Dwellings that cannot be served by gravity flow to
the sanitary sewer shall not be subject to the sewer service charges provided
by this chapter, unless lesser charges for those dwellings are enacted by
resolution of the City Council.
   C.   Abutting a ROW with Service.  Any dwelling that is on property abutting
any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a sanitary sewer of
the city and that, by reason of ordinance, resolution or motion duly adopted by
the City Council, is not required to connect to the sewage system, shall not be
subject to the sewer service charges provided by this chapter.
   D.   When Levied (Existing).  When sewer service is initially provided to
existing dwellings, the sewer service charge shall first be levied for the
month following the first month in which dwellings  are permitted to be
connected to the sewer.
   E.   When Levied (New).  When new dwellings are served by the sewage system,
the sewer service charge shall first be levied for the month following the
first month in which the dwelling is occupied or utilized by personnel not
associated with the construction of the dwelling.
   F.   Based on Availability.  Sewer service charges are to be levied and
imposed based upon the availability of sewer service and are not dependent upon
the owner’s schedule for connecting to the sewer system after the system is
available.
   G.   Minimum Service.  The minimum sewer service for an individually billed
service shall be equal to the charge for a residential service.
   H.   Who is Billed.  Sewer service charges shall be billed to any dwelling
showing connection to the city sewer and either water use or electric power
use.
   I.   Property Owner Responsibility.  Sewer service charges may be billed to
an occupant; however, the property owner shall be ultimately responsible for
all sewer service charges to his or her property.
§ 13.12.050   Rates for sewer service.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish appropriate rates to be
charged for monthly sewer service.  These rates shall differentiate between the
various types of uses or activities which are connected to the sewage system.
§ 13.12.060   Special rates and other fee schedules.
   The City Council shall by resolution, establish appropriate rates to be
charged for but not limited to extra-strength rates, resampling fees and
industrial waste discharge permit fees.  The rates shall differentiate between
the various types of uses or activities which require special fees.
§ 13.12.065   In-lieu-of franchise fee.
   As compensation for the use of publicly-owned rights-of-way, the sewer
combined funds shall pay the General Fund an in-lieu-of franchise fee in the
amount of 7% of city sewer customer service charges.
(Ord. 1356, passed 5-16-2012; Am. Ord. 1402, passed 6-18-2014)
§ 13.12.070   Collection.
   A.   Who Collects.  The officer or agent who has been duly designated and
authorized by the City Council to receive payments for sewer charges and
connection charges, as provided for herein,  is hereby directed to collect
those charges.
   B.   Where Paid.  Sewer service fees shall, as and when collected, be paid
into a fund designated as the Sewer Fund and connection charges shall, as and
when collected, be paid into a fund designated as the Sewer Reserve.
   C.   Delinquent Charges.  Sewer service charges, as hereinafter provided,
shall be collected monthly; and if not paid on or before 15 days after the
billing, the charges shall be deemed delinquent.
§ 13.12.080   Prohibited practices.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge into any outlet within the city any
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided  in  accordance with subsequent provisions
of this title.
§ 13.12.090   Interference with operation of sewerage system.
   A.   No unauthorized person shall enter any city sewer, manhole, pumping
station, treatment plant or appurtenant facility. No person shall maliciously,
wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the city system. Any
person violating this provision will be subject to immediate arrest.
   B.   No person, other than an authorized employee or agent of the city,
shall operate or change the operation of the city sewer, pumping station,
treatment plant, outfall structure or appurtenant facility.
APPENDIX A:
SERVICE CONNECTION MORTGAGE
   THIS MORTGAGE is made this _____ day of _______, 20____, between __________,
herein called “Mortgagor” and the City of Canby, Oregon, herein called “city”.
   City has imposed a connection charge of $______ on Mortgagor for the
privilege of connecting to the city’s sewerage system, the following described
real property:
   SEE ATTACHED PROPERTY DESCRIPTION, EXHIBIT “A.”
   Mortgagor desires to defer the payment of the connection charge and the city
has agreed to such deferral.  Mortgagor agrees to pay to the city the service
charge of $_______ in not less than ____(  ) equal installments of $_______
each on the first days of January and July of each year together with and in
addition to each said installment, interest on unpaid principal balances
existing at any principal payment date at the rate of ten percent (10%) per
annum on each principal payment date.  Interest shall be paid in addition to
each principal payment.
   To secure the aforesaid sum, the Mortgagor conveys to the city the above-
described real property and Mortgagor covenants to and with city that Mortgagor
is the owner thereof and that Mortgagor will warrant and defend the same from
the claims of all persons.
   Mortgagor covenants and agrees to commit no waste on the premises and to pay
all taxes and assessments thereon promptly when due and before the same become
delinquent.
   NOW, THEREFORE, if the covenants herein shall be performed as agreed, this
conveyance shall be void.  But, in case default shall be made in payment of the
principal or interest when either principal or interest shall become due or in
any covenant herein, then the whole sum shall immediately become due and
payable and the city may foreclose this mortgage at any time thereafter.
   In any suit to foreclose this mortgage, or in any suit which the city
defends to protect the lien thereof, the Mortgagor agrees, in addition to any
sum due on the foregoing obligation at the time such suit is commenced, to pay
a sum of money as reasonable attorney’s fees to be set by the court hearing
said suit or any appeal therefrom and the costs and disbursements allowed by
the Code of Civil Procedure, and further agrees to pay the reasonable costs of
searching records and abstracting the same as may be incurred by the city in
foreclosing or defending this mortgage.
   In this instrument, the masculine shall be deemed to include the feminine
and the singular the plural where the connotations are applicable herein.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Mortgagor has set his or her hand the day and year
first hereinabove written.
__________________________                        ___________________
__________________________                        ___________________
                                    MORTGAGOR
STATE OF OREGON                           )
                                    )ss.  Date:________
COUNTY OF CLACKAMAS                        )
   Personally appeared the above named _______________the foregoing instrument
to be ________________ and acknowledged voluntary act and deed.
BEFORE ME:
   _____________________________
   Notary Public for _______________
   My Commission Expires: ________
CHAPTER 13.16:  SEWER USE
Section
General Provisions
   
13.16.001   Purpose and policy.
   
13.16.002   Administration.
   
13.16.003   Definitions.
   
13.16.004   Abbreviations.
General Sewer Use Requirements
   
13.16.015   Prohibited discharge standards.
   
13.16.016   Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
   
13.16.017   State requirements.
   
13.16.018   Local limits.
   
13.16.019   City's right to revision.
   
13.16.020   Special agreement.
   
13.16.021   Dilution.
   
13.16.022   Deadline for compliance with categorical standards.
   
13.16.023   Inflow and infiltration.
Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
13.16.035   Pretreatment facilities.
   
13.16.036   Additional pretreatment measures.
   
13.16.037   Spill prevention and slug control plans.
   
13.16.038   Tenant responsibility.
   
13.16.039   Separation of domestic and industrial wastewater.
   
13.16.040   Hauled wastewater.
   
13.16.041   Vandalism.
   
13.16.042   Grease interceptors.
Wastewater Permit Eligibility
   
13.16.055   Wastewater survey.
   
13.16.056   Wastewater permit requirement.
   
13.16.057   Permitting existing connections.
   
13.16.058   Permitting new connections.
   
13.16.059   Permitting extra-jurisdictional industrial users.
   
13.16.060   Wastewater permit application contents.
   
13.16.061   Authorized signatory and accuracy certification.
   
13.16.062   Wastewater permit decisions.
Wastewater Permit Issuance Process
   
13.16.075   Wastewater permit duration.
   
13.16.076   Wastewater discharge permit contents.
   
13.16.077   Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
   
13.16.078   Wastewater permit modifications.
   
13.16.079   Wastewater permit transfer.
   
13.16.080   Wastewater permit revocation.
   
13.16.081   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
   
13.16.082   Regulation of wastewater received from other jurisdictions.
Reporting Requirements
   
13.16.090   Baseline monitoring reports.
   
13.16.091   Compliance schedule for meeting pretreatment standards.
   
13.16.092   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.
   
13.16.093   Periodic compliance reports.
   
13.16.094   Report of changed conditions.
   
13.16.095   Reports of potential problems.
   
13.16.096   Reports from unpermitted users.
   
13.16.097   Sample collection.
   
13.16.098   Analytical requirements.
   
13.16.099   Monitoring charges.
   
13.16.100   Timing.
   
13.16.101   Record keeping.
   
13.16.102   Reporting of additional monitoring.
   
13.16.103   Notification of significant production change.
   
13.16.104   Hazardous waste notification.
Compliance
   
13.16.115   Inspection and sampling.
   
13.16.116   Search warrants.
Confidential Information
   
13.16.130   Confidential information.
Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
   
13.16.140   Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
   
13.16.150   General.
   
13.16.151   Industrial user violation process.
   
13.16.152   Violation.
   
13.16.153   Violation of permit parameters.
   
13.16.154   Additional violation parameters.
   
13.16.155   IU notice to city of violation.
   
13.16.156   Consent orders.
   
13.16.157   Show cause hearing.
   
13.16.158   Compliance orders.
   
13.16.159   Cease and desist orders.
   
13.16.160   Administrative fines.
   
13.16.161   Emergency suspensions.
   
13.16.162   Termination of permit.
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
   
13.16.175   Injunctive relief.
   
13.16.176   Civil penalties.
   
13.16.177   Criminal prosecution.
   
13.16.178   Remedies nonexclusive.
Supplemental Enforcement Actions
   
13.16.190   Performance bonds.
   
13.16.191   Liability insurance.
   
13.16.192   Water supply severance.
   
13.16.193   Public nuisance.
   
13.16.194   Contractor listing.
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violation
   
13.16.210   Affirmative defenses.
   
13.16.211   Upset.
   
13.16.212   Prohibited discharge standards.
   
13.16.213   Bypass.
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
13.16.230   Pretreatment charges and fees.
   
13.16.231   Sewer connection charges levied and imposed.
   
13.16.232   Rates for connection charges.
   
13.16.233   Fees for sewer service levied and imposed.
   
13.16.234   Severability and conflicts with other ordinances.
   
13.16.235   Emergency clause.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13.16.001   Purpose and policy.
   A.   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of publicly
owned treatment works (POTW) for the city and enables the city to comply with
all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (Act 33
U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part
403) and Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR) Chapter 340. The objectives of this
chapter are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW, which will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise
be incompatible with the POTW;
      3.   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge
is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal to be in compliance
with applicable statutes and regulations;
      4.   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; and
      5.   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the POTW;
   B.   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. The chapter
authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires users reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
(Ord. 1413 § 1.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.002   Administration.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Public Works Director or designated
representative of the city shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1413 § 1.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.003   Definitions.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated;
   Act or “the Act”. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.1251 et seq.
   Approval Authority.  The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).
   Authorized Representative of the User.
      1.   If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative
shall mean:
         a.   The president, secretary, or vice-president of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         b.   The manager of 1 or more manufacturing, production, or operating
facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions
that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations,
and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents
has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
      2.   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively;
      3.   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his or her
designee.
      4.   The individuals described in divisions 1. through 3. above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing.
The authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
   Best Management Practice (BMP). Best Management Practices or BMPs means
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and
other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in §
13.16.015 A. and B. [40 C.F.R. 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
   Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
within 5 days at 20° Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration [milligrams
per liter (mg/l)].
   Building Sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to
the POTW.
   Categorical Industrial User. A user regulated by one of EPA's Categorical
Pretreatment Standards.
   Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a
specific category of users and which appears in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405-471.
   City. City of Canby Oregon, or the City Council of Canby, Oregon or a
designated representative of the City of Canby, Oregon.
   Color. The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is
equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
   Composite Sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on either an increment of
flow or time.
   Continuing Violation. Each day a violation occurs may be considered as a
separate violation.
   Control Authority. The City of Canby, Oregon or designated representative of
the city, tasked with administration of this chapter.
   Cooling Water/Non Contact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such
as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration to which the
only pollutant added is heat.
   Department of Environmental Quality or (DEQ). The Oregon Department of
Environmental Quality or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the Director of the Department or other duly authorized
official of the Department.
   Domestic User (Residential User). Any person who contributes sewage
wastewater to the municipal wastewater system.
   Environmental Protection Agency or U.S. EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Director of the Region 10 Office
of Water, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   Existing Source. A categorical industrial user, the construction or
operation of whose facility commenced prior to the publication by EPA of
proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which would be applicable to such
source if and when the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307 of the Act.
   Existing User. Any non-categorical user which was discharging wastewater
prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   Grab Sample. A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the
flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   Holding Tank Waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump trucks.
   Indirect Discharge or Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d)
of the Act.
   Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator. The person designated by the city to
carry out certain duties and responsibilities associated with the pretreatment
program. This person is the duly authorized representative of the Public Works
Director in accordance with this section.
   Industrial User. Any person, which is a source of indirect discharge.
   Infiltration. Any water other than wastewater that enters the sewage
treatment system (including service connections) from the ground, typically
from broken pipes, or defective joints in pipes and manhole walls.
   Inflow. Any water from storm water runoff that directly enters the sewage
system during or immediately after rainfall. Typical points of entry include,
but are not limited to, connections with roof and area drains, storm drain
connections, holes in manhole covers in flooded streets, cooling water
discharges, catch basins, and drainage from springs and swampy areas.
   Instantaneous Limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
   Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, both:
      1.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      2.   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405
of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title
II, commonly referred to as (RCRA); and including State regulations contained
in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
   Local Discharge Limitations. Specific discharge limits developed and
enforced by (the city) upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement
the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1)
and (b).
   Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit. The maximum concentration (or loading) of
a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis
of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial
flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   Medical Waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
   Municipal Wastewater System or System's. A "treatment works" as defined in
Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the state or
municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant. The term also means the municipal entity having the responsibility for
the O&M of the system.
   National Pretreatment Standard. National pretreatment standard is defined in
40 C.F.R. 403.3(j) as any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA under Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act
applicable to industrial users, including the general and specific prohibitions
found in 40 C.F.R. 403.5.
   New Source.
      1.   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307 (c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         a.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
         b.   The building, structure, facility or installation completely
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         c.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions a., b., or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
      3.   Construction of a new source as defined under this division has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         a.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program;
            i.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            ii.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new sources
facilities or equipment; or
         b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contacts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
division.
   New User. A "new user" is a user that is not regulated under federal
categorical pretreatment standards but applies to the city for a new building
permit or occupies an existing building and plans to commence discharge of
wastewater to the city's collection system after the effective date of this
chapter. Any person that buys an existing facility that is discharging non-
domestic wastewater will be considered an "existing user" if no significant
changes are made in the manufacturing operation.
   Non-domestic Pollutants. Any substances other than human excrement and
household gray water (shower, dish washing operations, and the like). Non-
domestic pollutants include the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor).
   Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation).
   Permittee.  A person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit.
   Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
   Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS,
Turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), toxicity, or odor).
   Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard).
   Pretreatment Requirement. Any substantive or procedural requirements related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   Pretreatment Standards or Standards. Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits established by the city/
POTW.
   Prohibited Discharge Standard or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain types or characteristics of
wastewater as established by EPA, DEQ, and/or the city.
   Public Works Director. The person or their duly authorized representative
designated by the city to supervise operation of the POTW its Pretreatment
Program and carry out certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter.
   Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). "A treatment works," as defined by
Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
The term also means the city.
   Receiving Stream or Waters of the State. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the State of Oregon or any
portion thereof.
   Septic Tank Waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dish washing
operations, and the like).
   Sewer. Any pipe, conduit ditch, or other device used to collect and
transport sewage from the generating source.
   Shall, May. "Shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissive.
   Significant Industrial User.
      1.   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      2.   Any other Industrial user that:
         a.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewater); contributes a process wastewater); or
         b.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5 percent or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
         c.   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      3.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division 2. has
no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at
any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a
user [in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. 403.8(f)(6)] determine that
such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
   Slug Load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause
a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §§ 13.16.015 et seq. A
slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including
but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge,
which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in
any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit
conditions.
   Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States
Office of Management and Budget.
   State.  State of Oregon.
   Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   Total Suspended Solids (TSS). The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
   Toxic Pollutant. One of the pollutants or combination of those pollutants
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection
Agency under the provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act.
   Treatment Plant. That portion of the municipal wastewater system designed to
provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.
   Treatment Plant Effluent. The discharge from the POTW into the waters of the
state.
   User or Industrial User. A source of indirect discharge. The source shall
not include "domestic user" as defined herein.
   Violation. Shall have occurred when any requirement of this chapter has not
been met; or when a written request of the Public Works Director or other
designee, made under the authority of this chapter, is not met within the
specified time; or when a condition of a permit or contract issued under the
authority of this chapter is not met within the specified time; or when
permitted effluent limitations are exceeded, regardless of intent or accident;
or if an industrial user (IU), causes the POTW to violate its NPDES permit, the
IU is in violation; or when false information has been provided by the
discharger.
   Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   Wastewater Discharge Permit (Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit). An
authorization or equivalent control document issued by the city to users
discharging wastewater to the POTW. The permit may contain appropriate
pretreatment standards and requirements as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 1413 § 1.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.004   Abbreviations.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
   BMP   Best Management Practices
   BOD   Biochemical Oxygen Demand
   CFR   Code of Federal Regulations
   COD   Chemical Oxygen Demand
   DEQ   Department of Environmental Quality
   EPA   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
   GPD   Gallons Per Day
   IU's   Industrial Users
   IWA   Industrial Waste Acceptance
   LC50   Lethal Concentration for Fifty Percent (50%) of the Test Organisms
   L   Liter
   LEL   Lower Explosive Limit
   mg   Milligrams
   mg/l   Milligrams per liter
   NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
   O&M   Operation and Maintenance
   POTW   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
   RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
   SNC   Significant Non-Compliance
   SP/SCP   Spill Prevention/Slug Control Plan
   SIC   Standard Industrial Classification
   SWDA   Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901)
   TSS   Total Suspended Solids
   USC   United States Code
(Ord. 1413 § 1.4, passed 4-1-2015)
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 13.16.015  Prohibited discharge standards.
   A.   General prohibitions (C.F.R. 403.5(a)1). A user may not introduce into
a POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass through or interference. These general
prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in this section apply to each user
introducing pollutants into a POTW whether or not the user is subject to other
national pretreatment standards or any national, state, or local pretreatment
requirements.
   B.   Specific prohibitions (C.F.R. 403.5(b)). No user shall introduce or
cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater;
      1.   Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
municipal wastewater system. Included in this prohibition are wastestreams with
a closed cup flash point of less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods
prescribed in 40 C.F.R. 261.21.
      2.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause interference
with the flow in a sewer.
      3.   Any fat, oils or greases, including but not limited to petroleum
oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in
amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
      4.   Any wastewater from a grab sample having a pH less than 6.0 su., or
more than 10.0 su., or which may otherwise cause corrosive structural damage to
the POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 5.0, unless the
sewerage treatment system is specifically designed to accommodate such
discharges.
      5.   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants (BOD, and the like), in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration),
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to pass through or
interfere with the municipal wastewater system, any wastewater treatment or
sludge process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals.
      6.   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
      7.   Any substance which may cause the treatment plant effluent or any
other residues, sludge, or scum, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or
to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance
discharged to the system cause the city to be in noncompliance with sludge use
or disposal regulations or permits issued under Section 405 of the Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act,
or other state requirements applicable to the sludge use and disposal practices
being used by the city.
      8.   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plants
effluent thereby violating the city's NPDES permit.
      9.   Heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in Interference, but in no case wastewater that causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40°
C).
      10.   Any wastewater containing any radioactive waste or isotopes except
as specifically approved by the Public Works Director or other designee in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
      11.   Any pollutants, which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapor
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
      12.   Any hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the
city in accordance with §
13.16.040.
      13.   Storm water, surface water, groundwater, artisan well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Public Works Director or other designee.
      14.   Any sludge, screening, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
      15.   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Public
Works Director or other designee in a wastewater permit.
      16.   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating
agents, which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal
wastewater system.
      17.   Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 C.F.R.
Part 261 except as specifically authorized by the Public Works Director or
other designee.
      18.   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to demonstrate
toxicity to test species during a bio-monitoring evaluation.
      19.   Recognizable portions of the human body or animal anatomy.
      20.   Any wastes containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other
substances, which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater
system.
      21.   Wastewater discharging from dental facilities which contain mercury
shall be provided with an approved amalgam separator.
      22.   Any wastewater from dry cleaning machines.
   C.   Waste prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that these waste could be discharged to the POTW.
(Ord. 1413 § 2.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.016    Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply
with applicable standards set out in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471 and incorporated herein.
   A.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Public
Works Director or other designee may impose equivalent concentration or mass
limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.6(c).
   B.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Public Works Director
or other designee shall impose an alternate limit using the combined
wastestream formula in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e).
   C.   A user may obtain a variance from categorical pretreatment standard if
the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40
C.F.R. 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   D.   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.15.
(Ord. 1413 § 2.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.017   State requirements.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by
all users which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are
more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this
chapter or in other applicable ordinances.
(Ord. 1413 § 2.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.018   Local limits.
   A.   Authority to establish local limits. The city is authorized to
establish local limits pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.5(c).
   B.   Numerical local limits.
      1.   No nonresidential user shall discharge wastewater containing
restricted substances into the POTW in excess of limitations specified in its
wastewater discharge permit or adopted, by resolution, by the city. The Public
Works Director or other designee shall publish and revise, from time to time,
standards for specific restricted substances. These standards shall be
developed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Section 403.5 and shall implement the
objectives of this chapter. Standards published in accordance with this section
will be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of Section 307(d) of the
Act.
      2.   The Public Works Director or other designee may impose mass
limitations in addition to (or in place of) the concentration-based limitations
above. Where a user is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard and a
local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent or applicable
pretreatment standard shall apply.
   C.   BMP - The Public Works Director or other designee may develop best
management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge
permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of §
13.16.015. Such BMP's shall be considered local limits and pretreatment
standards.
(Ord. 1413 § 2.4, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.019   City’s right to revision.
   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
permits, more stringent limitations or requirements for discharge to the
municipal wastewater system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives
presented in § 13.16.001 or the general and specific prohibitions in §
13.16.015.
(Ord. 1413 § 2.5, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.020   Special agreement.
   The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users
setting out special terms under which the industrial user may discharge to the
system. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request
a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R.
403.15. Industrial users may also request a variance from the categorical
pretreatment standard from U.S. EPA. Such a request shall be approved only if
the user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by U.S. EPA when establishing that
pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different
factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 C.F.R. 403.13.
(Ord.1413 § 2.6, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.021    Dilution.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute, a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or any other pollutant-
specific limitation developed by the city.
(Ord. 1413 § 2.7, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.022   Deadline for compliance with categorical standards.
   A.   Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards
shall be within 3 years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter
compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1
Subchapter N.
   B.   New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall
start-up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest
feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable
pretreatment standards.
(Ord. 1413 § 2.8, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.023   Inflow  and  infiltration.
   A.   All property owners and responsible users identified by the city as
contributors to excessive or improper infiltration or inflow into the treatment
works shall be advised of their infiltration or inflow problems. All such
properties shall be provided a 180-day grace period in which to correct the
identified infiltration and inflow problems, said 180-day grace period to
extend from the date of notification. By the end of the 180-day grace period,
each property owner shall notify the city that corrective actions have been
taken or are in progress, and describe the actions being taken.
   B.   A property owner failing to notify the city of corrective actions prior
to the end of the 180-day grace period shall be subject to termination of
service without further notice, and water service shall be immediately
discontinued and shut off until the violations shall have been corrected in
accordance to federal, state, and city regulations.
   C.   In the event any instance of excessive infiltration or inflow into the
treatment works of the city shall continue beyond the 180-day grace period, it
is hereby declared that such continuing infiltration or inflow is a public
nuisance. The Public Works Director or other designee shall have the right to
abate such a public nuisance, to enter upon any private property within the
city for such a purpose, and to assess the cost of such abatement as a lien
against the property upon which such infiltration and inflow occurs. The Public
Works Director or other designee shall assess the cost of such abatement to the
property from which infiltration and inflow occurs. An administration fee of
$350 or 5% of the cost, whichever is greater, shall be assessed in addition to
all cost of abatement. The assessment of all cost shall be levied by the filing
of a statement of such costs together with the description of the property or
properties to be assessed and the name of the owner(s) thereof with the City
Recorder. The City Recorder shall enter the assessment as a lien against such
property in the lien docket of the city.
   D.   No new connections from inflow sources into the water pollution control
facilities shall be permitted without the approval of the Public Works Director
or other designee.
(Ord. 1413 § 2.9, passed 4-1-2015)
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 13.16.035  Pretreatment facilities.
   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in §
13.16.015et seq. above, within the time limitations specified by the Public
Works Director or other designee. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city
for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the
facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary
to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1413 § 3.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.036   Additional pretreatment measures.
   Whenever deemed necessary, the Public Works Director or other designee may
require industrial users to restrict the industrial user's discharge during
peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into
specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as
may be necessary to protect the municipal wastewater system and determine the
industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Each person discharging, into the municipal wastewater system greater
than 100,000 gallons per day or greater than 5% of the average daily flow in
the system, whichever is lesser, may be required by the Public Works Director
or other designee to install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or
her expense, a suitable storable and flow control facility to ensure
equalization of flow over a 24 hour period. The facility shall have a capacity
for at least 50% of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with
alarms and a rate of discharge controller. A wastewater permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.
   B.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided, when, in the
judgment of the Public Works Director or other designee, they are necessary for
the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease,
flammable substances, sand, suspended solids or other harmful substances;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the city and shall
be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the owner, at his or her expense.
   C.   Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances
may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
(Ord. 1413 § 3.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.037   Spill prevention and slug control plans.
   The city may require any user to develop and implement a spill prevention/
slug control plan (SP/SCP). Where deemed necessary by the city, facilities to
prevent accidental discharge or slug discharges of pollutants shall be provided
and maintained at the user's cost and expense. A spill prevention/slug control
plan (SP/SCP) showing facilities operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the city for review and approval before
implementation. The city shall determine which user is required to develop a
plan and require said plan to be submitted within 90 days after notification by
the city. Each user shall implement its SP/SCP as submitted or as modified
after such plan has been reviewed and approved by the city. Review and approval
of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the user
from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter. The plan shall be posted and available for
inspection at the facility during normal business hours.
   A.   Any user required to develop and implement an accidental spill
prevention plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the
following:
      1.   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      2.   Description of stored chemicals;
      3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
would violate any standards in §§
13.16.015 through
13.16.018, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40
C.F.R. 403.5(b), or as required by §
13.16.095; and
      4.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   B.   Users shall notify the City Wastewater Treatment Facility immediately
after the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances regulated
by this chapter. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and
time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
Any affected user shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the POTW,
in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city on account thereof
under state or federal law.
   C.   Within 5 days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit
to the city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish
kills, or any other damage to person or property nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
   D.   Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user's
premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental
discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover
such discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures.
   E.   Preventive measures.
      1.   If any user has a spill or uncontrolled discharge of prohibited or
restricted substances into the city sewer, the Public Works Director or other
designee may require the user's spill prevention and control plan to be
resubmitted, with revisions, in order to fully comply with the requirements of
this chapter. The POTW may also require the industrial user to install, modify
equipment and/or make other changes necessary to prevent such discharges as a
condition of issuance of and industrial waste discharge permit or as a
condition of continued discharge into the city sewer system. The Public Works
Director or other designee may establish a schedule of compliance for
construction completion.
      2.   The Public Works Director or other designee may require connections
or entry points which could allow spills or uncontrolled discharges of
prohibited or restricted substances to enter the city sewer systems to be
eliminated, labeled, or controlled, so as to prevent the entry of wastes in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1413 § 3.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.038   Tenant responsibility.
   Any person who shall occupy an industrial user's premises as a tenant under
any rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter in the same manner as the owner.
(Ord. 1413 § 3.4, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.039   Separation of domestic and industrial wastewater.
   All domestic wastewaters from rest rooms, showers, drinking fountains, and
the like unless specifically included as part of a categorical pretreatment
standard, shall be kept separate from all industrial wastewaters until the
industrial wastewaters have passed through a required pretreatment system and
the industrial user's monitoring facility. When directed to do so by the Public
Works Director or other designee, industrial users must separate existing
domestic wastestreams.
(Ord. 1413 § 3.5, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.040   Hauled wastewater.
   Septic tank waste (septage) will be accepted into the municipal wastewater
system at a designated receiving structure within the POTW area, (when such
structures become available), and at such times as are established by the
Public Works Director or other designee, provided such wastes do not contain
toxic or hazardous pollutants, and provided such discharge does not violate any
other requirements established by the city. The Public Works Director or other
designee shall issue permits for individual vehicles to use such facilities.
   A.   All waste haulers, regardless of the origin of the hauled wastes, shall
be considered "industrial users" for the purposes of this chapter and required
to apply for a waste hauler permit.
   B.   The discharge of domestic septage wastes from commercial or industrial
sites requires prior approval. The Public Works Director shall have authority
to prohibit the disposal of such wastes, if such disposal would interfere with
the treatment plant operation.
   C.   Fees for the discharge of septage will be established as part of the
user fee system as authorized in §
13.16.230et seq.
(Ord. 1413 § 3.6, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.041   Vandalism.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the municipal wastewater system.
Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the
sanctions set out in §§
13.16.150et seq., below.
(Ord. 1413 § 3.7, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.042   Grease interceptors.
   A.   The city may inspect grease interceptors (i.e., traps, oil/water
separators) to insure proper installation and maintenance. Users may be
required to reimburse the city for cleaning and additional maintenance of
public sewer mains due to discharge of grease caused by noncompliance with
these rules and regulations.
   B.   In the event the city, during routine line maintenance, discovers an
accumulation of grease in a public line sufficient to restrict the normal flow
of waste, upstream IUs shall be inspected. When the city determines which user
was responsible for the grease or oil discharge, the user may be required to
cease discharge of the prohibited waste, install an interceptor, and shall
maintain the interceptor, and may be charged for the cost of cleaning the line.
(Ord. 1413 § 3.8, passed 4-1-2015)
WASTEWATER PERMIT ELIGIBILITY
§ 13.16.055   Wastewater survey.
   When requested by the city, all industrial users must submit information on
the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater
survey prior to commencing their discharge. The Public Works Director or other
designee is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey
shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subjects the industrial
user to the sanctions set out in §§
13.16.150et seq.
(Ord. 1413 § 4.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.056   Wastewater permit requirement.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge
wastewater into the city's sanitary sewer system without first obtaining a
wastewater permit from the Public Works Director or other designee. Any
violation of the terms and conditions of wastewater permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and subjects the industrial user to the sanctions set
out in §§
13.16.150et seq. Obtaining a wastewater permit does not relieve a permittee of
its obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state or local law.
   B.   The Public Works Director or other designee may require other non-
domestic users, non-discharging categorical industrial users and liquid waste
haulers, to obtain waste water permits as necessary to carry out the purpose of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1413 § 4.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.057   Permitting existing connections.
   Any significant industrial user, without a current industrial discharge
permit, which discharges industrial waste into the municipal wastewater system
prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such
discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the
city for a wastewater permit in accordance with §
13.16.060, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the system to continue
after 180 days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance with
a permit issued by the Public Works Director or other designee.
(Ord. 1413 § 4.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.058   Permitting new connections.
   Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging
industrial wastes into the municipal wastewater system must obtain a wastewater
permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for
this permit must be filed at least 90 days prior to the anticipated startup
date.
(Ord. 1413 § 4.4, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.059   Permitting extra-jurisdictional industrial users.
   Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the city limits
shall submit a permit application, in accordance with §
13.16.060, within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. New
significant industrial users located beyond the city limits shall submit such
applications to the Public Works Director or other designee 90 days prior to
any proposed discharge into the municipal system. Upon review of such
application, the Public Works Director or other designee may enter into a
contract with the industrial user which requires the industrial user to subject
itself to and abide by this chapter, including all permitting, compliance
monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions herein. Alternately, the
Public Works Director or other designee may enter into an agreement with the
neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is located to
provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program
requirements against said user.
(Ord. 1413 § 4.5, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.060   Wastewater permit application contents.
   A.   In order to be considered for a wastewater permit, all industrial users
required to have a permit must submit the following information on an
application form approved by the Public Works Director or other designee.
      1.   Name, mailing address, and location if different from the mailing
address).
      2.   Environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
      3.   Standard industrial classification (SIC) codes for pretreatment the
industry as a whole and any processes for which categorical pretreatment
standards have been promulgated.
      4.   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the
facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the
municipal system.
      5.   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
      6.   Each product by type, amount, process or processes and rate of
production.
      7.   Type and amount of raw materials process (average and maximum per
day).
      8.   The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation, and all points of discharge.
      9.   Time and duration of the discharge.
      10.   Measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day,
to the municipal system from regulated process streams and other streams as
necessary to use the combined wastestream formula in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e).
      11.   Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonable variations, if any.
      12.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by federal, state, and local
standards, pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; and
nature and concentration (or mass if pretreatment standard requires) of
regulated pollutant in each regulated process (daily maximum and average
concentration or mass when required by a pretreatment standard) Sampling and
analysis shall be undertaken in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136; and
certified that sampling is representative of normal work cycles and expected
pollutant discharges.
      13.   A statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the user
and certified to by a qualified professional indicating whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what
additional pretreatment is necessary.
      14.   If additional pretreatment and for O&M will be required to meet the
standards, then the industrial user shall indicate the shortest time schedule
necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional treatment
and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
following conditions apply to this schedule:
         a.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operation). No
increment referred to above shall exceed 9 months nor shall the total
compliance period exceed 36 months.
         b.   No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Public Works Director or other designee including, at a minimum, whether or not
it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than 9 months elapse between such progress
reports.
      15.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Public
Works Director or other designee to evaluate the permit application.
      16.   A new source discharger may provide estimates as to the character
and volume of pollutants described in §
13.16.060(A)10. through 12.
   B.   Incomplete or inaccurate applications shall not be processed and shall
be returned to the industrial user for revision.
(Ord. 1413 § 4.6, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.061   Authorized signatory and accuracy certification.
   A.   All permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the
following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative
of the industrial user:
      "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."
   B.   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to Public Works Director or
other designee prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
(Ord. 1413 § 4.7, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.062  Wastewater permit decisions.
   A.   The Public Works Director or other designee will evaluate the data
furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. Within
60 days of receipt of a complete permit application, the Public Works Director
or other designee will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater permit.
If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be
deemed denied.
   B.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or area proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers,  which  waters  contain  the  substances  or
possess the characteristics enumerated in §§
13.16.015et seq., and which in the judgment of the Public Works Director or
other designee, may have a deleterious effect upon the municipal treatment
system, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Public Works Director or
other designee may take any of the following actions:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
(Ord. 1413 § 4.8, passed 4-1-2015)
WASTEWATER PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
§ 13.16.075   Wastewater permit duration.
   Permits shall be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed 5 years. A
permit may be issued for a period less than 5 years, at the discretion of the
Public Works Director or other designee. Each permit shall indicate a specific
date upon which it will expire.
(Ord. 1413 § 5.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.076   Wastewater discharge permit contents.
   Wastewater permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed
necessary by the Public Works Director or other designee to prevent pass
through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the
treatment plants effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   A.   Wastewater permits shall contain the following conditions:
      1.   A statement that indicates permit duration, which in no event shall
exceed 5 years.
      2.   A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to and approval from the city and provisions for furnishing the
new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit.
      3.   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards in federal, state and local law.
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state and local law.
      5.   Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable
federal deadlines.
      6.   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the Public
Works Director or other designee to be necessary.
      7.   Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of
noncompliance and for automatic re-sampling and reporting within 30 days where
self-monitoring indicates a violation(s).
      8.   Requirements for prior notification and approval by the Public Works
Director or other designee of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or
of any change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to
introduction in the system.
      9.   Requirements for immediate notification of excessive, accidental, or
slug discharges, or any discharge which could cause any problems to the system.
   B.   Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
      2.   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties.
      3.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or
construction of appropriate containment devices, and the like, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment
works.
      4.   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges.
      5.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system.
      6.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the system.
      7.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment.
      8.   Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and
reporting schedules.
      9.   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and
requirements.
      10.   Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special
notification reports.
      11.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified in §
13.16.101 and affording the Public Works Director, or representatives, access
thereto.
      12.   Requirements for prior notification and approval by the Public
Works Director or other designee of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee.
      13.   A statement that compliance with permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and
state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the permit.
      14.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Public Works Director
or other designee to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 1413 § 5.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.077   Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
   Any person, including the user, may petition the Public Works Director or
other designee to reconsider the terms of the permit within 10 days of its
issuance.
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative conditions, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
   D.   If the Public Works Director or other designee fails to act within 15
days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not
to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be
considered final administrative actions for purpose of judicial review.
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Clackamas County Circuit Court, pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 34, within 60 days
of the final administrative decision.
(Ord. 1413 § 5.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.078   Wastewater permit modifications.
   A.   The Public Works Director or other designee may modify the permit for
good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
      2.   To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time
of permit issuance.
      3.   A change in the municipal wastewater system that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
      4.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the city's municipal wastewater system, city personnel, or the receiving
waters.
      5.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater permit.
      6.   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in
the permit application or in any required reporting.
      7.   Revisions of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.13.
      8.   To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
      9.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to
a new owner/operator.
   B.   The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification does
not stay any permit condition.
(Ord. 1413 § 5.4, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.079   Wastewater permit transfer.
   A.   Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator
only with prior approval of the Public Works Director or other designee. The
permittee must give at least 30 days advance notice to the Public Works
Director or other designee. The notice must include provision for furnishing
the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit and a written
certification by the new owner which:
      1.   States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the
facility's operations and processes.
      2.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
      3.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
permit.
   B.   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
permit terminated.
(Ord. 1413 § 5.5, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.080   Wastewater permit revocation.
   A.   The Public Works Director or other designee may revoke a wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      1.   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
      2.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      3.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      4.   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises
and records;
      5.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      6.   Failure to pay administrative penalties;
      7.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      8.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      9.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey;
      10.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility;
      11.   Violations of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms
of the permit or the chapter.
      12.   Failure to provide prior notification of changed conditions
pursuant to §
13.16.094.
      13.   Misrepresentation of, or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application.
      14.   Failure to complete a wastewater discharge permit application.
   B.   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voided upon cessation of
operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
permit to that user.
(Ord. 1413 § 5.6, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.081   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
   A user who is required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
a wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with §
13.16.060, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
wastewater discharge permit. A user whose existing wastewater discharge permit
has expired and who has submitted its re-application in the time period
specified herein shall be deemed to have an effective wastewater discharge
permit until the city issues or denies the new wastewater discharge permit. A
user whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and who failed to
submit its re-application in the time period specified herein will be deemed to
be discharging without a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 1413 § 5.7, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.082   Regulation of wastewater received from other jurisdictions.
   If another municipality, or user located within another jurisdiction,
contributes wastewater to the municipal wastewater system, the Public Works
Director or other designee shall enter into an inter-municipal or inter-
jurisdictional agreement with the contributing municipality or jurisdiction, or
enter into a contract with the user(s), in accordance with requirements
specified in the city's pretreatment procedures. All inter-jurisdictional
agreements made with users outside the city's jurisdiction will be considered a
major modification to the city NPDES permit and will require approval from the
Department of Environmental Quality.
(Ord. 1413 § 5.8, passed 4-1-2015)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 13.16.090   Baseline monitoring reports.
   A.   Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards
and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the municipal system
shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information
listed in division B., below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, including existing users which have changed their
operation or processes so as to become new sources, shall be required to submit
to the city a report which contains the information listed in division B. A new
source shall also be required to report the method it intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of
its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
   B.   The information required by this section includes:
      1.   Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address
of the facility including the name of the operator and owners;
      2.   Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental controls
permits held by or for the facility;
      3.   Description of operation. The user shall submit a brief description
of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the system from the regulated processes;
      4.   Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the
system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow
use of the combined wastewater formula set out in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e);
      5.   Measurement of pollutant.
         a.   The industrial user shall identify the categorical pretreatment
standards applicable to each regulated process.
         b.   In addition, the industrial user shall submit the results of
sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass,
where required by federal, state or city standards) of regulated pollutants in
the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and
long term average concentrations (or mass, where required by federal, state or
city standards) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations.
         c.   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula, in
order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. Where an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R.
403.6(e). This adjusted limit along with supported data shall be submitted to
the control authority.
         d.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto.
         e.   The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline
monitoring report, which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures.
         f.   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharge to the POTW.
      6.   Special certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operations and maintenance
(O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required in order to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements; and
      7.   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M shall be
established. The completion date in this schedule will not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out
in §
13.16.060 (14).
      8.   Signature and certification. All baseline-monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with §
13.16.041 .
(Ord. 1413 § 6.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.091   Compliance schedule for meeting pretreatment standards.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
13.16.090B.7.:
   A.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation).
   B.   No increment referred to above shall exceed 9 months.
   C.   The user shall submit a progress report to the Public Works Director no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.
   D.   In no event shall more than 9 months lapse between such progress
reports.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.092   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the municipal (POTW)
wastewater system, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the Public Works Director a report containing the
information described in §
13.16.090B.4. through 6. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(c),
this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term
production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §§
13.16.061 and
13.16.090B.6. through 8.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.093   Periodic compliance reports.
   A.   Any user that is required to have an industrial waste discharge permit
and performs self-monitoring shall submit to the city semi-annually on the 15th
day of June and December, unless required on other dates or more frequently by
the city, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP)
or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance of the user. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed
within the industrial waste discharge permit. At a minimum, users shall sample
their discharge at least twice per year. In addition, this report shall include
a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period for the discharge according to 40 C.F.R. 403.12(b)(4).
   B.   The report shall include a record of the concentration (and mass if
specified in the wastewater discharge permit) of the pollutants listed in the
wastewater discharge permit that were measured and a record of all flow
measurements (average and maximum) taken at the designated sampling locations
and shall also include any additional information required by this chapter or
the wastewater discharge permit. Production data shall be reported if required
by the wastewater discharge permit. Both daily maximum and average
concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. If a user sampled
and analyzed more frequently than what was required by the city or by this
chapter, using methodologies in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, it must submit all results
of sampling and analysis of the discharge during the reporting period.
   C.   Any user subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established
by the city or by unit production limits specified in the applicable
categorical standards shall report production data as outlined in §
13.16.092.
   D.   If the city calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or non-
regulated flows, the user will be responsible for providing flows from the
regulated process flows, dilution flows and non-regulated flows.
   E.   Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurements, provided,
however, that the city may accept reports of average and minimum flows
estimated by verifiable techniques if the city determines that an actual
measurement is not feasible.
   F.   Discharges sampled shall be representative of the user's daily
operations and samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements
specified in §§
13.16.090et seq.
   G.   The city may require reporting by users that are not required to have
an industrial wastewater discharge permit if information or data is needed to
establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent, or
determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of
the sewer system.
   H.   The city may require self-monitoring by the user or, if requested by
the user, may agree to perform the periodic compliance monitoring needed to
prepare the periodic compliance report required under this section. If the city
agrees to perform such periodic compliance monitoring, it may charge the user
for such monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the city for the sampling
and analyses. Any such charges shall be added to the normal sewer charge and
shall be payable as part of the sewer bills. The city is under no obligation to
perform periodic compliance monitoring for a user.
   I.   All wastewater samples must be representative of industrial user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that
sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
      1.   In the event an industrial user's monitoring results indicate a
violation has occurred, the industrial user shall immediately (within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the violation) notify the Public Works Director or other
designee and shall re-sample its discharge. The industrial user shall report
the results of the repeated sampling within 30 days of discovering the first
violation.
      2.   The reports shall indicate the time, date, persons, location of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of the normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the city sewer system. All sampling and analysis protocol shall
be in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
      3.   The Public Works Director or other designee may require reporting by
dischargers that are not required to have an industrial discharge permit if
information or data is needed to establish a sewer charge, determine the treat
ability of the effluent or determine any other factor which is related to the
operation and maintenance of the sewer system.
      4.   Reporting requirements for industrial users not subject to
categorical pretreatment standards will be according to the requirements
established in 40 C.F.R. 403.12(h) and §
13.16.093.
   J.   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
13.16.061.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.4, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.094   Report of changed conditions.
   Each industrial user shall notify the Public Works Director or other
designee of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations
or system, which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater
at least 30 days before the change. Notification of any changes in the listed
or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial
notification under 40 C.F.R. 403.12(p) must also be reported.
   A.   The Public Works Director or other designee may require the industrial
user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the
changed condition, including the submission of a waste water permit application
under §
13.16.060, if necessary.
   B.   The Public Works Director or other designee may issue a wastewater
permit under §
13.16.062 or modify an existing wastewater permit under §
13.16.078.
   C.   No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s)
until and unless the Public Works Director or other designee has responded to
the industrial user's notice.
   D.   For purposes of this requirement, flow or loading increases of 20% or
greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutant shall be
deemed significant.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.5, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.095   Reports of potential problems.
   A.   In the case of an accidental or other discharge, which may cause
potential problems for the municipal wastewater system, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the City POTW
Supervisor or Public Works Director or other designee of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
   B.   Within 5 days following an accidental discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Public Works Director or other designee, submit a detailed
written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, natural resources,
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve
the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
by this chapter.
   C.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in division A., above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   D.   Significant industrial users are required to notify the Public Works
Director or other designee immediately of any changes at its facility affecting
the potential for a slug discharge. Failure to notify the city of potential
problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.6, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.096   Reports from unpermitted users.
   All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and
not required to obtain a wastewater permit shall provide appropriate reports to
the city as the Public Works Director or other designee may require.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.7, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.097   Sample collection.
   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
   A.   Except as indicated in division B. and C. below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by Public Works Director. Where time-proportional composite sampling
or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative
of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation)
specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab
samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the
analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may
be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil
and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples
for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in
approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
limits.
   B.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   C.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in §§
13.16.090 and
13.16.092 [40 C.F.R. 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of 4 grab samples must be
used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not
exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
Public Works Director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required
by §
13.16.093 [40 C.F.R. 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the industrial user is required
to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance
by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   D.   Samples that are taken by city personnel for the purposes of
determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter may be split with
the discharger if requested (or a duplicate sample provided in the instance of
fats, oils and greases) if requested before or at the time of sampling.
   E.   The Public Works Director or other designee may require a discharger to
install and maintain at the discharger's expense a suitable manhole in the
discharger's branch sewer or other suitable monitoring access to allow
observation, sampling and measurement of all industrial wastes being discharged
into the city sewer system. It shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the city and shall be designed so that flow measuring and sampling
equipment may be conveniently installed. Access to the manhole or monitoring
access shall be available to city representatives at all times.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.8, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.098   Analytical requirements.
   All sample analyses shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and any amendments thereto or with any other test
procedures approved by the Administrator of The Environmental Protection
Agency. If there are no approved test procedures for a particular pollutant,
then analyses shall be performed using other validated procedures approved by
the Public Works Director or other designee and, if the discharge is subject to
a categorical pretreatment standard, by the EPA Administrator.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.9, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.099   Monitoring charges.
   The city may recover the expenses incurred in collecting and analyzing
samples of the industrial user's discharge by adding the city's expenses to the
industrial user's sewer charges.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.10, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.100   Timing.
   Written reports shall be deemed to have been transmitted at the time of
deposit, postage prepaid, into a mail facility services by the United States
Postal Service.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.11, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.101   Record keeping.
   Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection, and
copying, all records and information required to be retained under 40 C.F.R.
403.12(o), (including documentation associated with best management practices).
These records shall remain available for a period of at least 3 years. This
period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the industrial user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Public Works Director
or other designee, DEQ or EPA.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.12, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.102   Reporting of additional monitoring.
   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of 40 C.F.R.
403.12(e) or (h), which requires submission of periodic compliance reports,
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, using the
procedures prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report, as required by 40 C.F.R. 403.12(g)(5).
(Ord. 1413 § 6.13, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.103   Notification of significant production change.
   An industrial user operating under a waste discharge permit incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based
standard shall notify the Public Works Director or other designee within 2
business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production
level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not
notifying the Public Works Director or other designee of such anticipated
change shall be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit
that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production
rate.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.14, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.104   Hazardous waste notification.
   A.   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, of any discharge
into the municipal wastewater system of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40
C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms
of such waste per calendar month to the municipal wastewater system, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass
and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during
that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date of this
rule. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of
this rule shall provide the notification no later than 180 after the discharge
of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this
paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 C.F.R.
403.12(j) and §
13.16.094. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 C.F.R.
403.12(b), (d), (e), and §§
13.16.090,
13.16.092, and
13.16.093.
   B.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of this division A.,
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous waste, unless the wastes are acute hazardous waste as
specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous waste in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   C.   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of the RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Director,
the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and DEQ Solid and
Hazardous Waste Division Director, of the discharge of such substance within 90
days of the effective date of such regulations.
   D.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
   E.   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
hereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. 1413 § 6.15, passed 4-1-2015)
COMPLIANCE
§ 13.16.115   Inspection and sampling.
   Authorized city representatives may inspect and monitor any non-residential
user of city water and/or sewer services to determine compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. The discharger shall allow the city or its
authorized representatives to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all
reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination,
record copying, and photographic documentation. The city shall also have the
right to set up on the discharger's property such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
The right of entry includes, but is not limited to, access to those portions of
the premises that contain facilities for sampling, measuring, treating,
transporting or otherwise handling waste, and storing records, reports or
documents relating to the treatment, sampling or discharge of waste.
   A.   Where a user has security measures in force, which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the industrial
user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state, and
U.S. EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their official duties.
   B.   The entry shall be made at reasonable times during normal operating or
business hours unless an emergency situation exists as determined by the Public
Works Director or other designee.
   C.   The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment, as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
industrial user at the industrial user's expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their
accuracy.
   D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the industrial user at the written or oral request of the Public Works Director
or other designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the industrial user.
   E.   Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the industrial
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1413 § 7.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.116   Search warrants.
   If the Public Works Director or authorized representative has been refused
access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and has
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation to this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the
city designed to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, the Public Works Director shall contact the City Attorney who may
then apply for an administrative search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1413 § 7.2, passed 4-1-2015)
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
§ 13.16.130   Confidential information.
   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs, and from
city inspections and sampling activities shall be available to the public
without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state laws.
   A.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data"
as defined by 40 C.F.R. 2.302 shall not be recognized as confidential
information and shall be available to the public without restriction.
   B.   When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a
report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the pubic but shall be made available immediately
upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
(Ord. 1413 § 8, passed 4-1-2015)
PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
§ 13.16.140   Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
   The city shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW,
a list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
divisions C., D. or H. of this section) and shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter taken during a 6 month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined
in §§
13.16.015et seq.;
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a 6 month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
by §§
13.16.015et seq. multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   C.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by §§
13.16.015  et seq. (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the city determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   D.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   E.   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic seif-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the city determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 1413 § 9, passed 4-1-2015)
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 13.16.150   General.
   A.   This section authorizes the development and implementation of an
Enforcement Response Plan, Industrial Sampling/Inspection Procedures Manual,
and any modifications or revisions thereof. Administration of fines for
noncompliance shall be contained in the city's Enforcement Response Procedure.
These procedures shall also establish a general guideline for establishment of
a fine schedule. The city is hereby authorized to adopt rules, procedures and
forms to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Any discharger that fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter and any rules adopted hereunder or provisions of its industrial waste
discharge permit may be subject to enforcement actions as prescribed below in
addition to those developed by the city.
(Ord. 1413 § 10, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.151   Industrial user violation process.
   Whenever the city determines that a violation of this chapter, any permit
issued hereunder, or any order issued by the city pursuant to this chapter, has
occurred or is taking place, it may initiate enforcement action as provided in
this section. In addition, any enforcement action or remedy provided in state
or federal law may be employed. If the city believes a violation has occurred
or is occurring, a representative of the city shall make a reasonable effort to
notify the user of the violation. All violations including the first violation
shall receive a written notice of violation, and may also incur a monetary
penalty.
   A.   All written notices of violations shall describe the violation and any
potential penalty (monetary or additional pretreatment). The written notice may
further require that a response to the violation be submitted to the city
within a 10 day time period.
   B.   If a written notice of violation requires submittal of a response, the
response shall include an explanation of the cause of the violation, a plan for
its satisfactory correction and prevention of future such violations, and
specific corrective or preventive actions. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the Public Works Director or other designee to initiate emergency
action or other enforcement action without first issuing a notice of violation.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.152   Violation.
   A.   A violation of limitations established under this chapter, any
applicable federal, state or pretreatment standards, or specific requirements
of a discharge permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be
cause for enforcement action by the city, including but not limited to levying
of administrative penalties as described in §§
13.16.150et seq. regardless of the intent of the user. Each day of a continuing
violation shall constitute a separate offense for purposes of computing the
applicable penalty.
   B.   Whenever the city finds that any IU has violated or is violating this
chapter, a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the Public Works Director or other designee shall
cause to be served upon said IU a written notice of violation. The notice of
violation shall be delivered to the user's premises or be sent by certified
mail to the address of the permit holder on record with the city.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.153   Violation of permit parameters.
   A.   For the maximum daily allowable concentration, if the concentration of
any single sample (whether grab or a sample within a series) exceed the
limitations, a violation will have occurred.
   B.   For the monthly average allowable concentration, if the average of all
sample(s) (grab or composite) taken exceeds the limitation, a violation will
have occurred. One sample collected may constitute a monthly average violation.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.154   Additional violation parameters.
   A violation of this chapter shall also be deemed to occur:
   A.   For noncompliance with any special reporting requirements established
by permit, written request of the city, or as specified by federal pretreatment
standards (40 C.F.R. 403.12).
   B.   Pollutants prohibited by this chapter are discharged into the system.
   C.   Failure to apply for and obtain a permit prior to discharge of
industrial wastewater into the system.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.4, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.155   IU notice to city of violation.
   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
industrial user shall notify the Public Works Director or designate within 24
hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also resample and
report the results within 30 days of becoming aware of violation pursuant to 40
C.F.R. 403.12(g)(2). Resampling must continue until it is evident that the
discharge is within compliance.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.5, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.156   Consent orders.
   The city may enter into consent orders, assurance of voluntary compliance,
or other similar documents establishing an agreement with an IU not in
compliance with any permit parameter or provision of this chapter. Such orders
will include specific action to be taken by the IU to correct the noncompliance
within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the
same force and effect as administrative orders and upon issuance, such orders
shall be judicially enforceable. Use of a consent order shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.6, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.157   Show cause hearing.
   A.   The city may order any user, which causes or contributes to violation
(s) of this chapter, wastewater permits, order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, to appear before the city and show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
IU specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and an order that the IU show cause why
this proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
   B.   The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered
mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any authorized representative of the IU. Whether or not
the IU appears at the hearing, the city may pursue enforcement action following
the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.7, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.158    Compliance orders.
   A.   When the city finds that an IU has violated or continues to violate the
chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
requirement, an order may be issued to the IU directing that, following a
specific time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain such other requirements
as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer.
   B.   In addition to such Compliance Orders, the city may require additional
self-monitoring for at least 90 days after consistent compliance has been
achieved, after which time the self-monitoring conditions in the discharge
permit shall control. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.8, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.159   Cease and desist orders.
   When the city finds that an industrial user has violated or continued to
violate this chapter, any permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the city may issue an order to the industrial user
directing them to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user
to:
   A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.9, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.160   Administrative fines.
   A.   When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine
such user in an amount not to exceed $2,500. Such fines shall be assessed on a
per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or long-term average
discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of
violation.
   B.   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty of 20% of the unpaid balance, and interest shall
accrue thereafter at a rate of 7% per month. A lien against the user's property
will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
   C.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount
within 15 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the
city may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the users appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be
returned to the user. The city may add the cost of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.10, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.161   Emergency suspensions.
   The city may immediately suspend an industrial user's discharge and the
industrial user's wastewater discharge permit, after informal notice to the
industrial user, whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
city may also immediately suspend an industrial user's discharge and the
industrial user's wastewater discharge permit, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the municipal waste
water system, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment.
   A.   Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater permit
shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of an
industrial user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall allow
the industrial user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings set forth in §
13.16.162 are initiated against the user.
   B.   An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence prior to the date of any show cause or
termination hearing under §§
13.16.157 and
13.16.162.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.11, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.162   Termination of permit.
   A.   In addition to those provisions in §
13.16.080 of this chapter, any industrial user which violates the following
conditions of this chapter, wastewater permits, or orders issued hereunder is
subject to permit termination:
      1.   Violation of permit conditions.
      2.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
      3.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge.
      4.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling.
      5.   Slug loads causing interference, pass through, or damage to human
health, the environment, or the treatment plant.
      6.   When the facility serviced by the sanitary sewer service is occupied
prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued.
      7.   When the facility served by the sanitary sewer service does not
comply with the provisions of the city's "Construction Standards for Public
Works Facilities".
      8.   When the facility served by the sanitary sewer service does not
comply with a condition of approval issued by the City Council, Planning
Commission, or Site and Design Review Committee.
      9.   When the facility served by the sanitary sewer service is improperly
connected to a city utility system or is connected without obtaining the
required approvals or without paying the required fees and charges.
      10.   When a user fails to immediately comply with an Administrative
Order requiring the immediate halting or elimination of discharge.
   B.   Non-complying industrial users shall be notified of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit and be offered an opportunity to show
cause under §
13.16.157, why the proposed action should not be taken.
(Ord. 1413 § 10.12, passed 4-1-2015)
JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 13.16.175   Injunctive relief.
   Whenever an industrial user has violated, threatens to violate, or continues
to violate the provisions of this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment requirements, the city may petition the courts for
the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as may be appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater permit,
order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the
industrial user. Such other action as may be appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief may also be sought by the city. A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other
action against the user.
(Ord. 1413 § 11.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.176   Civil penalties.
   Any industrial user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter,
any order or permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall be
liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $2,500 per violation per day.
In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each calendar day during the period of this violation.
   A.   The court may award reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
   B.   In determining the amount of civil penalty, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, corrective actions by the industrial user,
economic benefit to the user of noncompliance, the compliance history of the
user, and any other factors as justice requires.
   C.   Where appropriate, the city may accept mitigation projects in lieu of
the payment of civil penalties where the project provides a valuable service to
the city and the industrial user's expense in undertaking the project is at
least 150% of the civil penalty.
(Ord. 1413 § 11.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.177   Criminal prosecution.
   Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provisions of
the chapter, any orders or permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of not more than $2,500 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more
than 1 year, or both.
   A.   Any industrial user who knowingly makes any false statement,
representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to the chapter
or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500 per violation
per day or imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both.
   B.   In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $5,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more
than 3 years, or both.
(Ord. 1413 § 11.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.178   Remedies nonexclusive.
   A.   A City Enforcement Response Plan will be developed by the city in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. Section 403.8 and submitted to the City Attorney for
approval and certification. The city will implement the plan after receiving
approval from the City Attorney.
   B.   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The city
may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will be in accordance with the
City of Canby's Enforcement Response Plan. However the city may take other
action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is
empowered to take more than 1 enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
(Ord. 1413 § 11.4, passed 4-1-2015)
SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS
§ 13.16.190   Performance bonds.
   The city may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has
failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any orders, or a previous
permit issued hereunder unless such user first files a satisfactory bond,
payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city to
be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(Ord. 1413 § 12.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.191   Liability insurance.
   The city may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has
failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any orders, or a previous
permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it
has obtained financial assurance sufficient to restore or repair damage to the
municipal wastewater system caused by its discharge.
(Ord. 1413 § 12.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.192   Water supply severance.
   When an industrial user has violated the provisions of this chapter, orders,
or permits issued hereunder, the city may sever water service to the industrial
user and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(Ord. 1413 § 12.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.193   Public nuisance.
   Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this chapter,
permits, or orders issued hereunder is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city. Any person(s) creating a
public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city ordinance
governing such nuisance, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred
in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
(Ord. 1413 § 12.4, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.194   Contractor listing.
   Subject to other applicable law, industrial users which have not achieved
consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements
are not eligible to receive contract awards for the sale of goods or services
to the city.
(Ord. 1413 § 12.5, passed 4-1-2015)
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
§ 13.16.210   Affirmative defenses.
   A user shall have an affirmative defenses in any action brought against it
alleging a violation of the general prohibitions, specific prohibitions and
this chapter, where the user can demonstrate the requirements established in 40
C.F.R. 403.5(a)(2).
(Ord. 1413 § 13.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.211   Upset.
   A.   For the purpose of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   B.   An upset shall be an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards and
requirement if the following conditions are met:
   C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   The user can identify the cause of the upset;
      2.   The facility was operating in a prudent and workman-like manner at
the time of the upset and was in compliance with applicable O&M procedures; and
      3.   The user submits the following information to the city within 24
hours of becoming aware of the upset, If this report is given orally, the user
must also submit a written report containing such information within 5 days:
         a.   A description of the discharge and its causes of noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance including exact dates and time or, if
not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
      4.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have burden of proof.
      5.   Users will have the opportunity for judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action for noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards.
      6.   User shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. 1413 § 13.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.212   Prohibited discharge standards.
   An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement
action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific
prohibitions in §
13.16.015, first paragraph of §
13.16.001 or the specific prohibitions in §
13.16.015B.2. through 3., B.5. through 11., and B.13. through 20., if it can
prove that it did not know or have reasons to know that its discharge, alone or
in conjunction with discharges from other sources would cause pass through or
interference and that either:
   A.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or
interference; or
   B.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 1413 § 13.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.213   Bypass.
   A.   For the purposes of this section,
      "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion
of a user's treatment facility.
      "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   B.   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of divisions A., B. and C. of this section.
      1.   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Public Works Director or other designee, at least 10 days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.
      2.   A user shall submit oral notice to the Public Works Director or
other designee of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within 5 days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description
of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates
and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Public Works Director or other designee
may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has
been received within 24 hours.
      3.   Bypass is prohibited, and the Public Works Director or other
designee may take an enforcement action against a user for bypass, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The user submitted notices required under division 3. of this
section.
   C.   The Public Works Director or other designee may approve an anticipated
bypass, after considering its adverse effects; if the Public Works Director or
other designee determines that it will meet the 3 conditions listed in division
B. of this section.
(Ord. 1413 § 13.4, passed 4-1-2015)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 13.16.230   Pretreatment charges and fees.
   The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include:
   A.   Fees for permit applications including the cost of processing such
applications;
   B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including
the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users;
   C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   D.   Fees for filing appeals;
   E.   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by
the city.
(Ord. 1413 § 14.1, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.231   Sewer connection charges levied and imposed.
   A.   What is a connection charge? All sewer connection charges and any other
development-related charges shall be imposed in accordance with the city's most
current systems development ordinance and implementing resolutions.
   B.   What the connection charge is based on. The service connection charge
is levied upon a property based upon the existing or intended use of the
property at the time of application for connection. If the property is
improved, expanded, subdivided or otherwise modified so as to increase the
connection charge due from that property, a service connection charge shall be
levied for the modified portion of the property based upon connection charges
in effect at the time of modification.
   C.   Abutting a Right-of-Way with Sanitary Service. Any dwelling that is on
property abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a
sanitary sewer of the city and, that by reason of ordinance, resolution or
motion duly adopted by the City Council, is not required to connect to the
sewage system, shall not be subject to the sewer connection charges provided by
this chapter.
(Ord. 1413 § 14.2, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.232   Rates for connection charges.
   The City Council shall by resolution, establish appropriate rates and
methodologies to be charged for connecting to the city sewer system. Such rates
shall differentiate between various types of users or activities with discharge
into the sewage system.
(Ord. 1413 § 14.3, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.233   Fees for sewer service levied and imposed.
   A.   Rates. All users of the city's sewage system shall pay to the city the
rates for sewer service as provided by this chapter.
   B.   Abutting a row with service. Any dwelling that is on property abutting
any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a sanitary sewer of
the city and that, by reason of ordinance, resolution or motion duly adopted by
the City Council, is not required to connect to the sewage system, shall not be
subject to the sewer service charges provided by this chapter.
   C.   When levied (existing). When sewer service is initially provided to
existing dwellings, said sewer service charge shall first be levied for the
month following the first month in which dwellings are permitted to be
connected to the sewer.
   D.   When levied (new). When new dwellings are served by the sewage system,
said sewer service charge shall first be levied for the month following the
first month in which the dwelling is occupied or utilized by personnel not
associated with the construction of the dwelling.
   E.   Based on availability. Sewer service charges are to be levied and
imposed based upon the availability of sewer service, and are not dependent
upon the owner's schedule for connecting to the sewer system after said system
is available.
   F.   Minimum service. The minimum service for an individually billed service
shall be equal to the charge for a residential service.
   G.   Who is billed. Sewer service charges shall be billed to any dwelling
showing connection to the city sewer and either water use or electric power
use.
   H.   Property owner responsibility. Sewer service charges may be billed to
an occupant; however, the property owner shall be ultimately responsible for
all sewer service charges to his or her property.
(Ord. 1413 § 14.4, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.234   Severability and conflicts with other ordinances.
   A.   If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and
shall continue in full force and effect.
   B.   To the extent that an inconsistency exists between the terms of this
chapter and another existing ordinance, this chapter shall be deemed to preempt
the other ordinance and the terms of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 1413 § 14.5, passed 4-1-2015)
§ 13.16.235   Emergency clause.
   This chapter being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist and this chapter
shall take effect immediately after final reading and enactment by the Canby
City Council.
(Ord. 1413 § 14.6, passed 4-1-2015)
CHAPTER 13.20:  IMPLEMENTATION
Section
   
13.20.010   Denial of connection.
   
13.20.020   Issuance of stop work order.
   
13.20.030   Delinquency.
   
13.20.040   Discontinuance of service.
   
13.20.050   Restoration of service.
   
13.20.060   Ownership and occupancy.
   
13.20.070   Lien.
   
13.20.080   Special agreements.
   
13.20.090   Disbursement.
   
13.20.100   Right of revision.
§ 13.20.010   Denial of connection.
   No local government agency or person shall connect a sewer to the city
sewerage system unless the agency or person shall then be in compliance with
all of these rules and regulations.
§ 13.20.020   Issuance of stop work order.
   If any local government agency or person shall construct a public sewer,
private sewer or building sewer in violation of these rules and regulations,
the city may issue an order to the agency or person to stop work in progress
which is not in compliance with these rules and regulations, or the city may
issue an order to correct work which has been performed.  The agency or person
shall forthwith take action as may be necessary to comply with the order and
with these rules and regulations, all at the expense of the agency or person.
§ 13.20.030   Delinquency.
   Sewer service charges or connection charges levied in accordance with the
rules and regulations shall be a debt due to the city and shall be a lien upon
property.  If this debt is not paid within 30 days after it shall be due and
payable, it shall be deemed delinquent and may be recovered by civil action in
the name of the city against the property owner, the person or both.
§ 13.20.040   Discontinuance of service.
   A.   In the event of failure to pay sewer service charges, connection fees,
industrial pretreatment compliance monitoring analysis, any administrative or
civil fines assessed by the city or court after they become delinquent, failure
to cease discharging to the sewer substances prohibited by any rules and
regulations of the city, or failure to have flow monitoring or sampling devices
in proper operating condition for more than 7 days, the city shall have the
right to remove or close sewer connections and enter the property for
accomplishing that purpose.
   B.   The expense of the removal or closing, as well as the expense of
restoring service, shall likewise be a debt due to the city and a lien upon the
property, and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against
the property owner, the person or both.
   C.   If past due sewer service charges or connection fees are placed in the
hands of the City Attorney for collection, the property owner, the person or
both shall be liable for the city’s reasonable attorneys’ fees and collection
costs in the recovery of the sewer charges, both at trial and appeal.
§ 13.20.050   Restoration of service.
   Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including the expense
of removal, closing and restoration shall have been paid and the cause for
discontinuance of service corrected.
§ 13.20.060   Ownership and occupancy.
   Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be
cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
§ 13.20.070   Lien.
   A.   All sewage service rental charges shall be a lien against the property
served from and after the date of billing and entry on the ledger record of the
Sewer Department, and the ledger record shall be made accessible for inspection
by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of the charges against the 
property.
   B.   The City Council may use additional means of collection as may be
provided by the laws of the state or permitted by the Charter and ordinances of
the city.
§ 13.20.080   Special agreements.
   A.   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
person, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
admitted to the sewage disposal works, either before or after pretreatment;
provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater
treatment system by reason of the admission of the wastes, and no extra costs
are incurred by the city without recompense by the person.
   B.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the city sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in this title and which, in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Public Works, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewer, including a minimum of 2 hours of settling for wastes containing
soil, dirt and/or sand;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge by
constructing equalization basins or by other appropriate methods; or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by the existing sewer charges. 
   C.   If the Superintendent of Public Works permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject
to the requirements of all applicable costs, ordinances and laws.
§ 13.20.090   Disbursement.
   The City Council, by resolution or motion duly adopted, may from time to
time direct the transfer of funds from the Sewer Fund to all or any of the
following:
   A.   Construction.  The account or accounts for the construction, operation
or maintenance of the sewage system.
   B.   Principal and Interest.  The account or accounts for the payment of
principal and interest on maturing bonds.
   C.   Reserve Fund.  The account or accounts established for the Sewer
Reserve Fund.
§ 13.20.100   Right of revision.
   The city reserves the right to amend this title to provide for more
stringent limitations or requirements on dischargers to the POTW where deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in this title.
TITLE 14
(RESERVED)
 
TITLE 15:  BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
   Chapter
      
15.04   BUILDING CODE
      
15.08   NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
      
15.12   FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION
      
15.16   ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
      
15.20   EROSION CONTROL
CHAPTER 15.04:  BUILDING CODE
Section
   
15.04.010   Adoption of codes.
   
15.04.020   Fees.
   
15.04.030   Appeal procedure.
   
15.04.040   Penalties.
   
15.04.050   Remedies for city.
§ 15.04.010   Adoption of codes.
   The following specialty codes, rules and standards are adopted and
incorporated herein by this reference as if included in this chapter in full.
   A.   Structural Code. The Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as adopted by
OAR 918-460-0000 through 918-460-0015, except as modified in this chapter, is
adopted as part of this chapter.
   B.   Mechanical Code.  The Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, as adopted by
OAR 918-440-0010 through 918-440-0040, except as modified in this chapter, is
adopted as part of this chapter.
   C.   One and Two Family Dwelling Code.  The Oregon One and Two Family
Dwelling Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-480-0005 through 918-480-0010,
except as modified in this chapter, is adopted as part of this chapter.
   D.   Plumbing Code.  The Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR
918-750-0100 through 918-750-0190, except as modified in this chapter, is
adopted as part of this chapter.
   E.   Electrical Code. The Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, as adopted by
OAR 918-305-0000 through 918-305-0260, except as modified in this chapter, is
adopted as part of this chapter.
   F.   Manufactured Dwelling Parks Rules.  The Manufactured Dwelling Park and
Mobile Home Park Rules adopted by OAR 918-600-0000 through 918-600-0095, except
as modified in this chapter, is adopted as part of this chapter.
   G.   Manufactured Home Installation Rules.  The Manufactured Dwelling Rules
adopted by OAR 918-500-0005 through 918-500-0035, except as modified in this
chapter, is adopted as part of this chapter.
   H.   Recreational Park and Organizational Camp Rules.  The Recreational Park
and Organizational Camp Rules adopted by OAR 918-650-0005 through 918-650-0085,
except as modified in this chapter, is adopted as part of this chapter.
   I.   Fire Sprinkler Requirements.  Section AN 109.4.2 of the 2005 Oregon
Residential Specialty Code is adopted and incorporated herein as part of this
chapter.
   J.   Excavation and Grading.  Appendix Chapter J of the Oregon Structural
Specialty Code is adopted and incorporated herein as part of this chapter.
   H.   Sign Code.  Appendix Chapter H of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code
with the following amendments is adopted and incorporated herein as part of
this chapter:
      1.   Subsection H102.2(1) and (4) are deleted.
§ 15.04.020   Fees.
   A.   Fees charged under this chapter shall be established by resolution of
the City Council.
   B.   The Building Official may authorize the refunding of fees paid.
   C.   The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this
chapter shall be made by the Building Official in accordance with rules adopted
by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division.
(Ord. 1085, passed 1-2-2002)
§ 15.04.030    Appeal procedure.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Official made pursuant to
the specialty codes adopted by the state may appeal that decision to the
Building Codes Division of the State of Oregon.
(Ord. 1085, passed 1-2-2002)
§ 15.04.040   Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish,
equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any
violation, the person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation.  Each day that a violation exists is a separate offense.
(Ord. 1085, passed 1-2-2002)
§ 15.04.050   Remedies for city.
   In case of violations of any code adopted by this chapter, the city may
institute an appropriate court suit or action to enjoin the use and/or
occupancy or threatened use and/or occupancy of a building or structure until a
certificate of occupancy is issued and approved by the City Building Official. 
In this case, the city shall be entitled to recover from the defendant(s) in a
suit or action and, in addition to statutory costs, its reasonable attorneys’
fees to be fixed by the trial court and any further sum as may be fixed by the
appellate court in case of appeal.  The city may also use the State of Oregon
Department of Consumer and Business Services Building Codes Division compliance
section for administrative rule and statute enforcement.
(Ord. 1085, passed 1-2-2002)
CHAPTER 15.08:  NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
Section
   
15.08.010   Division of city into areas.
   
15.08.020   Assigning of building numbers.
   
15.08.030   Recordkeeping.
   
15.08.040   Installation of building numbers.
   
15.08.050   Notice of correction.
   
15.08.060   Installation by city.
§ 15.08.010   Division of city into areas.
   For the purpose of this chapter and the building numbering system adopted by
this chapter, the city shall be divided into the following 4 areas:
   A.   Northeast: North of Southern Pacific Company right-of-way and east of
Ivy Street.
   B.   Northwest: North of Southern Pacific Company right-of-way and west of
Ivy Street.
   C.   Southeast: South of Southern Pacific Company right-of-way and east of
Ivy Street.
   D.   Southwest: South of Southern Pacific Company right-of-way and west of
Ivy Street.
§ 15.08.020   Assigning of building numbers.
   The City Superintendent shall assign numbers to all dwelling houses and
business establishments in the city now existing or hereafter constructed. The
numbering of buildings on streets running north and south shall commence at the
Southern Pacific Company right-of-way; and the numbering of buildings on
avenues running east and west shall commence at Ivy Street.  Assigned building
numbers shall have at least 3 digits, and the same number shall not be assigned
to more than 1 building on each street or avenue in each of the 4 areas of the
city.  Buildings on the north and east side of their streets or avenues shall
be assigned even numbers, and buildings on the south and west side of their
streets and avenues shall be assigned odd numbers.
§ 15.08.030   Recordkeeping.
   The City Superintendent shall make a record of all building numbers assigned
and shall keep the record current at all times.
§ 15.08.040   Installation of building numbers.
   Numbers assigned to buildings shall be installed at the property owner’s
expense within 30 days after completion of construction.  Building numbers
shall be installed on or in close proximity to the buildings for which the
number is assigned, and the numbers shall be kept at all times clearly visible
from the street or sidewalk.  Building numbers shall be at least 3 inches in
height and installed not more than 6 feet nor less than 4 feet above the ground
or porch level.
§ 15.08.050   Notice of correction.
   If any assigned building number is not properly installed within the time
required by this chapter and thereafter kept properly installed, the City
Superintendent shall post a notice in a conspicuous place on the building
setting forth the assigned number, the reasons why the installation of the
number does not conform to this chapter, and that proper corrections are to be
made within 30 days from the date of the notice.
§ 15.08.060   Installation by city.
   If a property owner fails or neglects to properly install an assigned
building number within the time required by this chapter, or to correct an
improperly installed number, then after notice thereof is given, as provided in
§
15.08.050, the City Superintendent shall cause the number to be installed by
city work force; and a fee for the costs of the installation shall be added to
the property owner’s next ensuing utility bill, and shall be collected as a
part of the bill. This fee shall be set forth by resolution.
(Am. Ord. 1327, passed 5-19-2010)
CHAPTER 15.12:  FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION
Section
   
15.12.010   Purpose.
   
15.12.020   Findings and objectives.
   
15.12.030   Definitions.
   
15.12.040   Applicability.
   
15.12.050   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
   
15.12.060   Penalties for noncompliance.
   
15.12.070   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   
15.12.080   Interpretation.
   
15.12.090   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   
15.12.100   Designation of the local administrator.
   
15.12.110   Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
   
15.12.120   Development permit required.
   
15.12.130   Variance and appeal procedure.
   
15.12.140   Provisions for flood hazard protection, generally.
   
15.12.150   Specific standards.
   
15.12.160   Before regulatory floodway.
   
15.12.170   Floodways.
   
15.12.180   Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO Zones).
   
15.12.190   Critical facility.
§ 15.12.010   Purpose.
   The state has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry.  It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health; and
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;
and
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; and
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard; and
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   H.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.020   Findings and objectives.
   A.   Flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which results in
loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities,
and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas.  Uses that are
inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss.
   C.   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
      1.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
      2.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
      4.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage;
      5.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other
areas;
      6.   Coordinating and supplementing the provisions of the state building
code with local provisions.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.030   Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   Appeal means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision
of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, or AH Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).  The base flood depths range from 1 to 3 feet; a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.  AO is characterized as
sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
   Area of special flood hazard means the land in the flood plain within a
community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.  Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
   Base flood means the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.  Also referred to as the "100-year flood".  Designation on
maps always includes the letters A or V.
   Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   Below-grade crawl space means an enclosed area below the base flood
elevation in which the interior grade is not more than 2 feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the
crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed 4 feet at
any point.
   Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
   Coastal high hazard area means an area of special flood hazard extending
from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast
and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources.  The area is designated on the FIRM as Zone V1-V30, VE or V.
   Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great.  Critical facilities include, but are not limited
to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
   Elevated building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building
which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.
   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the adopted floodplain management regulations.
   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-
Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot.
   Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.  The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   New construction means structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after June 17, 2008.
   New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of adopted floodplain management regulations.
   Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
      1.   Built on a single chassis;
      2.   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date.  The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   State building code means the combined specialty codes.
   Structure means a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:
      1.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.  For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either:
         a.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         b.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   Water dependent means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot
exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the
intrinsic nature of its operations.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.040   Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.050   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study for Clackamas County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas," dated
June 17, 2008, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps, are hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.  The Flood Insurance
Study is on file at the city.  The best available information for flood hazard
area identification as outlined in §
15.12.110.B shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which
incorporates the data utilized under §
15.12.110.B.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.060   Penalties for noncompliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.  Violations of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.070   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this chapter and
another chapter the code, state building code, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.080   Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit or repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes and rules, including the state building code.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.090   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.100   Designation of the local administrator.
   The city Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.110   Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
   Duties of the Building Official shall include, but not be limited to:
   A.   Permit review.
      1.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements and conditions of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
      3.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway.  If located in the floodway, assure
that the encroachment provisions of §
15.12.170.A are met.
   B.   Use of other base flood data (in A and V zones).  When base flood
elevation data has not been provided (A and V zones) in accordance with §
15.12.050, the Building Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or
other source, in order to administer §§
15.12.150 and
15.12.170.
   C.   Information to be obtained and maintained.
      1.   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood
Insurance Study, FIRM, or required as in §
15.12.110.B above, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements and below-grade
crawlspaces) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or
not the structure contains a basement.
      2.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where
base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM,
or as required in §
15.12.110.B:
         a.   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level), and
         b.   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §
15.12.120.B.3.
      3.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Alteration of watercourses.
      1.   Notify adjacent communities, the Department of Land Conservation and
Development, and other appropriate state and federal agencies, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
      2.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
   E.   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed,
as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions).  The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in §
15.12.130.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.120   Development permit required.
   A.   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §
15.12.050.  The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured
homes, and for all development including fill and other activities.
   B.   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the city Building Official, and may include but not be limited to plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. 
Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of floodproofing in any
structure;
      3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in §
15.12.150.B; and
      4.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.130   Variance and appeal procedure.
   A.   Appeal board.  The Planning Commission is established as an appeal
board and shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.  In review of such applications, the Planning
Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
      1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for that area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   B.   Appeal.  Those aggrieved by a decision of the Building Official may
appeal such decision to the Planning Commission as provided herein.  The
Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
   C.   Variance.  The Planning Commission shall hear and decide variances. 
Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on
the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of
property, they are not personal in nature, and do not pertain to the structure,
its inhabitants, economic, or financial circumstances.  They primarily address
small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods.  As such, variances
from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
      1.   Approval criteria.  Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
as identified in §
15.12.130.A, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      2.   Conditions for variances.
         a.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing items in §
15.12.130.A have been fully considered.  As the lot size increases, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.  Variances
may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to
allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry-floodproofing,
where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential and
otherwise complies with §§
15.12.140.A and
15.12.140.B.
         b.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation,
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the Statewide Inventory of Historic Properties without regard to the
procedures set forth in this section.
         c.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         d.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      3.   Upon consideration of the factors in §
15.12.130.A, and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Commission may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
      4.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   D.   The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.140   Provisions for flood hazard protection, generally.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required
to be met:
   A.   Anchoring.
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
      2.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage.  Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors
(reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas"
guidebook for additional techniques).
   B.   AH Zone drainage. Adequate drainage paths are required around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   C.   Construction materials and methods.
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      3.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
   D.   Utilities.
      1.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
      2.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
      3.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with the Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality.
   E.   Subdivision.
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      2.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
      4.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50
lots or 5 acres (whichever is less).
   F.   Review of building permits. Where elevation data is not available
either through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or from another authoritative
source as detailed in §
15.12.110.B, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that
proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding.  The test of
reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high
water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available.  Failure to
elevate the lowest floor at least two feet above grade in these zones may
result in higher insurance rates.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.150   Specific standards.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided (Zones A1-30, AH, and AE) as set forth in §§
15.12.050 or
15.12.110.B, the following standards are required to be met:
   A.   Residential construction.
      1.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a
minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
      2.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement must be either certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of 2 openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above
grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   B.   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above
the base flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
      1.   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
      2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
      3.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications, and plans. 
Such certifications shall be provided to the official.
      4.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must
meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in §
15.12.150.A.2.
      5.   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified
that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are 1 foot below the
floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will
be rated as 1 foot below).
   C.   Manufactured homes.
      1.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites that are:
         a.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, or
         b.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision, or
         c.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or
         d.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood;
         e.   Shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to a minimum of 1 foot above the
base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately designed
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      2.   Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the above manufactured
home provisions be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to a
minimum of 1 foot above the base flood elevation; or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
   D.   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are
required to either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days.
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
      3.   Meet the requirements of §
15.12.150.C and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured
homes.
   E.   Below-grade crawl spaces.  Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject
to the following standards as found in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01,
Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.
      1.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through
the required openings stated in §
15.12.150.E.2 below.  Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is
not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than 5 feet per second
unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a
registered architect or professional engineer.
      2.   The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation
and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by
allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.  The bottom of each flood
vent opening can be no more than 1 foot above the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
      3.   Portions of the building below the base flood elevation must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.  This includes not only
the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also
any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the base flood
elevation.  The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of
joists and all insulation above the base flood elevation.
      4.   Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated
above base flood elevation or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or
accumulate within the system components during flood conditions.  Ductwork in
particular must either be placed above the base flood elevation or sealed from
floodwaters.
      5.   The interior grade of a crawlspace below the base flood elevation
must not be more than 2 feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
      6.   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall must not
exceed 4 feet at any point.  The height limitation is the maximum allowable
unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code
requirements for flood hazard areas.
      7.   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace.  The enclosed area should be drained
within a reasonable time after a flood event.  The type of drainage system will
vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as
soil types.  Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-
drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles or
gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.
      8.   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed 5 feet per
second for any crawlspace.  For velocities in excess of 5 feet per second,
other foundation types should be used.
      9.   For more detailed information refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-
01.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.160   Before regulatory floodway.
   In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it
is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 1 foot at any point
within the community.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.170   Floodways.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
15.12.050 are areas designated as floodways.  Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
   A.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered
professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If §
15.12.170.A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
15.12.140 through
15.12.190.
   C.   New installation of manufactured dwellings are prohibited (2002 Oregon
Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code).  Manufactured dwellings may
only be located in floodways according to 1 of the following conditions:
      1.   If the manufactured dwelling already exists in the floodway, the
placement was permitted at the time of the original installation, and the
continued use is not a threat to life, health, property, or the general welfare
of the public; or
      2.   A new manufactured dwelling is replacing an existing manufactured
dwelling whose original placement was permitted at the time of installation and
the replacement home will not be a threat to life, health, property, or the
general welfare of the public and it meets the following criteria:
         a.   As required by 44 CFR Chapter 1, Subpart 60.3(d)(3), it must be
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practices that the manufactured dwelling and any
accessory buildings, accessory structures, or any property improvements
(encroachments) will not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge;
         b.   The replacement manufactured dwelling and any accessory buildings
or accessory structures (encroachments) shall have the finished flood elevated
a minimum of 18 inches (46 cm) above the base flood elevation as identified on
the FIRM;
         c.   The replacement manufactured dwelling is placed and secured to a
foundation support system designed by an Oregon professional engineer or
architect and approved by the authority having jurisdiction;
         d.   The replacement manufactured dwelling, its foundation supports,
and any accessory buildings, accessory structures, or property improvements
(encroachments) do not displace water to the degree that it causes a rise in
the water level or diverts water in a manner that causes erosion or damage to
other properties; and
         e.   The location of a replacement manufactured dwelling is allowed by
the local planning department's ordinances.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.180   Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO Zones).
   Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. 
The base flood depths in these zones range from 1 to 3 feet above ground where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.  Such flooding is usually
characterized as sheet flow.  In these areas, the following provisions apply:
   A.   New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures
and manufactured homes within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, a minimum
of 1 foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
   B.   New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures within AO zones shall either:
      1.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade of the building site, 1 foot or more above the depth
number specified on the FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified);
or
      2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely flood proofed to or above that level so that any space below that
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and the structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.  If this method is
used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as in §
15.12.150.B.3.
   C.   Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   D.   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO zones on the
community's FIRM must either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
      3.   Meet the requirements of §
15.12.180 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 15.12.190   Critical facility.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) (100-year
floodplain).  Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible
within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available.  Critical
facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest flood elevated 3
feet or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher.  Access to
and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized
above.  Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.  Access
routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be
provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 1279, passed 6-18-2008)
CHAPTER 15.16:  ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section
   
15.16.010   Definitions.
   
15.16.020   Nuisance declared.
   
15.16.030   Initial action.
   
15.16.040   Mailed notice.
   
15.16.050   Published and posted notices.
   
15.16.060   Hearing.
   
15.16.070   Council orders; notice.
   
15.16.080   Abatement by the city.
   
15.16.090   Assessment.
   
15.16.100   Summary abatement.
   
15.16.110   Errors in procedure.
   
15.16.120   Penalty.
§ 15.16.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, any building or structure which has any or
all of the conditions or defects described in this section shall be deemed to
be a dangerous building, provided that the conditions or defects exist to the
extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants
are endangered:
   Dangerous Buildings.  An instance of a dangerous building is:
      1.   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not arranged as to provide safe
and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
      2.   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
      3.   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than 1.5 times the working stress or stress
allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location;
      4.   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to the extent that the structure’s strength
or stability thereof is materially less than it was before the catastrophe and
is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of
similar structure, purpose or location;
      5.   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property;
      6.   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of 1/2 of that specified in the building
code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location, without
exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for those
buildings;
      7.   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled
to the extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction;
      8.   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof is likely
to partially or completely collapse because of:
         a.   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
         b.   Faulty construction;
         c.   The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting the building;
         d.   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
         e.   Any other cause.
      9.   Whenever, for any reason, the building,  structure or any portion
thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
      10.   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to the extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity does not fall inside the middle 1/3 of the base;
      11.   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members,
or 50% damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or
outside walls or coverings;
      12.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become an attractive nuisance to children; such that it constitutes a dangerous
condition to children who, because of their inability to appreciate the danger
associated with the condition, may reasonably be expected to be attracted to
the dangerous condition;
      13.   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or
is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition
applicable to the building or structure provided by the building regulations of
the city, or of any law or ordinance of the city relating to the condition,
location or structure of buildings;
      14.   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting part, member or
portion less than 66% of the following characteristics required by law in the
case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the
same location:
         a.   Strength;
         b.   Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or
         c.   Weather-resisting qualities.
      15.   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Health Officer to be unsanitary,
unfit for human habitation or in a condition that is likely to cause sickness
or disease;
      16.   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal to be a
fire hazard; or
      17.   Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to
constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity
jurisprudence.
   Owner means the owner of the title to real property, or the contract
purchaser of real property, as shown on the last available complete assessment
roll in the office of the County Assessor.
   Person means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
§ 15.16.020   Nuisance declared.
   Every building found by the Council to be a dangerous building is declared
to be a public nuisance and may be abated according to the procedure specified
in this chapter or by a suit for abatement brought by the city.
§ 15.16.030   Initial action.
   When the City Building Official determines that a dangerous building exists
in the city, the Official shall report it to the Council.  The Council shall,
within a reasonable time, fix a time and place for a public hearing.
§ 15.16.040   Mailed notice.
   A.   The City Recorder shall notify the owner and any occupants of the
building by certified or registered mail.  The notice shall state:
      1.   That a hearing will be held concerning the nuisance character of the
property;
      2.   A description of the property and alleged nuisances; and
      3.   The time and place of the hearing.
   B.   A copy of this notice shall be posted on the building.
§ 15.16.050   Published and posted notices.
   At least 10 days prior to the hearing date, the city shall publish a notice
of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or post
notices in at least 3 public places in the city.
§ 15.16.060   Hearing.
   A.   At the hearing, the owner or other interested parties shall have the
right to be heard.
   B.   The Council may inspect the building and consider the facts observed in
determining whether the building is dangerous.
   C.   1.   If the Council determines that the building is dangerous, the
Council may by resolution:
         a.   Order the building to be demolished; or
         b.   Order the building to be made safer and prescribe what must be
done to make it safe.
      2.   In the resolution, the Council may set a time, not less than 10
days, within which the order must be obeyed.
§ 15.16.070   Council orders; notice.
   Notice of the Council’s determination and order by the Council shall be sent
by certified or registered mail to the owner of the building.  If the orders
are not obeyed, and the building is not made safe within the time specified by
the order, the Council may order the building demolished or made safe at the
expense of the owner of the property on which it is located.
§ 15.16.080   Abatement by the city.
   If the Council orders are not complied with, the Council may specify the
demolition or work to be done and direct that it be undertaken by city
personnel and equipment, or that bids be obtained according to applicable local
and state contracting laws and regulations.
§ 15.16.090   Assessment.
   A.   The city shall forward to the owner, by registered or certified mail, a
notice stating:
      1.   The total cost of abatement, including the administrative costs;
      2.   That the costs as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien
against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;
and
      3.   That if the owner objects to the costs of the abatement as
indicated, a written notice of objection may be filed with the City Recorder
not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.
   B.   No sooner than 30 days after the date of the notice of costs, the
Council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and make a decision on
the objections to the costs assessed.
   C.   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date
of the notice of costs or, if an objection was filed, within 10 days from the
Council determination, an assessment of the costs as stated or as decided by
the Council shall be made by resolution and shall be entered in the docket of
city liens.  When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the property
from which the nuisance was removed or abated.
   D.   The lien shall bear interest at the legal rate recognized by law at the
time of assessment.  The interest shall begin to run from the date of entry of
the lien in the lien docket.
   E.   Collection of the lien shall be in accordance with O.R.S. 223.510
through 223.595.
§ 15.16.100   Summary abatement.
   The procedures of this chapter need not be followed if the condition of a
building is unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers life or property. 
In this instance, the Chief of the Fire Department, the Fire Marshal, the Chief
of Police or any other city official authorized by the City Council may
summarily abate the nuisance.
§ 15.16.110   Errors in procedure.
   Failure to conform to the requirements of this chapter that does not
substantially and adversely affect the legal right of a person does not
invalidate a proceeding under this chapter.
§ 15.16.120   Penalty.
   A person who owns a dangerous building and who allows the building to remain
dangerous past the time established in the notice described in §
15.16.070 of this chapter may be fined not more than $500.  Each subsequent day
that the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
CHAPTER 15.20:  EROSION CONTROL
Section
   
15.20.010   Purpose.
   
15.20.020   Authority.
   
15.20.030   Compliance with other laws.
   
15.20.040   Definitions.
   
15.20.050   Referenced regulations.
   
15.20.060   General scope.
   
15.20.070   Minimum requirements.
   
15.20.080   Special site requirements.
   
15.20.090   Maintenance.
   
15.20.100   Plan required.
   
15.20.110   Permit and plan requirements.
   
15.20.120   Approval or denial of erosion, sediment and pollutant control plan.
   
15.20.130   Alternative methods review process.
   
15.20.140   Issuance of permit.
   
15.20.150   Cancellation or expiration of permit.
   
15.20.160   Inspection; general.
   
15.20.170   Inspection procedure.
   
15.20.180   Release of bond or other guarantee.
   
15.20.190   Revisions to erosion, sediment and pollutant control plan.
   
15.20.200   Violation of chapter.
   
15.20.210   Notice of violation.
   
15.20.220   Stop work orders.
   
15.20.230   Erosion, sediment and pollutant control plan for nonpermitted
activities.
   
15.20.240   Voluntary compliance agreement.
   
15.20.250   Civil penalties.
   
15.20.260   Appeal of notice of violations and penalties.
   
15.20.270   Summary abatement authorized.
   
15.20.280   Notification following summary abatement.
§ 15.20.010   Purpose.
   A.   This chapter provides requirements for development and construction
related activities in order to control the creation of sediment and to prevent
the occurrence of erosion at the source during construction and development.
   B.   The erosion and sediment control regulations seek to:
      1.   Reduce the sediment and pollutants contained in erosion caused by
construction and development;
      2.   Reduce the amount of sediment and pollutants entering storm drainage
systems and surface waters from all ground-disturbing activity;
      3.   Reduce the amount of erosion placing dirt and mud on the public
right-of-way and surrounding properties during construction and development;
and
      4.   Reduce the amount of soil and dust placed into the air during
ground-disturbing activity.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.020   Authority.
   A.   1.   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Community
Development and Planning Director and the Public Works Supervisor for all
ground-disturbing activities that require a building permit. 
      2.   For nonpermitted ground-disturbing activity, this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Department of Public Works on a complaint-
based response basis.
   B.   1.   The Directors, as specified above, may implement procedures, forms
and written policies for administering the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The Directors, as specified in division B.1. above, may issue
interpretations on the meaning and intent of the erosion and sediment control
regulations.  These interpretations shall conform to the purposes of this
chapter.
      3.   Prior to the adoption of a permanent rule or a modification of the
adopted Erosion Control Manual, the Director shall:
         a.   Publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city.  The notice shall be published not less than 30 days before the hearing.
The notice shall identify the place, time and purpose for the hearing; a brief
description of the subjects covered by the proposed rule; the final date for
acceptance of written comments; the location to submit comments and the
location where copies of the full set of the proposed rules may be obtained.
         b.   The Planning Commission shall hear testimony and receive written
comments at the hearing regarding the proposed rules.
         c.   The hearing body shall adopt, modify or reject the proposed rule.
         d.   A list of interested citizens will be maintained by the City
Planning Department. When the manual or rules are updated, the changes will be
mailed to all citizens on the list.
      4.   All fees for all permits, plan reviews and inspections under this
chapter shall be established by City Council resolution.  Fees shall be set at
levels sufficient to cover all administrative costs associated with processing
applications, reviewing plans, inspections and enforcement.  Fees under this
chapter are in addition to any other fees required by the city code.  Fees
under this chapter are also not part of any required bond, letter of credit or
other form of guarantee.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.030   Compliance with other laws.
   A.   The requirements of this chapter are minimum requirements.  Compliance
with this chapter does not in any way imply, either directly or indirectly,
compliance with any other law. 
   B.   Where the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than those
set forth in other regulations under the city code or ordinance, the provisions
of this chapter shall control. 
   C.   Where state or federal natural resource agency permit requirements
address erosion prevention and sediment control, the state or federal natural
resource protection requirements shall control.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.040   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Applicant means the person who applies for a permit.
   Approval or Approved means a determination by the Director that the
provisions of this chapter have been met.
   Bedrock means in-place solid rock.
   Best Management Practice or BMP means a physical, chemical, structural or
managerial practice that prevents, reduces or treats the contamination of
water, or which prevents or reduces soil erosion.
   Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control or CPESC means a
person who has been so determined by the Soil and Water Conservation Society
and the International Erosion Control Association.
   Denuded means land that has had the natural vegetative cover or other cover
removed, leaving the soil exposed to the elements.
   Development means any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real
estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to construction,
installation or expansion of a building or other structure, land division,
street construction, drilling and site alteration such as that due to dredging,
grading, paving, parking or storage improvements, excavating, filling or
clearing.
   Director means those persons specified in §
15.20.020, including the Public Works Supervisor, or those persons’ designees.
   Drainage Control means the collection, conveyance and discharge of
stormwater.
   Erosion means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the
effects of gravity, wind, water or ice.
   Erosion Control Manual means the collection of administrative rules adopted
by the city to implement the purpose and intent of this chapter.
   Final Grade means the finished grade of the site which conforms to the
approved plan.
   Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface.
   Ground-Disturbing Activity means any activity that exposes soil through the
use of motorized equipment.
      1.   Permanent: ongoing areas of exposed soils or ground disturbance,
such as mining operations, farming, gardening and sports fields.
      2.   Temporary: short-duration ground disturbance that occurs over a very
limited time frame (less than 6 months between disturbances), such as
construction, fill placement, landscape installation, and other vegetation
clearing activities.
   Owner means the person whose name and address is listed as the owner of the
property by the County Tax Assessor on the county assessment and taxation
records.
   Permit means an official document issued by the Director authorizing
performance of a specified activity.
   Person means any individual, partnership, association or corporation.
   Plan means a graphic or schematic representation, with accompanying notes,
schedules, specifications and other related documents.
   Responsible Party means:
      1.   The property owner or person legally authorized to act on the
owner’s behalf; or
      2.   Any person causing or contributing to a violation of this chapter.
   Sediment means mineral or organic matter deposited as a result of erosion.
   Site means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination where
development occurs.
   Slope means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is
expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
   Soil means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlaying bedrock.
   Special Site, see §
15.20.080 of this chapter.
   Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of
vegetation or mulch or other ground cover and may be in combination with
installation of temporary or permanent structures. Stabilization shall reduce
to the maximum extent practicable the erosion process and the resultant
transport of sediment.
   Storm Drainage System means facilities by which stormwater runoff is
collected or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains,
culverts, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
constructed (or altered) drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures.
   Storm Event means a storm that produces 1/2 inch of rain or more during any
24-hour time period.
   Stormwater means water runoff, snowmelt runoff or surface runoff and
drainage.
   Visible and Measurable means:
      1.   Deposits or tracking of mud, dirt, sediment or similar material
exceeding 1/2 cubic foot in volume on public or private streets, adjacent
property, or into the storm or surface water system, either by direct deposit,
dropping, discharge or as a result of the action of erosion.
      2.   Evidence of concentrated flows of water over bare soils; turbid or
sediment-laden flows; or evidence of on-site erosion such as rivulets on bare 
soil slopes, where the flow of water is not filtered or captured on the site.
      3.   Earth slides, mud flows, earth sloughing or other earth movement
which leaves the property.
   Water Body means rivers, streams, sloughs and drainages including
intermittent streams and seeps, ponds, lakes, aquifers, wetlands and coastal
waters.
   Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently with some degree of regularity.  Watercourses
may be either natural or artificial.
   Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and which under
normal circumstances does support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.  Wetlands include swamps, marshes, bogs
and similar areas.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.050   Referenced regulations.
   All referenced regulations are available within the Erosion Control Manual
which is maintained by the City Planning Department.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.060   General scope.
   A.   Applicability.  This chapter applies to all ground-disturbing
activities that disturb more than 100 square feet of ground, whether or not a
permit is required, unless the activities otherwise are exempted by the city
code.  All nonpermitted ground-disturbing activities that are permanent or
temporary in nature shall comply with this chapter unless otherwise noted.
   B.   Exemptions.
      1.   Signs.  Installation of signs is exempt from this chapter.
      2.   Emergencies.  Development which is subject to division A. above may
commence without complying with the requirements of this chapter if the
Director determines that there is a hazard posing imminent danger to life or
property, such as substantial fire hazards, risk of flood or other emergency. 
However, upon a determination by the Director that the emergency has passed,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.070   Minimum requirements.
   The following minimum requirements apply to all development and ground-
disturbing activities.
   A.   Purpose.
      1.   No visible and measurable sediment, pollutant or construction debris
shall exit the site, enter the public right-of-way or be deposited into any
water body or storm drainage system.
      2.   Depositing or washing soil into a water body or the storm drainage
system is prohibited.
   B.   Requirements and Standards.  In order to meet the purpose set forth in
division A. above, the responsible party shall do all or any of the following:
      1.   Install measures intended to keep soil on site or out of water
bodies, storm drainage systems or the public right-of-way as the first step in
any development. These measures shall be made functional prior to any up-slope
development taking place;
      2.   Remove any soil that enters the public right-of-way;
      3.   Protect stormwater inlets that are functioning during the course of
the development by approved sediment control measures so that sediment- laden
water cannot enter the inlets without first being filtered;
      4.   Apply permanent or temporary soil stabilization to denuded
development site areas in conformance with the following schedule:
         a.   Between October 1 and April 30, all denuded sites shall
immediately be provided with either temporary or permanent soil stabilization.
         b.   Between May 1 and September 30, temporary erosion and sediment
control measures to reduce dust and sediment transport shall be applied as soon
as practicable, but in no case more than 7 days after ground-disturbing
activity occurs.
         c.   Ground cover shall be installed on any portion of a site that is
denuded for more than 6 months.  Sports fields or playgrounds surrounded by
vegetative cover or permanently installed curbing are exempt from this
requirement.
         d.   Temporary measures shall be maintained until permanent measures
are established.
         e.   Permanent nonpermitted ground- disturbing activities may achieve
compliance with the standards set out in divisions 4.a. through 4.d. above,
with the installation and maintenance of approved permanent BMPs that meet the
purpose of this chapter.
      5.   Plant replacement vegetative cover;
      6.   Secure or protect soil stockpiles throughout the project with
temporary or permanent soil stabilization measures.  The responsible party is
accountable for the protection of all stockpiles on the site and those
transported from the site.  Depositions of soil may be subject to additional
regulations requiring permit, review or erosion and sediment control; and
      7.   Select BMPs from the Erosion Control Manual.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.080   Special site requirements.
   When the Director determines that special site conditions may prevent
compliance with §
15.20.070, the Director may require additional erosion, sediment and pollutant
control measures.
   A.   Special site conditions may include but are not limited to the
following:
      1.   Slopes before development that are greater than 10% (1 vertical:10
horizontal);
      2.   Ground disturbance of a natural vegetative buffer within 50 feet of
a wetland and/or water body;
      3.   The development site or development phase will have ground-
disturbing activity at any 1 time of 1 acre or more.  Single-family dwellings
and duplex dwellings are included;
      4.   The development includes a land division containing 10,000 square
feet or more; and
      5.   Project timing is such that ground- disturbing activity will take
place between October 1 and April 30.
   B.   Additional requirements imposed by the Public Works Supervisor to
achieve compliance with §
15.20.080A. may include but are not limited to the following:
      1.   Requiring drainage control in compliance with city-approved design
specs;
      2.   Requiring that a State of Oregon registered professional engineer,
other professional certified by the State of Oregon with experience or
qualifications in preparing erosion control plans, or a registered CPESC
prepare or implement the erosion and sediment control plan;
      3.   Prohibiting ground-disturbing activities between October 1 and April
30;
      4.   Limiting the amount of denuded soil at any given time; and
      5.   Requiring a bond, letter of credit or other guarantee.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.090   Maintenance.
   A.   The responsible party shall maintain all erosion, sediment and
pollutant control measures, temporary and permanent, in proper functioning
order.
   B.   The responsible party shall inspect, maintain, adjust, repair and
replace erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures within 24 hours
following a storm event to ensure that the measures are functioning properly.
   C.   During active ground-disturbing activity, the responsible party shall
inspect erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures daily between October
1 and April 30.
   D.   All inspections conducted by a responsible party in divisions B. and C.
above shall be noted in an inspection log indicating the date and time of the
inspection.  The inspection log shall be made available to the Director upon
request.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.100   Plan required.
   The responsible party shall submit an erosion, sediment and pollutant
control plan for permitted development projects to the Director for review. 
The responsible party shall not commence any development before the Director
has approved the proposed plan.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.110   Permit and plan requirements.
   A.   All permit applications or contract submittals shall be accompanied by
erosion, sediment and pollutant control plans at the time of application or
submittal. The number of erosion, sediment and pollutant control plans required
shall be determined by the applicable permit or contract process.  All erosion,
sediment and pollutant control plans shall comply with the minimum erosion,
sediment and pollutant control plan standards in the Erosion Control Manual.
   B.   The Public Works Supervisor shall review all erosion, sediment and
pollutant control plans.  The Public Works Supervisor may waive items required
under division A. above where the Public Works Supervisor determines that
certain items are not applicable to a specific application or project.
   C.   The responsible party shall be accountable for any plan modifications
needed due to conflicts, omissions or changed conditions that arise in the
field. The responsible party shall bear all costs to comply with the Erosion
Control Manual and the city code.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.120   Approval or denial of erosion, sediment and pollutant control
plan.
   The erosion, sediment and pollutant control plan shall be reviewed by the
Public Works Department.  If the Public Works Department finds that the plan
complies with this chapter, it shall be approved.  This approval shall be
indicated on the plan documents. The approved plan shall not be changed,
modified or altered without authorization from the Public Works Department. 
All development regulated by this chapter shall be done in accordance with the
approved plan.  If the Public Works Department approves only a portion of the
plan, development may commence on only that portion of the site for which a
plan has been approved.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.130   Alternative methods review process.
   A.   The Director may approve the use of alternate methods that provide
protection that is greater than or equal to the protection provided by the
methods prescribed in the Erosion Control Manual.
   B.   The burden of proof for all alternate methods reviews falls upon the
responsible party.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.140   Issuance of permit.
   A.   No permit requiring an erosion, sediment and pollutant control plan
shall be issued until the plan is approved.
   B.   As a condition of permit issuance, the responsible party shall agree to
allow all inspections to be conducted.
   C.   Where a bond, letter of credit or other guarantee is required, the
permit shall not be issued until the bond or guarantee has been obtained and
approved.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.150   Cancellation or expiration of permit.
   The Public Works Department may require that all denuded soil on the site be
permanently stabilized before a permit is cancelled or expires.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.160   Inspection; general.
   A.   The city may conduct inspections whenever it is necessary to enforce
any provisions of this chapter, to determine compliance with this chapter or
whenever the city has reasonable cause to believe there exists any violation of
this chapter.
   B.   Inspections shall occur from 1 of the following locations:
      1.   The adjacent right-of-way;
      2.   Adjacent public property;
      3.   Adjacent private property with approval of entry from the property
owner; or
      4.   The property that is the subject of the complaint with approval for
entry by the property owner.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.170   Inspection procedure.
   A.   The Public Works Supervisor may conduct the following inspections on
permitted development activities.  It shall be the duty of the responsible
party to call the inspection hotline at the appropriate inspection phase as set
forth below.  Inspections of erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures
may occur with other inspections being conducted on the development or
construction project.
   B.   1.   The Public Works Department may conduct inspections after initial,
temporary erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures have been put in
place and prior to any ground disturbance in addition to that necessary for the
installation of the erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures. When the
development is being conducted in phases, this inspection shall occur at the
beginning of each phase.
      2.   The Public Works Department may conduct inspections after permanent
controls are put in place.  When the development is being conducted in phases,
this inspection may occur after permanent measures have been installed for each
phase.
      3.   An inspection may be conducted at project completion prior to final
project approval. When the project is conducted in phases, an inspection may be
made after all phases of the project have been completed.
      4.   An inspection may be conducted after construction completion to
determine the effectiveness of permanent erosion and sediment control measures.
This inspection may be conducted 6 months after construction completion or at
other times determined by the city.
      5.   No person shall refuse entry or access to a permitted development
project to any authorized representative of the city who provides proper
credentials and requests entry for the purpose of conducting an inspection.  In
addition, no person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with any representative
while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.180   Release of bond or other guarantee.
   At the time of project approval, when the Director determines that all
provisions of this chapter have been met, the bond, letter of credit or other
guarantee that has been provided shall be released.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.190   Revisions to erosion, sediment and pollutant control plan.
   A.   During development, the Planning Director, Public Works Supervisor or
the responsible party may request revisions to the approved erosion, sediment
or pollutant control plan.  The Public Works Supervisor may approve or deny all
revisions.
   B.   The Public Works Supervisor may require revisions to the approved
erosion, sediment and pollutant control plan when:
      1.   It is determined that approved erosion, sediment and pollutant
control measures do not meet the purposes set forth in §
15.20.070;
      2.   An alternate method, measure or control fails to perform as claimed
by the responsible party;
      3.   A change in project timing has occurred due to an adverse change in
weather;
      4.   During development, relevant new information about soil, site,
topography or water conditions is discovered;
      5.   Changes to the area or type of ground- disturbing activity or
equipment used are proposed or implemented;
      6.   The project schedule has changed which results in development being
conducted at a different time of year than originally accepted or approved; or
      7.   Additional or substitute construction or maintenance materials or
chemicals will be used during development that require pollutant BMPs as set
out in the Erosion Control Manual.
   C.   Revised plans shall show all actual and proposed changes made on the
site, the new locations of the drainage patterns, and the effect that the
revisions will have on the site.  The new plans shall  show how problems
associated with the prior plan have been corrected, and indicate all new
erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures.  The Director may require
that the new plans be prepared by a State of Oregon registered engineer, a
State of Oregon registered landscape architect or a CPESC, and that the
revisions be stamped as such.
   D.   The responsible party shall be solely responsible for the costs
associated with any revisions, including but not limited to any additional or
alternate methods, measures, performance criteria or controls.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.200   Violation of chapter.
   A.   The following actions shall constitute a violation of this chapter:
      1.   Any failure, refusal or neglect to comply with any requirement of
this chapter;
      2.   Allowing or causing a condition that threatens to injure public
health, the environment or public or private property; and/or
      3.   Failure to correct ineffective erosion, sediment and pollutant
control measures after being required to do so by the Public Works Supervisor
or his or her designee.
   B.   Each specific incident and each day of noncompliance shall be
considered a separate violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.210   Notice of violation.
   A.   When the Public Works Supervisor determines that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the Supervisor shall notify the responsible party and the
property owner in writing that a violation of this chapter has occurred.  The
notice of violation shall either be delivered to the responsible party or
posted at the property site of the violation, and mailed to all responsible
parties.  If the address of the responsible party is unknown, then the notice
shall, in addition to being posted at the site, be published in a local
newspaper for 1 week. This publication shall serve as the mailed notice.
   B.   The written notice shall include the following information:
      1.   Date violation has occurred;
      2.   Permit number, where applicable;
      3.   Site address, legal description or project location;
      4.   Description of violation;
      5.   Disclosure that civil penalties, charges and liens may result from a
failure to remedy the violations;
      6.   Deadline to correct violation prior to assessment of civil penalties
is 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day after notification.  If there is a threat of
injury to the public health, the environment or public or private property, the
Director may require correction of the violation within 24 hours;
      7.   The date that civil penalties, administrative enforcement fees,
charges or liens will begin accumulating; and
      8.   Information about the responsible party’s ability to appeal.
   C.   Failure to respond to notice of violation may result in civil
penalties, administrative enforcement fees and stop work orders.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.220   Stop work orders.
   A.   1.   When it is necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter, the
Public Works Supervisor may issue a stop work order requiring that all work,
except work directly related to the elimination of the violation, be
immediately and completely stopped.  If the Supervisor issues a stop work
order, the responsible party shall not resume work until the time that the
Supervisor gives specific approval in writing.  A stop work order will apply to
all city permits. 
      2.   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall include:
         a.   Date of order;
         b.   Permit number, where applicable;
         c.   Site address, legal description or project location of stop work
order;
         d.   A description of all violations; and
         e.   The conditions under which the work may resume.
   B.   The stop work order shall be in writing and posted at a conspicuous
location at the site. In addition, a copy shall be sent to the responsible
party by certified mail. For projects in the public right-of- way, the stop
work order shall be delivered to the responsible party.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to remove, obscure, mutilate or otherwise
damage a stop work order.
   D.   A stop work order shall be effective upon posting.
   E.   When an emergency condition exists, the Director may issue a stop work
order orally.  The Supervisor shall then issue a written notice under division
A. above within 24 hours.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.230   Erosion, sediment and pollutant control plan for nonpermitted
activities.
   If nonpermitted ground-disturbing activities violate provisions of this
chapter, the responsible party may be required to submit an erosion, sediment
and pollutant control plan to demonstrate what measures will be revised or
added to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.240   Voluntary compliance agreement.
   A.   General.  When a violation of this chapter has occurred, as an
enforcement option, the Public Works Supervisor may enter into a voluntary
compliance agreement with the responsible party.
   B.   Contents.  A voluntary compliance agree- ment shall set forth the
actions to be taken by the responsible party to correct violations of this
chapter. It may also set forth the actions to mitigate the impacts of
violations.  The agreement shall set forth a schedule for correction and
completion of the mitigation.
   C.   Effect of Agreement.
      1.   A voluntary compliance agreement is not enforceable by any third
party.  By entering into a voluntary compliance agreement, the responsible
party waives the right to an appeal under §
15.20.020.
      2.   The Director may reduce or waive civil penalties if the responsible
party performs all the terms of the voluntary compliance agreement.  The
Director may not waive civil penalties in any case where the responsible party
is a repeat violator.  If the responsible party fails to perform according to
the terms of the voluntary compliance agreement, the Director shall assess
civil penalties from the date the violation occurred for each violation
addressed in the agreement.
      3.   Subject to the approval of the Community Development Director, the
responsible party may elect to substitute in-kind services for up to 90% of the
amount of all assessed penalties.  The Director shall determine the actions
that can be deemed in-kind services.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.250   Civil penalties.
   Violations of this chapter may result in any of the following penalties:
   A.   Civil Penalties.
      1.   For each violation, a civil penalty may be assessed by the city. 
Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation.
      2.   The Public Works Supervisor shall consider the following criteria in
determining the amount of any civil penalty to be assessed under this section:
         a.   The nature and extent of the person’s involvement in the
violation;
         b.   The benefits, economic, financial or otherwise, accruing or
likely to accrue as a result of the violation;
         c.   Whether the violation was isolated and temporary, or repeated and
continuous;
         d.   The magnitude and seriousness of the violation;
         e.   The city’s costs of investigation and remedying the violation;
         f.   Whether any criminal charges have been issued against the person;
and
         g.   Any relevant, applicable evidence bearing on the nature and
seriousness of the violation.
   B.   Administrative Enforcement Fees.
      1.   The city may charge a penalty in the form of a monthly enforcement
fee for each project found in violation of this chapter that meets the
following conditions:
         a.   The project is subject to a notice of violation or stop work
order as described in §§
15.20.210 and
15.20.220;
         b.   A response period of 30 days has passed since the effective date
of the notice of violation or stop work order; and
         c.   The project remains out of compliance with the initial notice of
violation or stop work order or any subsequent notice of violation or stop work
order.
      2.   If all violations are not corrected within 6 months from the date of
the initial notice of violation, subsequent enforcement fees shall be twice the
amount stated above.
      3.   Once the monthly enforcement fees begin, they shall continue until
all violations listed in the first or any subsequent notice of violation have
been corrected, inspected and approved.
      4.   Whenever the responsible party believes that all violations listed
in the first or any subsequent notice of violation have been corrected, he or
she shall notify the Public Works Supervisor.  Upon receipt of this notice, the
Supervisor shall promptly schedule an inspection of the project and shall
notify the responsible party if any violations remain uncorrected.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.260   Appeal of notice of violations and penalties.
   Whenever the responsible party has been given a written notice or order
pursuant to this chapter and has been directed to make any correction or to
perform any act, and the responsible party believes the finding of the notice
or order was in error, the responsible party may have the notice or order
reviewed by the Director.  If a review is sought, the responsible party shall
submit a written request to the Director within 10 days of the date of the
notice or order.  The review shall be conducted by the Director.  The
responsible party requesting the review shall be given the opportunity to
present evidence to the Director. Following a review, the Director shall issue
a written determination.  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of
the Director to initiate a code enforcement proceeding.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.270   Summary abatement authorized.
   The Director may determine that the failure or nonexistence of erosion,
sediment and pollutant control measures as required by this chapter constitute
a nuisance presenting an immediate threat of injury to the public health, the
environment, or public or private property.  These nuisances shall be subject
to the requirements of this chapter.  In cases where the Director determines it
is necessary to take immediate action in order to meet the purposes of this
chapter, summary abatement of the nuisance is authorized.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
§ 15.20.280   Notification following summary abatement.
   A.   When summary abatement is authorized by this chapter, the decision
regarding whether or not to use summary abatement shall be at the Director’s
discretion.  In case of summary abatement, notice to the responsible party
prior to abatement is not required.  However, following summary abatement, the
Director shall post upon the development site liable for the abatement a notice
describing the action taken to abate the nuisance.
   B.   Upon posting of the notice described in division A. above, the Director
shall cause a notice to be mailed to the owner at the owner’s address as
recorded in the county assessment and taxation records for the property.  The
mailed notice shall include the content described in §
15.20.020C. An error in the name of the property owner or address listed in the
county assessment and taxation records shall not render the notice void, but in
that case the posted notice shall be deemed sufficient.
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-8-2003)
TITLE 16
PLANNING AND ZONING
Division I. – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.02
TITLE
Sections:
   
16.02.010   Title.
   
16.02.020   Severability.
16.02.010   Title.
This title shall be known as the “Land Development and Planning Ordinance of
the City” which incorporates such common names as “Zoning Ordinance” and
“Subdivision Ordinance.”  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.10, 1984).
16.02.020   Severability.
Invalidity of a section or part of a section of this ordinance shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections or parts of sections.  (Ord. 890 section
2, 1993)
Chapter 16.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:
   
16.04.010   Grammatical interpretation.
   
16.04.020   Generally.
   
16.04.030   Abutting-adjoining-adjacent.
   
16.04.035   Acceptable site.
   
16.04.036   Access.
   
16.04.037   Access classification.
   
16.04.038   Access connection.
   
16.04.039   Access management.
   
16.04.040   Accessory Dwelling Unit.
   
16.04.043   Accessory structure or use.
   
16.04.045   Accessway.
   
16.04.050   Agriculture.
   
16.04.060   Alley.
   
16.04.061   Antenna.
   
16.04.063   Application.
   
16.04.064   Attached WTS facility.
   
16.04.065   Backhaul network.
   
16.04.066   Bed and Breakfast.
   
16.04.068   Bicycle Facilities.
   
16.04.070   Billboard.
   
16.04.080   Boarding, lodging or rooming house.
   
16.04.090   Building.
   
16.04.100   Building line.
   
16.04.105   Cell.
   
16.04.110   Central business district (CBD).
   
16.04.120   City.
   
16.04.125   City Planner.
   
16.04.127   Collocation.
   
16.04.128   Commercial Recreation Uses.
   
16.04.130   Commission.
   
16.04.135   Conditionally suitable site.
   
16.04.137   Corner clearance.
   
16.04.140   Council.
   
16.04.145   Cross access.
   
16.04.150   Curb line.
   
16.04.155   Day care facility.
   
16.04.158   Detached WTS facility.
   
16.04.160   Development plan.
   
16.04.170   Dwelling, duplex-dwelling, two family.
   
16.04.180   Dwelling, multi-family.
   
16.04.190   Dwelling, single-family.
   
16.04.195   Dwelling, townhouse.
   
16.04.200   Dwelling unit.
   
16.04.210   Easement.
   
16.04.212   Eco-roof
   
16.04.215   Equipment shelters.
   
16.04.218   Façade.
   
16.04.220   Family.
   
16.04.221   Floor area ratio.
   
16.04.222   Foster Home,
   
16.04.223   Frontage road.
   
16.04.225   FCC.
   
16.04.228   Grade plane.
   
16.04.230   Height of building.
   
16.04.240   Home occupation.
   
16.04.250   Hotel.
   
16.04.253   Impervious Surface.
   
16.04.255   Infill homes.
   
16.04.275   Infiltration.
   
16.04.260   Intersection.
   
16.04.265   Joint access (or shared access).
   
16.04.270   Kennel.
   
16.04.275   Lattice tower.
   
16.04.280   Loading space.
   
16.04.290   Lot.
   
16.04.300   Lot area.
   
16.04.310   Lot, corner.
   
16.04.315   Lot depth.
   
16.04.318   Lot, flag.
   
16.04.320   Lot front.
   
16.04.321   Lot frontage.
   
16.04.330   Lot, interior.
   
16.04.340   Lot line.
   
16.04.350   Lot line, interior.
   
16.04.360   Lot line, street.
   
16.04.370   Lot, through.
   
16.04.380   Lot width.
   
16.04.383   Low impact development.
   
16.04.385   Lowest floor.
   
16.04.390   Manufactured home.
   
16.04.400   Manufactured (mobile) home park.
   
16.04.410   Manufactured (mobile) home subdivision.
   
16.04.420   Modular home.
   
16.04.425   Monopole.
   
16.04.430   Motel.
   
16.04.433   Nail Salons
   
16.04.435   Neighborhood activity center.
   
16.04.438   Nonconforming access features.
   
16.04.440   Nonconforming structure, lot or use
   
16.04.445   Nursing Home
   
16.04.450   Parent parcel.
   
16.04.460   Parking space.
   
16.04.470   Partition.
   
16.04.480   Pedestrian way.
   
16.04.490   Person.
   
16.04.500   Planning Commission.
   
16.04.510   Plat.
   
16.04.512   Porches, covered.
   
16.04.514   Preapplication conference
   
16.04.515   Preferred site.
   
16.04.516   Public facility, major
   
16.04.517   Public facility, minor
   
16.04.519   Reasonably direct.
   
16.04.520   Recommendation.
   
16.04.525   Residential Facility
   
16.04.527   Residential Home
   
16.04.530   Right-of-way.
   
16.04.540   Roadway.
   
16.04.545   Safe and convenient bicycle and pedestrian routes.
   
16.04.547   Self-Storage/Mini-Storage  Warehouse
   
16.04.550   Setbacks.
   
16.04.560   Sidewalk.
   
16.04.565   Stealth design.
   
16.04.567   Story above grade plane.
   
16.04.570   Street.
   
16.04.580   Structural alteration.
   
16.04.590   Structure.
   
16.04.595   Stub-out (or stub street)
   
16.04.600   Subdivide land.
   
16.04.610   Subdivision.
   
16.04.615   Traffic impact analysis.
   
16.04.620   Trailer coach.
   
16.04.630   Trailer park.
   
16.04.035   Trip generation study.
   
16.04.640   Urban Growth Boundary (UGB).
   
16.04.650   Urbanizable.
   
16.04.660   Use.
   
16.04.666   Vicinity.
   
16.04.670   Vision clearance area.
   
16.04.671   Walkway.
   
16.04.672   Wireless telecommunications facility.
   
16.04.676   Wireless telecommunications systems (WTS).
   
16.04.680   Yard.
   
16.04.690   Yard, interior.
   
16.04.700   Yard, rear.
   
16.04.710   Yard, street.
   
16.04.715   Zero-lot line development.
16.04.010   Grammatical interpretation.
As used in this title, the masculine includes the feminine and the neuter, and
the singular includes the plural with no preference or prejudice intended or
implied.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20 (A), 1984)
16.04.020   Generally.
Unless the context requires otherwise, the words and phrases set out in this
chapter shall mean as follows.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1 .20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.030   Abutting-adjoining-adjacent.
Abutting, adjoining or adjacent means physically touching, having at least one
common point or lots separated only by a public street, public right-of-way, or
railroad right-of-way.  (Ord. 890 section 3, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)
[part], 1984)
16.04.035   Acceptable site.
For purposes of siting wireless telecommunications systems facilities, any land
planned and zoned Highway commercial or Commercial-Manufacturing.  (Ord. 981
section 17, 1997)
16.04.036   Access.
Access means a way or means of approach to provide pedestrian, bicycle, or
motor vehicle entrance or exit to a property. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000).
16.04.037   Access classification.
Access classification means a ranking system for roadways used to determine the
appropriate degree of access management. Factors considered include functional
classification, the appropriate local government’s adopted plan for the
roadway, subdivision of abutting properties, and existing level of access
control. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.038   Access connection.
Access connection means any driveway, street, turnout or other means of
providing for the movement of vehicles to or from the public roadway system.
(Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.039   Access management.
Access management means the process of providing and managing access to land
development while preserving the regional flow of traffic in terms of safety,
capacity, and speed. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.040   Accessory Dwelling.
Accessory dwelling is an interior, attached, or detached residential structure
that is used in connection with, or that is accessory to, a single-family
dwelling. (Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.043   Accessory structure or use.
Accessory structure or use means a detached structure or use not intended for
human habitation, incidental and subordinate to the main use of the property
and which is located on the same lot with the main use such as, but not limited
to, garage, carport, tool shed, private greenhouse or utility building.  (Ord.
740 section 10.1.20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.045   Accessway.
Accessway means a walkway that provides pedestrian and bicycle passage either
between streets or from a street to a building or other destination such as a
school, park, or transit stop. Accessways generally include a walkway and
additional land on either side of the walkway, often in the form of an easement
or right-of-way, to provide clearance and separation between the walkway and
adjacent uses. Accessways through parking lots are generally physically
separated from adjacent vehicle parking or parallel vehicle traffic by curbs or
similar devices and include landscaping, trees, and lighting. Where accessways
cross driveways, they are generally raised, paved, or marked in a manner that
provides convenient access for pedestrians. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.050   Agriculture.
Agriculture means the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, silviculture
and horticulture.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.060   Alley.
Alley means a narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting another street. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.061   Antenna.
The specific device used to capture an incoming and/or transmit an outgoing
radio-frequency signal.  This definition shall include omni-directional (whip)
antennas; directional (panel) antennas; parabolic (microwave dish) antennas;
and ancillary antennas (i.e., GPS).  All other transmitting or receiving
equipment not specifically described herein shall be regulated in conformity
with the type of antenna described herein which most closely resembles such
equipment.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.063   Application.
Application for a land use permit (site and design review, conditional use
permit, annexation, zone change, subdivision, etc.) means a package of
information that includes:
   A.   The application form filled out and signed by the owner;
   B.   Site plan and/or narrative describing the proposal;
   C.   List of property owners on mailing labels (1" x 2 5/8"); and
   D.   The application fee.  (Ord. 981 section 1, 1997)
16.04.064   Attached WTS facility.
An existing pole, tower or other structure capable of accommodating a WTS
facility antenna, whether originally intended for such use or not.  (Ord. 981
section 17, 1997)
16.04.065   Backhaul network.
The land lines that connect a WTS provider’s radio signals to one or more
cellular telephone switching offices and/or local or long distance providers,
or the public switched telephone network.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.066   Bed and Breakfast.
Bed and Breakfast means any single-family residential dwelling having rooms for
rent to travelers or transients for a charge or fee paid, for rental or use for
a period of less than thirty (30) days.  Additionally, such establishment
serving only one meal per day prior to the noon hour.  (Ord. 890 section 4,
1993; renumbered due to Ord. 981 amendments)
16.04.068   Bicycle facilities.
Bicycle facilities is a general term denoting improvements and provisions made
to accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities and all
bikeways. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.070   Billboard.
Billboard means a sign which has a surface space upon which advertising may be
posted, painted, or affixed, and which is generally, although not necessarily,
designed for the rental or lease of such sign space for advertising not
relating to the use of the property upon which the sign exists.  (Ord. 740
section 10.1.20 (B)[part], 1984)
16.04.080   Boarding, lodging or rooming house.
Boardinghouse, lodging house or rooming-house means a building where lodging
with or without meals is provided for compensation for at least four, but not
more than ten guests.  Board and care, foster care and similar accommodations
are considered boardinghouses for the purposes of this title.  (Ord. 740
section 10.1.20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.090   Building.
Building means a structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1 .20(B)
[part), 1984)
16.04.100   Building line.
Building line means a line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which
buildings or structures may not be erected.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20 (B)
[part], 1984)
16.04.105   Cell.
A geographic area where a single radio transmission sending/receiving station
(per provider) and the equipment necessary to connect these radio calls to land
lines or other cells are located.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.110   Central business district (CBD).
Central business district (CBD) means the downtown area of Canby, defined
generally by zoning or designation on the Land Use Map of the Comprehensive
Plan for downtown commercial development.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20 (B)[part),
1984)
16.04.120   City.
City means the City of Canby, Oregon.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)[part],
1984)
16.04.125   City Planner.
City Planner means the person appointed by the city administrator as supervisor
of the day-to-day operations of Canby's city planning functions, or another
staff person he or she designates for a particular function.  Also referred to
as “Planning Director.”  (Ord. 890 section 5, 1993; Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.04.127   Collocation.
Two or more WTS providers utilizing a structure or site specifically designed
and/or approved for such multiple use, and including equipment shelters.  (Ord.
981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.128   Commercial Recreation Uses.
Commercial recreation uses means uses intended to provide for gymnastics,
tennis, racquetball and other sport-related centers that require oversized
indoor space and facilities.  (Ord. 960, section 1, 12/18/96)
16.04.130   Commission.
Commission means the Planning Commission of the city.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.135   Conditionally suitable site.
For purposes of siting wireless telecommunications systems facilities, any land
planned and zoned Residential/ Commercial, Convenience Commercial, or Downtown
Commercial.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.137   Corner clearance.
Corner clearance means the distance from an intersection of a public or private
road to the nearest access connection, measured from the closest edge of the
pavement of the intersecting road to the closest edge of the pavement of the
connection along the traveled way. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.140   Council.
Council means the City Council of Canby, Oregon.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)
[part], 1984)
16.04.145   Cross access.
Cross access means a service drive providing vehicular access between two or
more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public street system.
(Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.150   Curb line.
Curb line means a line along the edge of the curb nearest the street lot line,
not necessarily the right-of-way line.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part],
1984)
16.04.155   Day care facility.
Day care facility means any facility that provides day care to children,
including a day nursery, nursery school group, home of a family day care
provider, or similar unit operating under any name, but not including any:
   A.   Facility providing care that is primarily educational, unless provided
to a preschool child for more than four hours a day.
   B.   Facility providing care that is primarily supervised training in a
specific subject, including but not limited to dancing, drama, music or
religion.
   C.   Facility providing care that is primarily an incident of group athletic
or social activities sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club
or hobby group.
   D.   Facility operated by a school district, political subdivision of this
state, or a governmental agency.
   E.   Residential facility licensed under ORS 443.400 to 443.455.
   F.   Babysitters.  (Ord. 890 section 6, 1993)
16.04.158   Detached WTS facility.
A pole, tower or other structure designed and intended to support WTS facility
antennas.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.160   Development plan.
Development plan means any plan adopted by the Planning Commission for the
guidance of growth and improvement of the city, including modifications or
refinements which may be made from time to time.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)
[part, 1984)
16.04.170   Dwelling, duplex-dwelling, two-family.
Duplex dwelling or two-family dwelling means a building containing two dwelling
units located on the same lot or parcel.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)[part],
1984; Ord 1514, 2019)
16.04.180   Dwelling, multi-family.
Multi-family dwelling means a building containing three or more dwelling units
located on the same lot or parcel.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984;
Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.190   Dwelling, single-family.
Single-family dwelling means a detached building containing one dwelling unit.
Manufactured homes shall not be considered to be single-family dwellings for
the purposes of this chapter unless found to meet all city building,
mechanical, electrical and other construction codes applicable to conventional
units built on the site.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20 (B)([part], 1984; Ord.
1514, 2019)
16.04.195   Dwelling, Townhouse (Common Wall).
Means single-family attached common wall dwellings with each dwelling unit
located on a separate lot. There shall be no more than six attached townhouse
dwelling units in a row, and the combined single-family units shall not exceed
120 feet in length. (Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.200   Dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family and
not having more than one cooking facility.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)[part],
1984)
16.04.210   Easement.
Easement means a grant of the right to use an area of land for specific
purposes.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1 20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.212   Eco-roof
Eco-roof means a vegetated roof constructed for water quality and quantity
control.  Eco-roofs are vegetated roof covers with growing media and plants
taking the place of bare membrane, gravel ballast, shingles or tiles. The
number of layers and the layer placement vary from system to system and roof
type, but all eco-roofs include a single to multi-ply waterproofing layer,
drainage, growing media and the plants, covering at least 50% of the roof deck
surface.  (Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.04.215   Equipment shelters.
For purposes of siting wireless telecommunications systems facilities, the
buildings, structures, cabinets or vaults used to house and protect the
equipment necessary to connect/relay radio signals from cell site to cell site
and to land line systems. Associated equipment such as air conditioning or
emergency generators shall be included in this definition of equipment
shelters.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.218   Façade.
Façade means an exterior face of a building. (Ord 1296, 2008)
16.04.220   Family.
Family means an individual or two or more individuals related by blood,
marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship living together in a dwelling unit in
which meals or lodging may also be provided for not more than two additional
individuals excluding servants; or a group of not more than five individuals,
excluding servants, who need not be related by blood, marriage, adoption or
legal guardianship living together in a dwelling unit.  Five or fewer
handicapped persons, along with those individuals charged with caring for such
persons and sharing a common dwelling unit, shall be considered to be a family
for purposes of this title.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.221   Floor area ratio.
Floor area ratio means a method of calculating structural massing on a lot. 
Floor Area Ratio is expressed as a ratio of x divided by y, where x is equal to
the sum of the gross floor area of all stories above grade plane, as measured
to the outside surface of exterior walls, and y is equal to the lot area net of
any publicly dedicated right-of-way or land.  Detached accessory structures and
detached or attached parking structures above grade plane are not included in
the gross floor area calculation.  (Ord 1296, 2008)
16.04.222   Foster Home,
“Foster home” means any home maintained by a person who has under the care of
the person in the home any child under the age of 21 years unattended by the
child’s parent or guardian, for the purpose of providing the child with care,
food and lodging, but does not include items listed in ORS 418.625 a-f.(Ord.
1514, 2019)
16.04.223   Frontage road.
Frontage road means a public or private drive which generally parallels a
public street between the right-of-way and the front building setback line. The
frontage road provides access to private properties while separating them from
the arterial street (see also service roads). (Ord. 1043 section 3,
2000)
16.04.225   FCC.
The Federal Communications Commission; the federal agency that regulates
interstate and international communications by radio, television, wire,
satellite and cable.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.228   Grade plane.
Grade plane means the average of finished ground level adjoining the building
at exterior walls.  Where the finished ground level slopes away from the
exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points
within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is
more than 6 feet from the building, between the building and a point 6 feet
from the building.  (Ord 1296, 2008)
16.04.230   Height of building.
Height of building means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to
the height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B) [part], 1984; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.240   Home occupation.
Home occupation means a lawful activity commonly carried on within a dwelling
by members of the family occupying the dwelling with not more than one non-
resident employee being engaged, provided that:
   A.   The residential character of the building is maintained;
   B.   The activity occupies less than one-quarter of the ground floor area of
the building;
   C.   The activity is conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward
appearance nor manifest any characteristic of a business in the ordinary
meaning of the term nor infringe upon the rights of neighboring residents to
enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes.  Business visitors to the premises
shall not exceed eight (8) per day and delivery trucks shall not exceed one (1)
per day;
   D.   The occupation shall not be carried on in an accessory building of the
residence where the building is larger than six hundred (600) square feet;
   E.   No signs are permitted, except for a single unilluminated nameplate not
to exceed two (2) square feet in area;
   F.   All home occupations require a city business license.  (Ord. 890
section 7, 1993; Ord. 830 section 1, 1989; Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part],
1984)
16.04.250   Hotel.
Hotel means a building in which lodging is provided for more than ten guests
for compensation and in which no provision is made for cooking in the rooms. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.253   Impervious surface
Impervious surface means a surface area that creates a barrier to or hinders
the entry of water into the soil in comparison with natural conditions prior to
development, thus causing water to run off the surface in greater quantities or
at an increased rate of flow.  Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited
to, buildings, paved parking areas and driveways, roads, sidewalks, patios,
packed earth, and oiled surfaces. Open, uncovered retention/detention
facilities, green roofs, and permeable surfacing materials shall not be
considered impervious surfaces. Roof surfaces are also considered ‘pervious’
when 100% of the annual average roof runoff is captured and reused on-site for
irrigation or approved interior uses. (Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.04.255   Infill homes.
Infill homes mean existing and new single family dwellings, manufactured homes,
two-family dwellings, duplexes and triplexes on lots that are located in an R-
1 or R-1.5 zoning district, and that have existing homes on two adjacent sides.
Each adjacent home must be within 25 feet of the common lot line with the
infill homes and have pre-existed for at least 5 years (dated from the existing
homes final building permit approval). (Ord. 1107, 2002; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord
1323, 2010)
16.04.257   Infiltration
Infiltration means the process or rate at which water percolates from the land
surface into the ground.  Infiltration is also a general category of best
management practices (BMP) designed to collect runoff and allow it to flow
through the ground for pollutant removal. (Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.04.260   Intersection.
Intersection means the place where two streets meet or cross.  (Ord. 740
section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.265   Joint access (or shared access).
Joint access (or shared access) means a driveway connecting two or more
contiguous sites to the public street system. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.270   Kennel.
Kennel means a place where four or more dogs more than four months of age are
kept on one lot or contiguous lots under one ownership.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.275   Lattice tower.
For purposes of siting wireless telecommunications systems facilities, a WTS
support structure which consists of metal crossed strips or bars and which
supports antennas and related equipment for one or more WTS provider.  (Ord.
981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.280   Loading space.
Loading space means an off-street space for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle or truck while loading or unloading merchandise or materials
and which space has access to a street.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part],
1984)
16.04.290   Lot.
Lot means a single parcel or tract of land for which a legal description has
been filed in the office of the county recorder or the boundaries of which are
shown on a recorded subdivision plat.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part],
1984)
16.04.300   Lot area.
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot,
excluding the access strip servicing a flag lot.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)
[part], 1984)
16.04.310   Lot, corner.
Corner lot means a lot abutting two intersecting streets other than an alley,
provided that the streets do not intersect at an angle greater than one hundred
thirty-five degrees. (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20 (B) [part], 1984)
16.04.315   Lot depth.
Lot depth means the average distance from the front lot line to the rear lot
line. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.318   Lot, flag.
A flag lot is a lot that does not meet minimum frontage requirements and where
access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way. (Ord. 1043
section 3, 2000)
16.04.320   Lot front.
Lot front means the street lot line on a corner lot which the principal use or
structure is facing.  If no such use or structure exists, it means the street
side having the shorter length.  If the sides are of approximately equal
length, the City Planner may designate the lot front.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.321   Lot frontage.
Lot frontage means that portion of a lot extending along a street right-of-way
line. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.330   Lot, interior.
Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)
[part], 1984)
16.04.340   Lot line.
Lot line means the property line bounding a lot.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)
[part], 1984)
16.04.350   Lot line, interior.
Lot line, interior means all lot lines which separate one parcel from another,
other than street lot lines.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.360   Lot line, street.
Street lot line means a lot line that separates the lot from a street other
than an alley. The street lot line is not generally the same as the curb line. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.370   Lot, through.
Through lot means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets other than alleys.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.380   Lot width.
Lot width means the average width of a lot when measured at the front and rear
setback lines for a principal use.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part), 1984)
16.04.383   Low impact development
Low impact development (LID) means a stormwater management and land development
strategy applied at the parcel, multiple parcel and/or subdivision level that
emphasizes conservation and use of on-site natural features integrated with
engineered, small-scale controls to more closely mimic predevelopment
hydrologic functions.  LID tools are designed to reduce environmental impacts
of development, such as increased storm water runoff due to impervious areas,
poor water quality and inconsistent water quantity in streams and rivers.  LID
techniques control storm water runoff volume and reduce pollutant loadings to
receiving waters.  Not all sites are suitable for LID.  Considerations such as
soil permeability, depth of water table and slope should be considered, in
addition to other factors.  LID techniques may not completely replace the need
for conventional stormwater controls. (Ord 1338, 2010)
16.04.385   Lowest floor.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this title found in Chapter
16.40 (Hazard Overlay Zone).  (Ord. 804 section 2(A), 1987)
16.04.390   Manufactured home (Mobile Home)
“Manufactured home” means a structure constructed for movement on public
highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended
for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was
constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and
safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction. This
definition includes manufactured dwelling, manufactured home, mobile home, and
residential trailer as those terms are defined in ORS 446.003 . A manufactured
home shall be certified to meet the 1976 HUD Standards, as amended. The
definition does not include recreational vehicles, travel trailers, park
trailers or structures or vehicles which have a state of Oregon or U.S.
Government label designating them as a recreational vehicle. It also does not
include buildings or structures subject to the Structural Specialty Code
adopted pursuant to ORS 455.100  through 455.450 . (Ord 1514, 2019)
16.04.400   Manufactured (Mobile) home park.
Manufactured (Mobile)home park means a tax lot or lots where two or more
manufactured homes are used for human occupancy and where the space is
available for rent or lease.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984; Ord.
1514, 2019)
16.04.410   Manufactured (Mobile) home subdivision.
Manufactured (Mobile) home subdivision means a subdivision of property where
individual lots are available for the placement of manufactured homes.  (Ord.
740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.420   Modular home.
Modular home means a residential structure constructed of one or more
prefabricated parts which meet all city building, plumbing, mechanical,
electrical and other construction codes applicable to conventional units which
might be built on the site.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20 (B) [part], 1984)
16.04.425   Monopole.
For purposes of siting wireless telecommunications systems facilities, a WTS
support structure which consists of a single tapered steel pole and which
supports antennas and related equipment for one or more WTS provider.  (Ord.
981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.430   Motel.
Motel means a building or group of buildings on the same lot containing guest
units with separate and individual entrances and consisting of individual
sleeping quarters, detached or in connected rows, with or without cooking
facilities, for rental.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.433   Nail Salons.
Establishments primarily engaged in providing nail care services, such as
manicures, pedicures, and nail extensions. (Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.435   Neighborhood activity center.
Neighborhood activity center means an attractor or destination for residents of
surrounding residential areas. Includes, but is not limited to, existing or
planned schools, parks, shopping areas, transit stops, and employment areas.
(Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.438   Nonconforming access features.
Nonconforming access features means features of the property access that
existed prior to the date of ordinance adoption and do not conform with the
requirements of this ordinance. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.440   Nonconforming structure, lot or use.
Nonconforming structure, lot or use means a structure, lot or use which
lawfully existed prior to the adoption of zoning requirements for the zone in
which it is located and with which it does not comply.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.445   Nursing home
Means any institution or facility defined as a long term care facility for
licensing purposes under state statute or the rules of the Department of Human
Services, including a long term care facility operated as part of a dual
facility.  “Dual facility” means a facility that operates both a hospital and a
long term care facility on the same campus.  (ORS 678.710) (Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.450   Parent parcel.
Parent parcel means a lot or parcel of land from which other parcels or lots
are divided.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.460   Parking space.
Parking space means a rectangle in the dimensions as set forth in Division III
of this title together with maneuvering and access space required for a
conventional automobile to park within the rectangle.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.470   Partition.
Partition means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels
within the calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or
contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. 
Partitioned land does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the
relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not created and
where the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced
below the minimum lot size. (Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.480   Pedestrian way.
Pedestrian way means a right-of-way for pedestrian traffic.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.490   Person.
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, syndicate, or any legal entity, and including any trustee,
receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20 (B) [part], 1984)
16.04.500   Planning Commission.
Planning Commission means the Planning Commission of the City of Canby,
Oregon.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.510   Plat.
Plat means the map or drawing on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is
presented and which he submits for approval and intends in final form to
record.  Plat includes preliminary, tentative and final plats.  (Ord. 740
section 10.1.20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.512   Porches, covered.
Covered porches must not be enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in
height, for 50 percent or more of their perimeter. (Ord. 1107, 2002)
16.04.514   Preapplication conference.
Preapplication conference means a meeting of the representatives of the city
departments and other affected agencies, as determined by the City, to review
and provide initial input on land use applications or other proposals.  (Ord.
1237, 2007)
16.04.515   Preferred site.
For purposes of siting wireless telecommunications systems facilities, any land
planned and zoned Light Industrial or Heavy Industrial.  (Ord. 981 section 17,
1997)
16.04.516   Public facility, major.
A major public facility is any public service improvement or structure, other
than transportation projects, developed by or for a public agency that is not
defined as a minor public facility. Transportation projects are covered by
Section
16.08.130.  (Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.04.517   Public facility, minor.
A minor public facility includes the following public service improvements or
structures developed by or for a public agency:
   A.   Minor utility structures, except substations, but including poles,
lines, pipes, telecommunications facilities or other such facilities.
   B.   Sewer, storm drainage, or water system structures except treatment
plants or reservoirs, but including pump stations, manholes, valves, hydrants
or other portions of the collection, treatment and distribution systems located
within public property or public easements.
   C.   Street improvements within existing developments including sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, catch basins, paving, signs and traffic control devices and
street lights.
   D.   Transit improvements, such as shelters or pedestrian and bicycle safety
improvements, located within public right of way or public easements or on
public property.
   E.   School improvements which will not increase the capacity of the school
nor create significant additional traffic or other impacts on the surrounding
neighborhood.
   F.   Park improvements which will not create significant additional motor or
foot traffic impact on the surrounding neighborhood.  (Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.04.519   Reasonably direct.
A reasonably direct route does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line
or is a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction
travel for likely users. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.04.520   Recommendation.
Recommendation includes any staff report or report from the Planning Commission
to the City Council.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.525   Residential facility
Means a residential care, residential training or residential treatment
facility, as those terms are defined in ORS 443.400, that provides residential
care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination
thereof for six to fifteen individuals who need not be related. Staff persons
required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of
facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of
the residential facility.  (ORS 197.660)(1)) Under ORS 197.667(4), the city may
require an applicant proposing to site a residential facility to supply the
city with a copy of the entire application and supporting documentation for
state licensing  of the facility except for information that is exempt from
public disclosure. (Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.527   Residential home
Means a residential treatment or training home, as defined in ORS 443.400, a
residential facility registered under ORS 443.480 to 443.500 or an adult foster
home licensed under ORS 443.705 to 443.825 that provides residential care alone
or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for five
or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet
licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility
residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the
residential home.  (ORS 197.660(2)) (Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.530   Right-of-way.
Right-of-way means the area between the boundary lines of a street or other
easement. (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.540   Roadway.
Roadway means the portion or portions of a street right-of-way developed for
vehicular traffic.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.545   Safe and convenient bicycle and pedestrian routes.
Safe and convenient bicycle and pedestrian routes:
   A.   Are reasonably free from hazards; and
   B.   Provide a reasonably direct route of travel between destinations,
considering that the optimum travel distance is one-half mile for pedestrians
and three miles for bicyclists. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.547   Self Storage Unit/Ministorage Warehouse (NAICS 531130)
Establishments primarily engaged in renting or leasing space for self-storage.
These establishments provide secure space (i.e., rooms, compartments, lockers,
containers, or outdoor space) where clients can store and retrieve their goods.
16.04.550   Setback.
Setback means a distance which a structure is required to be set back from a
lot line. Where specified in this title, some setbacks are measured from curbs
or projected curb lines rather than lot lines. Decks 30 inches or less above
grade are exempt from setback standards. (Ord. 830 section 2, 1989; Ord. 740
section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984; Ord. 955 section 1, 1996; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.04.560   Sidewalk.
Sidewalk means a pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing to city standards.
(Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)[part], 1984)
16.04.565   Stealth design.
A variety of techniques used to disguise or mitigate the visual presence of WTS
support structures, including, but not limited to screening by mature trees (75
percent or more of the pole beneath the tree canopy), mimicking common features
of the urban landscape (light poles, church steeples, trees, etc.), painting
antennas to match the color of supporting building walls, or roof mounting
behind parapets.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.567   Story above grade plane.
Story above grade plane means any story having its finished floor surface
entirely above grade plane, except that a basement shall be considered as a
story above grade plane where the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is either (1) more than 6 feet above grade plane, or (2) more than 12
feet above the finished ground level at any point. (Ord 1296, 2008)
16.04.570   Street.
Street means the entire width between the right-of-way line of every way which
provides for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
and the placement of utilities and including the terms road, highway, lane,
place, avenue,  alley, or other similar designations.
   A.   Alley means a narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on another
street.
   B.   Arterial means a street of considerable continuity which is primarily a
traffic artery for intercommunication between large areas.
   C.   Collector means a street supplementary to the arterial street system
and a means of intercommunication between this system and smaller areas used to
some extent for through traffic and to some extent for access to abutting
properties.
   D.   Neighborhood connector means a street supplementary to the collector
street system providing local access to adjacent properties as well as movement
into or out of a neighborhood or between neighborhoods.
   E.   Cul-de-sac (dead-end street) means a short street having one end open
to traffic and being terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
   F.   Half-street means a portion of the width of a street, usually along the
edge of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be
provided in another subdivision.
   G.   Marginal access or frontage street means a minor street parallel and
adjacent to a major arterial street providing access to abutting properties,
but protected from through traffic.
   H.   Minor street means a street intended exclusively for access to abutting
properties. (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984; Ord. 1043 section 3,
2000)
   I.   Green street means a street that has been designed to integrate a
system of stormwater management within its right of way.  Green streets are
intended to reduce the amount of runoff that is piped directly to the city
stormwater system and/or streams and rivers.  Green streets make the best use
of the street tree canopy and natural filtration and drainage systems for
stormwater interception and provide temperature mitigation and air quality
improvements. (Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.04.580   Structural alteration.
Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a
structure, including the supporting parts of foundations, bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams, girders, or the roof.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)
[part], 1984)
16.04.590   Structure.
Structure means that which is built or constructed.  Structure means an edifice
or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed
of parts joined in some manner and which requires a location on the ground. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.595   Stub-out (or stub street).
Stub-out (or stub street) means a portion of a street or cross access drive
used as an extension to an abutting property that may be developed in the
future. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.04.600   Subdivide land.
Subdivide land means to divide a parcel of land into four or more lots in a
given calendar year for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development, whether immediate or future, when such parcel exists as a unit or
contiguous units under a single ownership.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B)
[part], 1984)
16.04.610   Subdivision.
Subdivision means either an act of subdividing land or tract of land subdivided
as defined in this chapter.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part), 1984)
16.04.615   Traffic Impact Analysis.
Traffic Impact Analysis A comprehensive traffic analysis of a development
proposal which includes trip generation, analysis of access/egress, accident
analysis, intersection analysis, and traffic flow analysis. (Ord. 1019 section
22, 1999)
16.04.620   Trailer coach.
Trailer coach means a trailer or motor home not certified as meeting the HUD
1976 standards or as may be amended for design and construction of a mobile
home.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.630   Trailer park.
Trailer park means a tax lot or lots where space is rented or leased for the
location of two or more trailer coaches, or some combination of mobile homes
and trailer coaches for human habitation.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part],
1984)
16.04.635   Trip generation study.
Trip Generation Study means an analysis of the number of vehicle trips
generated by a development proposal. Trip generation for commercial/industrial/
residential/ institutional projects are estimated through the Institute of
Transportation Engineers? manual. The results of the trip generation study will
determine the need for a Traffic Impact Analysis. If the trip generation study
determines the use will generate more than 100 vehicle trips per day, the City
Traffic Engineer may require a Traffic Impact Analysis. (Ord. 1019 section 23,
1999)
16.04.640   Urban Growth Boundary (UGB)
Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) means the area specifically delineated in the
city's comprehensive plan as being already urbanized or available for urban
development. (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.650   Urbanizable.
Urbanizable is the term applied to property which is within the city's Urban
Growth Boundary and which is planned for eventual urban development.  (Ord. 740
section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.660   Use.
Use means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or
for which it is occupied or maintained.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20 (B) [part],
1984)
16.04.666   Vicinity.
Vicinity means nearby; within the same neighborhood.  It should be noted that
in applying the criteria of this chapter, the term vicinity will be applied to
a larger area when warranted by a large project or a project which is expected
to have an impact on a large area.  (Ord. 805 section 1, 1987)
16.04.670   Vision clearance area.
Vision clearance area means the triangle area at the intersection of two
streets, a driveway and a street, or a street and a railroad, two sides of
which are measured from the corner intersection of the existing or proposed
curb lines to a distance specified in this title.  The third side of the
triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other
two sides.  Where the curb lines at intersections have rounded corners, the
curb lines will be extended in a straight line to their points of
intersection.  No plantings, structures, or temporary or permanent obstructions
shall be located within a vision clearance area, extending from two and one-
half to ten feet above the curb or street elevation.  Except, however, that one
tree trunk not greater than eighteen inches in diameter shall be permitted
within a vision clearance area.  (Ord. 830 section 3, 1989; Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.671   Walkway.
Walkway means a hard-surfaced area intended and suitable for pedestrians,
including sidewalks and the surfaced portions of accessways. (Ord. 1043 section
3, 2000)
16.04.672   Wireless telecommunications facilities.
The site, structures, equipment and appurtenances used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer wireless telecommunications services.  This
includes, but is not limited to antennas, poles, towers, cables, wires,
conduits, ducts, pedestals, vaults, buildings, electronics and switching
equipment.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.676   Wireless telecommunications systems (WTS).
The sending and receiving of radio frequency transmissions and the connection
and/or relaying of these signals to land lines and other sending and receiving
stations (cell sites), and including cellular radiotelephone, personal
communications services, enhanced/specialized mobile radio, and commercial
paging services.  (Ord. 981 section 17, 1997)
16.04.680   Yard.
Yard means an open space on a lot which is unobstructed from a point two and
one-half feet above the general ground level of the graded lot upward, except
as otherwise provided in this title.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part),
1984)
16.04.690   Yard, interior.
Interior yard means a yard lying between the nearest point of a building and
measured horizontally to an interior lot line.  (Ord. 1296; 2008; Ord. 740
section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.700   Yard, rear.
Rear yard means a yard lying to the rear of the principal building on the lot
and generally opposite the lot front.  (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20 (B) [part],
1984)
16.04.710   Yard, street.
Street yard means a yard lying between the nearest point of a building and the
street and measured horizontally to the street lot line.  (Ord. 740 section
10.1.20(B) [part], 1984)
16.04.715   Zero-lot line development.
Zero-lot line development means detached dwellings required to have a side yard
setback on only one side.  (Ord. 1111 section 4, 2003)
Chapter 16.05
INTERPRETATIONS
Sections:
   
16.05.010   Purpose.
   
16.05.020   Procedure.
16.05.010   Purpose.
Some terms and phrases within this Title may have two or more reasonable
meanings.  This section provides a process for resolving differences in the
interpretation of the text.
(Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.05.020   Procedure.
   A.   Requests. A request for a code interpretation shall be made to the
Planning Director.
   B.   Decision to Issue Interpretation.  Generally, the Planning Director
and/or the Planning Commission are authorized to make interpretations and/or
determinations that specific standards of this Ordinance are not applicable
and/or are impractical when applied to certain proposals.
      For more complex interpretations, i.e interpretations that are
discretionary and that do not have objective approval criteria, the Planning
Director shall advise the applicant and any other person who requested a
written copy of the decision within 14 days after the request is made. Basis
for declining may include, but is not limited to, a finding that the subject
code section affords only one reasonable interpretation. The Planning
Director’s decision to issue or not issue an interpretation is final when the
decision is mailed to the party requesting the interpretation.  The decision
shall become effective 10 days after delivery/mailing, unless an appeal is
filed. Any such appeal shall be processed as described in Chapter 16.89.
   C.   Public Notice. For more complex interpretations, i.e interpretations
that are discretionary and that do not have objective approval criteria, notice
of the Planning Director’s decision shall be sent to all property owners and
residents within 200 feet of the subject property. (Ord. 1237, 2007)
   D.   Interpretations On File.  For more complex interpretations, the
Planning Director shall keep all code interpretations on file. (Ord. 1080,
2001)
Division II. – PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 16.06
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:
   
16.06.010   Purpose.
   
16.06.020   Membership.
   
16.06.030   Appointment and removal.
   
16.06.040   Nonvoting participants.
   
16.06.050   Term of office.
   
16.06.060   Limitation on business engagements.
   
16.06.070   Election of chairman – appointment of secretary.
   
16.06.080   Compensation.
   
16.06.090   Employment of assistants.
   
16.06.100   Meeting place.
   
16.06.110   Meeting and quorum.
   
16.06.120   Duties.
   
16.06.130   Recommendations to City Council - Appeals.
   
16.06.140   Investigations and recommendations concerning buildings.
   
16.06.150   Powers.
   
16.06.160   Conflict of interest.
   
16.06.170   Hearings officer.
   
16.06.180   Expenditures.
16.06.010   Purpose.
The city has had an active Planning Commission since 1954.  The Planning
Commission sits as both a hearing body for land development applications and as
a recommending body, giving advice to the City Council on a variety of subjects
relating to the growth and development of the Canby area.  (Ord. 740 section
10.2.05, 1984; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.06.020   Membership.
The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members.  (Ord. 740 section
10.2.10, 1984; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.06.030   Appointment and removal.
Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council upon
a recommendation of the Mayor, Council Liaison to the Planning Commission, and
Planning Commission Chairperson, Members of the Planning Commission may be
removed by the City Council, after hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of
duty.  Any vacancy shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term of the
predecessor in the office.  (Ord. 740 section 10.2.15, 1984; Ord 1329, 2010)
16.06.040   Nonvoting participants.
The City Attorney shall be entitled to sit with the commission and take part in
its discussions, but shall not have the right to vote.  City staff persons
shall also attend to assist the commission in the conduct of its business. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.2.20, 1984)
16.06.050   Term of office.
All members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed to three-year terms,
unless appointed to fill the remainder of an unexpired term.  (Ord. 740 section
10.2.25, 1984; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.06.060   Limitation on business engagements.
Not more than two members shall be engaged principally in the buying, selling
or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any
partnership or officers or employees of any corporation engaged principally in
the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit.  Not more than two
members shall be engaged in the same kind of business, trade or profession. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.2.30, 1984)
16.06.070   Election of chairman – appointment of secretary.
The Planning Commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman who shall be
voting members, and the commission shall appoint a secretary who need not be a
member of the commission.  (Ord. 740 section 10.2.35, 1984)
16.06.080   Compensation.
Commission members shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for
duly authorized expenses.  (Ord. 740 section 10.2.40, 1984)
16.06.090   Employment of assistants.
The Planning Commission shall have power and authority to employ consulting
advice on municipal problems, and such clerks as may be necessary, and to pay
for their services and for such other expenses as may lawfully be incurred, but
all compensation and expenses authorized by this chapter shall be paid out of
such funds which are first budgeted by the City Council and placed at the
disposal of the Planning Commission for such purposes.  (Ord. 740 section
10.2.45, 1984)
16.06.100   Meeting place.
The City Council shall assign to the commission an office or locations in which
to hold its meetings, transact its business and keep its records.  (Ord. 740
section 10.2.50, 1984)
16.06.110   Meeting and quorum.
The commission shall meet at least once a month when applications are pending
and may make and alter rules and regulations for its government and procedure
consistent with the laws of this state and with the city charter and
ordinances.  A majority of the members of the commission constitutes a quorum. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.2.55, 1984)
16.06.120   Duties.
Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be the duty of the commission and
it shall have power to:
   A.   Recommend and make suggestions to the City Council and to all other
public authorities concerning laying out, widening, extending, and locating of
streets, parking, sidewalks and boulevards, relief of traffic congestion,
betterment of housing and sanitation conditions and establishing of zones of
districts limiting the use, height, area and bulk of buildings and structures;
   B.   Recommend to the City Council and all other public authorities plans
for regulation of the future growth, development and beautification of the
municipality in respect to its public and private buildings and works, streets,
parks, grounds and vacant lots, and plans consistent with future growth and
development of the city in order to secure to the city and its inhabitants
sanitation, proper service of all public utilities, and transportation
facilities;
   C.   Act as the city's official citizen involvement entity, hearing any and
all comments, criticisms, and suggestions concerning city planning policies,
procedures, or regulations as members of the public may wish to convey to the
city;
   D.   Do and perform all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry
out the provisions of city ordinances and of Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter
227, and all amendments thereto;
   E.   Study and propose in general such measures as may be advisable for
promotion of the public interest, health, safety and welfare of the city and of
the surrounding area;
   F.   Perform such acts as are now, or may hereafter be, specified in the
Land Development and Planning Ordinance or otherwise authorized by the City
Council.  Ord. 740 section 10.2.60, 1984)
16.06.130   Recommendations to City Council - Appeals.
   A.Any actions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council, provided that any such appeals must be properly filed as required in
Division VIII.
   B.All recommendations made to the City Council by the Planning Commission
shall be in writing, except in those unique cases where the two bodies meet
together or where an emergency exists.
   C.The City Council shall not act upon any item requiring the action or
recommendation of the Planning Commission until the Planning Commission has had
ample time to consider the item; except in the case of an emergency situation
where the City Council finds that prompt action is necessitated to preserve the
public health, safety, or general welfare.  (Ord. 740 section 10.2.65, 1984)
16.06.140   Investigations and recommendations concerning buildings.
   The City Planning Commission may make investigations and recommendations to
any person, partnership, firm, corporation or public authority with reference
to the location of buildings, structures, or works to be erected, constructed
or altered; but such recommendations shall not have the force or effect of a
law or ordinance except when so prescribed by the laws of the state or
ordinances of the city.  Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or public
authority having charge of the construction, placing or designing of buildings
or other structures and improvements in the city, may call upon the Planning
Commission for information; provided, however, that the Planning Commission
shall take no action which will prejudice the body in the consideration of any
pending or anticipated application.  (Ord. 740 section 10.2.70, 1984)
16.06.150   Powers.
The City Planning Commission shall have all the powers which are now or may
hereafter be given to it under the general laws of the state; and it may
receive gifts, bequests or devises of property to carry out any of the purposes
of this act, and shall have control and disposition over the same, unless this
title or this provision of this title should be repealed, in which case such
control shall be vested in the City Council or in a hearings officer as may be
appointed for the purpose.  (Ord. 740 section 10.2.75, 1984)
16.06.160   Conflict of interest.
   A.   A member of the Planning Commission shall not participate in any
commission proceeding or action in which any of the following has a direct or
substantial financial interest:
      1.   The member or his spouse;
      2.   A brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law or mother-in-law;
      3.   Any employee, partner, or business associate with whom he has been
engaged in business within the previous two years, or any business with which
he is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning
prospective partnership or employment.
   B.   Any actual or potential conflict of interest shall be disclosed at the
meeting of the commission where the action is being taken.  (Ord. 740 section
10.2.80, 1984)
16.06.170   Hearings officer.
The City Council may appoint or designate one or more qualified persons as
planning and zoning hearings officer, to serve at the pleasure of the City
Council.  (Ord. 740 section 10.2.85, 1984)
16.06.180   Expenditures.
The City Planning Commission shall have no authority to make any expenditures
on behalf of the city, or to obligate the city for the payment of any sums of
money except as herein provided, and then only after the City Council has first
authorized such expenditures for said purpose by adoption of a budget including
a line item for such expenditures, and placed the same at the disposal of the
Planning Commission, or has otherwise adopted a resolution to provide the
administrative method by which the said funds shall be drawn and expended. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.2.90, 1984)
Division III. – ZONING
Chapter 16.08
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
16.08.010   Compliance with title.
   
16.08.020   Zoning map.
   
16.08.030   Zone boundaries.
   
16.08.040   Zoning of annexed areas.
   
16.08.050   Prohibited parking.
   
16.08.070   Illegally created lots.
   
16.08.080   Area and yard reductions.
   
16.08.090   Sidewalks required.
   
16.08.100   Height allowances.
   
16.08.110   Fences.
   
16.08.115   Arbors
   
16.08.120   Siting and review process for Wireless Telecommunications Systems
Facilities.
   
16.08.130   Standard transportation improvements.
   
16.08.140   Temporary vendor.
   
16.08.150   Traffic Impact Study (TIS).
   
16.08.160   Safety and Functionality Standards
16.08.010   Compliance with title.
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
building, structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered contrary to the provisions of this
title.  No lot area, yard, or required off-street parking or loading area
existing on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title
shall be reduced in area, dimension, or size below the minimums required by
this title, nor shall any lot area, yard, or required off-street parking or
loading area that is required by this title for one use be used to satisfy the
lot area, yard, off-street parking or loading area requirement for any other
use, except as may be provided in this title.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(A),
1984)
16.08.020   Zoning map.
   A.   The location and boundaries of the zones designated in this division
are established as shown on the map entitled “Zoning Map of the City of Canby”
dated with the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title and
signed by the Mayor and the city recorder and hereafter referred to as the
zoning map.
   B.   The signed copy of the zoning map shall be maintained on file in the
office of the city recorder and is made a part of this title.  (Ord. 740
section 10.3.05(B), 1984)
16.08.030   Zone boundaries.
Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are lot lines or the centerline of
streets, railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended.  Where a zone boundary
divides a lot into two or more zones, the entire lot shall be considered to be
in the zone containing the greater lot area, provided the boundary adjustment
is a distance of less than twenty feet. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(C), (1984)
16.08.040   Zoning of annexed areas.
Zoning of newly annexed areas shall be considered by the Planning Commission in
its review and by the Council in conducting its public hearing for the
annexation.    (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(D), 1984)(Ord. 1294, 2008)
16.08.050   Prohibited parking.
In addition to the provisions of the motor vehicle laws of Oregon regulating
parking, no person shall park any vehicle, except an automobile, motorcycle,
van or pickup truck rated no larger than one ton, on any public street or alley
within any residential zone, except for an emergency or for the purpose of
loading or unloading.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(E), 1984)
16.08.060
(Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(F), 1984; renumbered as 16.64.040(I)(6) by Ord. 1043
section 3, 2000)
16.08.070   Illegally created lots.
In no case shall a lot which has been created in violation of state statute or
city ordinance be considered as a lot of record for development purposes, until
such violation has been legally remedied.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(G), 1984)
16.08.080   Area and yard reductions.
   A.   When there are existing dwellings on the lots situated immediately to
each side of a given lot and each of those neighboring lots has less than the
required street yard depth, the street yard of the subject property may be
reduced to the average street yard of those two abutting lots. 
   B.   When there is an existing dwelling situated on a lot immediately to
either side of a given lot which fronts on the same street, and such existing
dwelling has a street yard which is less than half of that required in the
zone, the street yard of the subject property may be reduced to a depth which
is halfway between that normally required in the zone and that of the existing
dwelling on the neighboring lot. 
   C.   If, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, a
lot or the aggregate of contiguous lots held in a single ownership has less
than the required area or width, the lot or lots may be occupied by a permitted
use subject to the other requirements of the zone; provided that if the
deficiency is one of area, residential uses shall be limited to single-family
dwellings; and further provided that if the deficiency is one of width, each
required interior yard may be reduced by one foot for each four feet of
deficient width.  In no case, however, shall such reduction result in an
interior yard of less than five feet.
   D.   Where two or more contiguous substandard recorded lots are in common
ownership and are of such size to constitute at least one conforming zoning
lot, such lots or portions thereof shall be so joined, developed, and used for
the purpose of forming an effective and conforming lot or lots.  Such
contiguous substandard lots in common ownership shall be considered as being
maintained in common ownership after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this title for zoning purposes.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(H),
1984; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.08.090   Sidewalks required.
   A.   In all commercially zoned areas, the construction of sidewalks and
curbs (with appropriate ramps for the handicapped on each corner lot) shall be
required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for new
construction or substantial remodeling, where such work is estimated to exceed
a valuation of twenty thousand dollars, as determined by the building code. 
Where multiple permits are issued for construction on the same site, this
requirement shall be imposed when the total valuation exceeds twenty thousand
dollars in any calendar year.
   B.   The Planning Commission may impose appropriate sidewalk and curbing
requirements as a condition of approving any discretionary application it
reviews.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(I), 1984)
16.08.100   Height allowances.
The following types of structures or structural posts are not subject to the
building height limitations:  chimneys, cupolas, tanks, church spires,
belfries, derricks, fire and hose towers, flagpoles, water tanks, elevators,
windmills, utility poles and other similar projections.  The height of wireless
telecommunications systems facilities shall be in accordance with section
16.08.120.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(J), 1984; Ord. 981 section 18, 1997)
16.08.110   Fences.
   A.   Fences not more than three and one-half feet in height may be
constructed within the street setbacks of any R-1, R-1.5, R-2 or C-1 zone. 
Fences not more than six feet in height may be constructed in any interior
yard, rear yard, or street yard along an alley; provided, however, that in no
case shall a fence be constructed in violation of the requirements of a vision
clearance area. 
   B.   On corner lots, the 3.5-foot height limit will apply within the
required setback along both street-facing yards.
   C.   No more than one row of fencing is allowed within a required street
yard setback.
   D.   The Planning Commission may require sight-blocking or noise mitigating
fences for any development it reviews.
   E.   Fences of up to eight feet in height are permitted for any development
in C-2, C-M, M-1 or M-2, or Planned Unit Development zones.
   F.   No fence/wall shall be constructed throughout a subdivision, planned
unit development or be part of a project that is/was subject to site and design
review approval where the effect or purpose is to wall said project off from
the rest of the community unless reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 890 section 8, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(K), 1984; Ord.
955 section 2, 1996; Ord. 981 section 43, 1997)
   G.   In all zones, private fences along a public pedestrian/bicycle pathway
shall comply with the following in order to provide security and visibility for
pathway users while maintaining privacy for the residence. 
      1.   Fencing installed as part of a new subdivision shall comply with
either (a) or (b) below.
      2.   Fencing installed by a property owner on an individual lot shall
comply with either (a), (b), or (c) below.
         a.   Solid fencing shall be no greater than four (4) feet in height;
or
         b.   Fencing shall be constructed with black open wire material,
wooden slats, or some other material that allows visual access between he
pathway and adjacent uses; or
         c.   Solid fencing shall be set back at least three (3) feet from the
property line that abuts the pathway. 
   H.   Use of hazardous materials.
      Fences and walls shall not be constructed of or contain any material
which will do bodily harm, such as electric or barbed wire, razor wire, broken
glass, spikes, or any other hazardous or dangerous material, except as follows:
         a.   Barbed wire or electrified fences enclosing livestock are
permitted in any zone permitting farm use. Electrified fences shall be posted
or flagged at not less than 25-foot intervals with clearly visible warnings of
the hazard when adjacent to developed areas.
         b.   In commercial and industrial zones barbed wire is permitted
attached to the top of a fence that is at least six foot in height above grade;
provided, that barbed wire shall not extend over a street, sidewalk, alley or
roadway. The attached barbed wire shall be placed at least six inches above the
top of the fence.(Ord. 890 section 8, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(K), 1984;
Ord. 955 section 2, 1996; Ord. 981 section 43, 1997; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord.
1514, 2019)
16.08.115   Arbors
   A.   Arbors that are constructed of proper design (height and setbacks) and
in accordance with, the design standards of the particular zone where it is
located are allowed with the following limitations:
      1.   Arbors shall be stand-alone structures and shall not be attached to
a fence.
      2.   The arbor shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall maintain a
five foot setback from the property line.
      3.   If the vegetation becomes too full or too high, the owner is
financially responsible to rectify the situation, and to maintain the
vegetation, and arbor;
      4.   The primary purpose of the arbor is to support and sustain foliage/
vegetation, provide shade, recreational space, and ascetic amenity. (Ord. 1514,
2019)
16.08.120   Siting and review process for Wireless Telecommunications Systems
Facilities.
   A.   The purpose of this section is to provide standards and review process
for wireless telecommunications systems facilities locating within the City of
Canby.  This purpose shall be realized by implementing new provisions of the
Canby Land Development and Planning Ordinance that will:
      1.   Regulate the placement, appearance and number of wireless
telecommunications systems facilities;
      2.   Ensure that the citizens of Canby will have access to a variety of
wireless telecommunications systems and providers;
      3.   Reduce the visual impact of certain wireless telecommunications
systems facilities by encouraging collocation;
      4.   Establish a graduated system of review that will expedite facilities
placement in preferred locations; and
      5.   Implement the applicable provision of the Federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996.
   B.   The siting and review process for WTS facilities is based on the type
of facility (lattice, monopole, attached, stealth design or collocation) and
its proposed location in a Preferred Site (M-1 or M-2 zoning districts),
Acceptable Site (C-2 or C-M zoning districts), or Conditionally Suitable Site
(C-R, C-C or C-1 zoning districts).
   C.   The development review process for wireless telecommunications systems
(WTS) facilities shall be as follows:
      1.   Building and Electrical Permits only:
         a.   An attached WTS facility (existing structure, including
collocation on cell tower), including equipment shelters, buildings and
cabinets housing WTS land line switching/connection equipment, on a Preferred
Site or Acceptable Site, where the height of the attached WTS facility is no
more than 10 feet higher than the existing structure.
         b.   A detached WTS facility (monopole), including equipment shelters,
buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/connection equipment, on
a Preferred Site, set back at least 660 feet from Highway 99E or land either
planned or zoned for residential use, and less than 150 feet in height,
including antennas.
         c.   A detached, stealth design WTS facility (monopole), including
equipment shelters, buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/
connection equipment, on an Acceptable Site, set back from all property lines a
distance equal to or greater than the height of the tower, and less than 60
feet high.
      2.   Building and Electrical Permits, and Site and Design Review (16.49):
         a.   An attached WTS facility (existing structure, including
collocation on cell tower), including equipment shelters, buildings and
cabinets housing WTS land line switching/connection equipment, on a Preferred
Site or Acceptable Site, where the height of the attached WTS facility is more
than 10 feet higher than the existing structure.
         b.   A detached WTS facility (monopole), including equipment shelters,
buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/connection equipment, on
a Preferred Site, set back at least 660 feet from Highway 99E or land either
planned or zoned for residential use, and equal to or over 150 feet in height,
including antennas.
         c.   A detached WTS facility (monopole), including equipment shelters,
buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/connection equipment, on
a Preferred Site, within 660 feet from Highway 99E or land either planned or
zoned for residential use, and under 100 feet in height, including antennas.
         d.   A detached WTS facility (lattice tower), including equipment
shelters, buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/connection
equipment, on a Preferred Site, set back at least 660 feet from Highway 99E or
land either planned or zoned for residential use, and under 150 feet in height,
including antennas.
         e.   A detached, stealth design WTS facility (monopole), including
equipment shelters, buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/
connection equipment, on an Acceptable Site, set back from all property lines a
distance equal to or greater than the height of the tower, and less than 100
feet high, including antennas.
      1.   Building and Electrical Permits, Site and Design Review (16.49), and
Conditional Use Permit (16.50):
         a.   A detached WTS facility (monopole), including equipment shelters,
buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/connection equipment, on
a Preferred Site, within 660 feet from Highway 99E or land either planned or
zoned for residential use, and equal to or over 100 feet in height, including
antennas.
         b.   A detached WTS facility (lattice tower), including equipment
shelters, buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/connection
equipment, on a Preferred Site, set back at least 660 feet from Highway 99E or
land either planned or zoned for residential use, and equal to or over 150 feet
in height, including antennas.
         c.   A detached, stealth design WTS facility (monopole), including
equipment shelters, buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/
connection equipment, on an Acceptable Site, set back from all property lines a
distance equal to or greater than the height of the tower, including, unless it
is demonstrated that locating the proposed facility within the required setback
area will take advantage of an existing natural or artificial feature to
conceal the facility or minimize its visual impacts, and equal to or over 100
feet high, with a maximum height of 130 feet.
         d.   An attached WTS facility (existing structure, including
collocation on cell tower) on a Conditionally Suitable Site, including
equipment shelters, buildings and cabinets housing WTS land line switching/
connection equipment, where the height of the attached WTS facility is no more
than 10 feet higher than the existing structure.
   D.   Standards for siting WTS facilities shall be as follows:
      1.   Site and Design Review standards and criteria (section 16.49.040)
shall apply to all WTS facilities requiring Site and Design approval.
      2.   Conditional Use Permit standards and criteria (section 16.50.010)
shall apply to all WTS facilities requiring Conditional Use Permit approval.
      3.   All WTS facilities shall observe minimum lot size, lot coverage,
building height and building setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district unless specifically exempted or otherwise regulated by this section. 
Underground facilities may encroach upon required yards or may be placed in
appropriate easements.
      4.   All detached WTS facilities shall be landscaped at the base of the
towers/poles, and completely around the equipment shelters.  The landscaping
shall conform to the ODOT standards for plant size and spacing.
      5.   Lighting for all WTS facilities shall be as required by the FAA or
recommended by ODOT Aeronautics Division.  All other lighting must be deflected
away from adjoining property.
      6.   All detached WTS facilities shall be screened from the public right-
of-way and abutting property by a security fence or wall at least 6 feet in
height consisting of chain link fencing with vinyl slats, solid wood fencing,
concrete masonry unit block, or brick.
      7.   Attached WTS facilities shall be painted to match the color of the
mechanical screen wall or building to which it is attached.
      8.   Equipment shelters, buildings and cabinets housing radio electronics
equipment shall be concealed, camouflaged or placed underground.
      9.   Any WTS facility sited on or designed with any of the following
attributes shall first receive FCC approval, as specified in FCC Rules 1.1301 -
1.1319, as a condition of city approval prior to construction; Wilderness Area;
Wildlife Preserve; Endangered Species; Historical Site; Indian Religious Site;
Flood Plain; Wetlands; High Intensity White lights in residential
neighborhoods; Excessive radio frequency radiation exposure.
   E.   Application requirements for WTS facilities shall be as follows:
      1.   WTS providers whose proposals conforms with the provisions of
subsection (C)(1) of this section (16.08.120) shall submit the following
information with the application for permits:
         a.   A copy of that portion of the lease agreement (or lease memo)
with the property owner, facility removal within 90 days of the abandonment and
a bond to guarantee removal shall be submitted for review prior to development
permit approval.
         b.   A map of the city showing the approximate geographic limits of
the cell to be created by the facility.  This map shall include the same
information for all other facilities owned or operated by the applicant within
the city, or extending within the city from a distant location, and any
existing detached WTS facilities of another provider within 1,000 feet of the
proposed site.
         c.   A plot plan showing:
            i.   The lease area;
            ii.   Antenna structure;
            iii.   Height above grade and setback from property lines;
            iv.   Equipment shelters and setback from property lines;
            v.   Access;
            vi.   Connection point with land line system; and
            vii.   All landscape areas associated with the WTS facility.
         d.   Anticipated capacity of the WTS facility (including number and
types of antennas which can be accommodated).
         e.   The method(s) of stealth design (where applicable).
         f.   An engineer’s statement that the radio frequency emissions at
grade, or at the nearest habitable space when attached to an existing structure
comply with FCC rules for such emissions; the cumulative radio frequency
emissions if collocated.
         g.   The radio frequency range in megahertz and the wattage output of
the equipment.
         h.   A description of the type of service offered (voice, data, video,
etc.) and the consumer receiving equipment.
         i.   Identification of the provider and backhaul provider, if
different.
         j.   A facilities maintenance regimen.
         k.   The zoning and comprehensive plan designation of the proposed
site.
         l.   The FAA determination.
         m.   The distance from the nearest WTS facility.
      2.   WTS providers whose proposals conforms with the provisions of
subsection (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section (16.08.120) shall submit, in
addition to the requirements of 16.49.035 and/or 16.50.020 of the Land
Development and Planning Ordinance, the following additional information:
         a.   Items in section (E) above.
         b.   Alternatives for locating/relocating support structures within
250 feet of the proposed site.
         c.   Photo simulations of the proposed WTS facility from the four
cardinal compass points and/or abutting right-of-way, whichever provides the
most accurate representation of the proposed facility from a variety of vantage
points.
         d.   An engineer’s statement demonstrating the reasons why the WTS
facility must be located at the proposed site (service demands, topography,
dropped coverage, etc.).
         e.   An engineer’s statement demonstrating the reasons why the WTS
facility must be constructed at the proposed height.
         f.   Verification of good faith efforts made to locate or design the
proposed WTS facility to qualify for a less rigorous approval process (building
permit and/or building permit and site and design review approval).
   F.   Private amateur radio (HAM) antennas, their support structures, and
direct to home satellite receiving antennas are exempt from this section
(16.08.120), but shall otherwise comply with the applicable provisions of the
underlying zoning district in which they are located to the extent that such
provisions comply with Federal Communications Commission policy.  (Ord. 981
section 19, 1997)
16.08.130   Standard transportation improvements.
   A.   Pursuant to the Transportation Planning Rule, projects that are
specifically identified in the Canby Transportation System Plan, for which the
City has made all the required land use and goal compliance findings, are
permitted outright and subject only to the standards established by the
Transportation System Plan. This section pertains to additional transportation
projects that may not be identified in the Canby Transportation System Plan,
and whether the use is permitted outright or permitted subject to the issuance
of a conditional use permit.
      1.   Except where otherwise specifically regulated by this ordinance, the
following improvements are permitted outright:
            i.   Normal operation, maintenance, repair, and preservation of
existing transportation facilities.
            ii.   installation of culverts, pathways, medians, fencing,
guardrails, lighting, and similar types of improvements within the existing
right-of-way.
            iii.   Projects specifically identified in the Transportation
System Plan as not requiring further land use regulation.
            iv.   Landscaping as part of a transportation facility.
            v.   Emergency measures necessary for safety and the protection of
property.
            vi.   Acquisition of right-of-way for public roads, highways, and
other transportation improvements designated in the Transportation System Plan,
except for those that are located in exclusive farm use or forest zones.
            vii.   Construction of a local street or road as part of
subdivision or land partition approved consistent with this Ordinance.
      2.   Except where otherwise specifically regulated by this ordinance, the
following improvements are permitted as a conditional use:
         a.   Construction, reconstruction, or widening, and other projects
authorized by the Transportation System Plan but not included in the list of
projects in the Transportation System Plan. These projects shall comply with
the Transportation System Plan and applicable standards, and shall address the
following criteria. For State projects that require an Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS) or Environmental Assessment (EA), the draft EIS or EA shall be
reviewed and used as the basis for findings to comply with the following
criteria:
            i.   The project is designed to be compatible with existing land
use and social patterns, including noise generation, safety, and zoning.
            ii.   The project is designed to minimize avoidable environmental
impacts to identified wetlands, wildlife habitat, air and water quality,
cultural resources, and scenic qualities.
            iii.   The project preserves or improves the safety and function of
the facility through access management, traffic calming, or other design
features.
            iv.   The project includes provision for bicycle and pedestrian
circulation as consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and other requirements of
this ordinance.
         b.   If review under this section indicates that the use or activity
is not clearly authorized by the Transportation System Plan or this ordinance,
a plan amendment shall be undertaken prior to or in conjunction with the
conditional use permit review. (Ord. 1043 Section 3, 2000)
16.08.140   Temporary vendor.
Any person who exhibits goods or services for sale or for offer in a temporary
manner on private property, from a vehicle, trailer, tent, canopy, shipping
container, or other temporary structure, or from one’s person or displayed on
the ground or off the ground, shall first obtain permit approval in compliance
with the following standards, and shall operate in compliance with this section
and with all other applicable sections of the Canby Municipal Code. 
   A.   Exemptions.  The following temporary activities do not require a
Temporary Vendor permit, and are exempt from the standards in this section:
      1.   Any person engaged in the mere delivery of any goods or services to
a site, which were purchased from a regular place of business inside or outside
the city;
      2.   Any person engaged in delivery, exhibition, sale or offering of food
on a site for a period of time not to exceed 2 hours during any 24 hour period;
      3.   Any contractor who is engaged in constructing, maintaining, or
repairing a structure, utility, equipment, or landscaping on a site; or
      4.   Any person conducting a garage sale per Section
5.04.020.
   B.   Permit process. 
      1.   A request for a Temporary Vendor permit shall be processed as a Type
I decision pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 16.89.  A Temporary
Vendor permit applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed activity meets all
fire and life safety codes, and is in compliance with this section and with all
other applicable sections of the Canby Municipal Code.
      2.   An application for a Temporary Vendor permit shall include a site
plan drawn to scale, which includes all existing lot lines, setbacks,
structures, landscaped areas, paved areas, and parking and loading spaces; and
illustrates the proposed location and layout of all the Temporary Vendor’s
structures, equipment, furnishings, signage, and inventory.
      3.   The Temporary Vendor activity (e.g., retail, restaurant, etc) shall
be an outright permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located; Or
if the use is conditionally permitted in the zoning district, a Conditional Use
Permit approval shall be required prior to issuance of a Temporary Vendor
permit.
      4.   A “Site and Design Review” permit is not required for a permitted
Temporary Vendor.
      5.   Any signage displayed by the Temporary Vendor must be in compliance
with Chapter 16.42 sign standards, and all required Sign permits must be
obtained.
      6.   A Temporary Vendor must obtain a City of Canby business license.
   C.   Duration. A Temporary Vendor permit may be granted for a site for up to
90 consecutive calendar days, and then may be renewed twice upon request for an
additional 90 days, provided that the temporary vendor activity has been
conducted in compliance with all applicable codes, and no public safety
incidents have occurred on the site related to the temporary vendor activity. 
In no case shall a site be permitted to host Temporary Vendor activity for more
than 270 days in any 12 month period.
   D.   A Temporary Vendor shall be located on a paved surface with adequate
vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress, in compliance with Section
16.10.070.  Inventory and equipment shall not be displayed or stored in any
landscaped areas.
   E.   A Temporary Vendor shall comply with all required development
standards, such as height limitations, setbacks, vision clearance areas, and
applicable conditions of any previous land use decisions for the site.
   F.   Equipment such as trash cans, fuel tanks, or generators shall be
screened such that it is not visible from any abutting public right-of-way.
   G.   A Temporary Vendor shall not displace any vehicle parking spaces that
are required to meet the minimum off-street parking requirements of another use
on site or on a nearby site.  A Temporary Vendor shall not encroach into
required loading space areas, driveways, or vehicle maneuvering areas.
   H.   A Temporary Vendor that displaces one or more vehicle parking spaces is
prohibited for any site that:
      C.   Is non-conforming in terms of meeting minimum required vehicle
parking or loading space requirements; or
      C.   Has been granted a vehicle parking exception, and currently has less
than the required minimum number of off-street vehicle parking spaces.
   I.   The property owner and the temporary vendor permit holder shall be
jointly and severally responsible for any violation of this section or other
applicable sections of the Canby Municipal Code.  Any such violation may result
in the immediate revocation or non-renewal of a temporary vendor permit, and
may result in the denial of any future temporary vendor permit for the site
upon which the violation occurred. (Ord 1315, 2009)
16.08.150   Traffic Impact Study (TIS).
   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of this section of the code is to implement
Section 660-012-0045(2)(b) of the State Transportation Planning Rule, which
requires the city to adopt a process to apply conditions to development
proposals in order to minimize adverse impacts to and protect transportation
facilities.  This section establishes the standards to determine when a
proposal must be reviewed for potential traffic impacts; when a Traffic Impact
Study must be submitted with a development application in order to determine
whether conditions are needed to minimize impacts to and protect transportation
facilities:  what information must be included in a Traffic Impact Study; and
who is qualified to prepare the Study.
   B.   Initial scoping.  During the pre-application conference, the city will
review existing transportation data to determine whether a proposed development
will have impacts on the transportation system.  It is the responsibility of
the applicant to provide enough detailed information for the city to make a
determination.  If the city cannot properly evaluate a proposed development’s
impacts without a more detailed study, a transportation impact study (TIS) will
be required to evaluate the adequacy of the transportation system to serve the
proposed development and determine proportionate mitigation of impacts.  If a
TIS is required, the city will provide the applicant with a “scoping checklist”
to be used when preparing the TIS.
   C.   Determination.  Based on information provided by the applicant about
the proposed development, the city will determine when a TIS is required and
will consider the following when making that determination.
      1.   Changes in land use designation, zoning designation, or development
standard.
      2.   Changes in use or intensity of use.
      3.   Projected increase in trip generation.
      4.   Potential impacts to residential areas and local streets.
      5.   Potential impacts to priority pedestrian and bicycle routes,
including, but not limited to school routes and multimodal street improvements
identified in the TSP.
      6.   Potential impacts to intersection level of service (LOS).
   D.   TIS General Provisions
      1.   All transportation impact studies, including neighborhood through-
trip and access studies, shall be prepared and certified by a registered
Traffic or Civil Engineer in the State of Oregon.
      2.   Prior to TIS scope preparation and review, the applicant shall pay
to the city the fees and deposits associated with TIS scope preparation and
review in accordance with the adopted fee schedule.  The city’s costs
associated with TIS scope preparation and review will be charged against the
respective deposits.  Additional funds may be required if actual costs exceed
deposit amounts.  Any unused deposit funds will be refunded to the applicant
upon final billing.
      3.   For preparation of the TIS, the applicant may choose one of the
following:
         a.   The applicant may hire a registered Oregon Traffic or Civil
Engineer to prepare the TIS for submittal to the city.  The city Traffic
Engineer will then review the TIS and the applicant will be required to pay to
the city any fees associated with the TIS review; or
         b.   The applicant may request that the city Traffic Engineer prepare
the TIS.  The applicant will pay to the city any fees associated with
preparation of the TIS by the city Traffic Engineer.
      4.   The TIS shall be submitted with a concurrent land use application
and associated with application materials.  The city will not accept a land use
application for process if it does not include the required TIS.
      5.   The city may require a TIS review conference with the applicant to
discuss the information provided in the TIS once it is complete.  This
conference would be in addition to any required pre-application conference.  If
such a conference is required, the city will not accept the land use
application for processing until the conference has taken place.  The applicant
shall pay the TIS review conference fee at the time of conference scheduling,
in accordance with the adopted fee schedule.
      6.   A TIS determination is not a land use action and may not be
appealed.
   E.   TIS Scope.  The city shall determine the study area, study
intersections, trip rates, traffic distribution, and required content of the
TIS based on information provided by the applicant about the proposed
development.
      1.   The study area will generally comprise an area within a ½-mile
radius of the development site.  If the city determines that development
impacts may extend more than ½ mile from the development site, a larger study
area may be required.  Required study intersections will generally include (in
addition to the primary access points) collector/collector and above
intersections with an anticipated peak hour traffic increase of five-percent
from the proposed project. 
      2.   If notice to ODOT or other agency is required pursuant to noticing
requirements in Chapter 16.89, the city will coordinate with those agencies to
provide a comprehensive TIS scope.  ODOT may also require a TIS directly to
support an OR 99E approach permit application.
   F.   TIS Content.  A project-specific TIS checklist will be provided to the
applicant by the city once the city has determined the TIS scope.  A TIS shall
include all of the following elements, unless waived by the city.
      1.   Introduction and Summary.  This section shall include existing and
projected trip generation including vehicular trips and mitigation of approved
development not built to date; existing level and proposed level of service
standard for city and county streets and volume to capacity for state roads;
project build year and average growth in traffic between traffic count year and
build year; summary of transportation operations; traffic queuing and delays at
study area intersections; and proposed mitigation(s).
      2.   Existing Conditions.  This section shall include a study area
description, including information about existing study intersection level of
service.
      3.   Impacts.  This section should include the proposed site plan,
evaluation of the proposed site plan, and a project-related trip analysis.  A
figure showing the assumed future year roadway network (number and type of
lanes at each intersection) also shall be provided.  For subdivision and other
developments, the future analysis shall be for the year of proposed site build-
out.  For proposed comprehensive plan and/or zoning map amendments, the future
analysis year shall be 20 years from the date of the City’s adopted TSP, or 15
years, whichever is greater.
      4.   Mitigation.  This section shall include proposed site and area-wide
specific mitigation measures.  Mitigation measures shall be roughly
proportional to potential impacts.  See Subsection K below for rough
proportionality determination.
      5.   Appendix. This section shall include traffic counts, capacity
calculations, warrant analysis, and any other information necessary to convey a
complete understanding of the technical adequacy of the TIS.
   G.   TIS Methodology.  The City will include the required TIS methodology
with the TIS scope.
   H.   Neighborhood Through-Trip Study.  Any development projected to add more
than 30 through-vehicles in a peak hour or 300 through-vehicle per day to an
adjacent residential local street or neighborhood route will be require
assessment and mitigation of residential street impacts.  Through-trips are
defined as those to and from a proposed development that have neither an origin
nor a destination in the neighborhood.  The through-trip study may be required
as a component of the TIS or may be a stand-alone study, depending on the level
of study required in the scoping checklist.  The through-trip study shall
include all of the following:
      1.   Existing number of through-trips per day on adjacent residential
local streets or neighborhood routes.
      2.   Projected number of through-trips per day on adjacent residential
local streets or neighborhood routes that will be added by the proposed
development.
      3.   Traffic management strategies to mitigate for the impacts of
projected through-trip consistent.
   If a residential street is significantly impacted, mitigation shall be
required.  Thresholds used to determine if residential streets are
significantly impacted are:
      1.   Local residential street volumes should not increase above 1,200
average daily trips
      2.   Local residential street speeds should not exceed 28 miles per hour
(85th percentile speed).
   I.   Mitigation.  Transportation impacts shall be mitigated at the time of
development when the TIS identifies an increase in demand for vehicular,
pedestrian, bicycle, or transit transportation facilities within the study
area.  Mitigation measures may be suggested by the applicant or recommended by
ODOT or Clackamas County in circumstances where a state or county facility will
be impacted by a proposed development.  The city shall determine if the
proposed mitigation measures are adequate and feasible.  ODOT must be consulted
to determine if improvements proposed for OR 99E comply with ODOT standards and
are supported by ODOT.  The following measures may be used to meet mitigation
requirements:
      1.   On-and off-site improvements beyond required standard frontage
improvements.
      2.   Development of a transportation demand management program.
      3.   Payment of a fee in lieu of construction, if construction is not
feasible.
      4.   Correction of off-site transportation deficiencies within the study
area that are substantially exacerbated by development impacts.
      5.   Construction of on-site facilities or facilities located within the
right-of-way adjoining the development site that exceed minimum required
standards and that have a transportation benefit to the public.
   J.   Conditions of Approval.  The city may deny, approve, or approve with
appropriate conditions a development proposal in order to minimize impacts and
protect transportation facilities.
      1.   Where the existing transportation system will be impacted by the
proposed development, dedication of land for streets, transit facilities,
sidewalks, bikeways, paths, or accessways may be required to ensure that the
transportation system is adequate to handle the additional burden caused by the
proposed use.
      2.   Where the existing transportation system is shown to be burdened by
the proposed use, improvements such as paving, curbing, installation or
contribution to traffic signals, traffic channelization, construction of
sidewalks, bikeways, accessways, paths, or street that serve the proposed use
may be required.
      3.   The city may require the development to grant a cross-over access
easement(s) to adjacent parcel(s) to address access spacing standards on
arterials and collector roadways or site-specific safety concerns. 
Construction of shared access may be required at the time of development if
feasible, given existing adjacent land use.  The access easement must be
established by deed.
   K.   Rough Proportionality Determination.  Improvements to mitigate impacts
identified in the TIS shall be provided in rough proportion to the
transportation impacts of the proposed development.
      1.   The TIS shall include information regarding how the proportional
share of improvements was calculated, using the ratio of development trips to
growth trips and the anticipated cost of the full Canby Transportation System
Plan.  The calculation is provided below:
         Proportionate Share Contribution = [Net New Trips/(Planning Period
Trips-Existing Trips)] X
                         Estimated Construction Cost
         a.   Net new trips means the estimated number of new trips that will
be created by the proposed development within the study area.
         b.   Planning period trips means the estimated number of total trips
within the study area within the planning period identified in the TSP.
         c.   Existing trips means the estimated number of existing trips
within the study area at the time of TIS preparation.
         d.   Estimated construction cost means the estimated total cost of
construction of identified improvements in the TSP. (Ord 1340, 2011)
16.08.160   Safety and Functionality Standards.
The City will not issue any development permits unless the proposed development
complies with the city’s basic transportation safety and functionality
standards, the purpose of which is to ensure that development does not occur in
areas where the surrounding public facilities are inadequate.  Upon submission
of a development permit application, an applicant shall demonstrate that the
development property has or will have the following:
   A1.   Adequate street drainage, as determined by the city.
   B.   Safe access and clear vision at intersections, as determined by the
city.
   C.   Adequate public utilities, as determined by the city.
   D.   Access onto a public street with the minimum paved widths as stated in
Subsection E below.
   E.   Adequate frontage improvements as follows:
      1.   For local streets and neighborhood connectors, a minimum paved width
of 16 feet along the site’s frontage.
      2.   For collector and arterial streets, a minimum paved width of 20 feet
along the site’s frontage.
      3.   For all streets, a minimum horizontal right-of-way clearance of 20
feet along the site’s frontage.
   F.   Compliance with mobility standards identified in the TSP.  If a
mobility deficiency already exists, the development shall not create further
deficiencies. (Ord 1340, 2011)
Chapter 16.10
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Sections
   
16.10.010   Off-street parking required – exceptions.
   
16.10.020   Definitions.
   
16.10.030   General requirements.
   
16.10.040   Prohibited near intersections.
   
16.10.050   Parking standards designated.
   
16.10.060   Off-street loading facilities.
   
16.10.070   Parking lots and access.
   
16.10.080   Street Tree Plan
   
16.10.090   Drive-up uses.
   
16.10.100   Bicycle parking.
16.10.010   Off-street parking required – exceptions.
   A.   At the time of establishment of a new structure or use, change in use,
or change in use of an existing structure, within any planning district of the
city, off-street parking spaces and off-street loading berths shall be as
provided in this and following sections, unless greater requirements are
otherwise established by the conditional use permit or the site and design
review process, based upon clear and objective findings that a greater number
of spaces are necessary at that location for protection of public health,
safety and welfare.  A lesser number of spaces may be permitted by the Planning
Commission based on clear and objective findings that a lesser number of
parking spaces will be sufficient to carry out the objective of this section. 
   B.   No off-street parking shall be required for any use permitted outright
within the C-1 zone in the rectangular area bounded by N. Ivy Street on the
east, NW First Avenue on the south, N. Elm Street on the west, and NW Third
Avenue on the north.
   C.   At the time of enlargement of an existing structure or use, the
provisions of this section shall apply to the enlarged structure or use only. 
(Ord. 1304, 2009; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 890 section 9, 1993; Ord. 872, 1992;
Ord. 854 section 2, 1991; Ord. 848, Part V, section 1, 16.10.010(A)(B), 1990)
16.10.020   Definitions.
   A.   Floor Area.  Except where otherwise specified, the floor area measured
shall be the gross floor area of the building primary to the function of the
particular use of the property other than space devoted to off-street parking
or loading.
   B.   Employees.  Where employees are specified, the term shall apply to all
persons, including proprietors, working on the premises during the peak shift. 
(Ord. 854 section 2, 1991; Ord. 848, Part V, section 1, 16.10.020(A)(B), 1990)
16.10.030   General requirements.
   A.   Should the owner or occupant of a structure change the use to which the
building is put, thereby increasing parking or loading requirements, the
increased parking/loading area shall be provided prior to commencement of the
new use.
   B.   Parking and loading requirements for structures not specifically listed
herein shall be determined by the City Planner, based upon requirements of
comparable uses listed.
   C.   In the event several uses occupy a single structure, the total
requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the
several uses computed separately.  If the applicant can demonstrate that the
uses do not have overlapping parking needs (based on days and hours of
operation) and can share parking, the total requirement for combined uses may
be reduced by up to 60 percent.
   D.   Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same
lot, or adjacent lot, with the dwelling.  Parking spaces located within an on-
site garage shall count toward the minimum parking requirement for residential
uses.  Other required parking spaces may be located on a separate parcel,
provided the parcel is not greater than five hundred (500) feet from the
entrance to the building to be served, measured along the shortest pedestrian
route to the building.  The applicant must prove that the parking located on
another parcel is functionally located and that there is safe vehicular and
pedestrian access to and from the site.
   E.   Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable
passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees and shall
not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks
used in conducting the business.
   F.   Institution of on-street parking shall not be allowed for off-street
parking, where none is previously provided, and shall not be done solely for
the purpose of relieving crowded parking lots in commercial or industrial
planning districts.
   G.   Parking facilities may be shared by users on adjacent parcels if all of
the following standards are met, or the Planning Commission determines a lesser
combination meets the intent of the ordinance:
      1.   One of the parcels has excess parking spaces, considering the
present use of the property; and the other parcel lacks sufficient area for
required parking spaces.  Excess parking spaces can be determined by
considering when the uses need the parking spaces, such as time of day or day
of week.
      2.   The total number of parking spaces meets the standards for the sum
of the number of spaces that would be separately required for each use.  If the
applicant can demonstrate that the uses do not have overlapping parking needs
(based on days and hours of operation) and can share parking, the total
requirement for combined uses may be reduced by up to 60 percent.
      3.   Legal documentation, to the satisfaction of the City Attorney, shall
be submitted verifying present use of the excess parking area on one lot by
patrons of the uses deficient in required parking areas.
      4.   Physical access between adjoining lots shall be such that functional
and reasonable access is provided to uses on the parcel deficient in parking
spaces.
      5.   Adequate directional signs shall be installed specifying the joint
parking arrangement. 
   H.   The number of vehicular spaces required in Table 16.10.050 may be
reduced by up to 10% if one of the following is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Planning Director or Planning Commission:
      1.   Residential densities greater than nine units per gross acre (limit
parking to no less than one space per unit for multi-family structures); or
      2.   The proposed development is pedestrian-oriented by virtue of a
location which is within convenient walking distance of existing or planned
neighborhood activities (such as schools, parks, shopping, etc.) and the
development provides additional pedestrian amenities not required by the code
which, when taken together, significantly contribute to making walking
convenient (e.g., wider sidewalks, pedestrian plazas, pedestrian scale
lighting, benches, etc.). (Ord. 890 section 10, 1993; Ord. 854 section 2
[part], 1991; Ord. 848, Part V, section 16.10.030, 1990; Ord. 1043 section 3,
2000; Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.10.040   Prohibited near intersections.
In no case will off-street parking be allowed within a vision clearance area of
an intersection.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.10(D), 1984)
16.10.050   Parking standards designated.
The parking standards set out in Table 16.10.050 shall be observed.  (Ord. 854
section 2, [part], 1991; Ord. 848 section 1, 16.10.050, 1990; Ord. 740 section
10.3.10(E), 1984; Ord. 981 section 20, 1997)
TABLE 16.10.050
Off-street Parking Provisions - The following are the minimum standards for
off-street vehicle parking:
 
USE                                              PARKING REQUIREMENT
Residential Uses:
                                                 2.00 spaces per dwelling unit for new construction. (Existing single-family
a. Single-family dwellings                       dwellings having only a single parking space shall not be considered to be
                                                 nonconforming.)
b. Two-family dwellings                          2.00 spaces per dwelling unit.
c. Multi-family dwellings in complexes with      One space per studio or 1-bedrrom unit.  2.00 spaces per 2-bedroom or
private internal driveways                       larger unit.  One additional guest parking space shall be provided for
                                                 every five units for each development often or more units.
d. Retirement/assisted living housing            1.0 spaces per unit
e. Residential day care facility and home        1.00 space per employee
occupation
Institutions:
                                                 1.00 spaces per two beds for patients or residents, plus 1.00 space per
a. Convalescent home, nursing home or sanitarium employee
                                                  
b. Hospital                                      4.00 spaces per two beds
                                                  
Places of Public Assembly:
a. Library, reading room                         1.00 space per 400 square feet of public area
b. Nursery, primary/elementary, or junior  high 2.00 spaces per employee
school
c. Senior high school                            1.00 space per classroom, plus 1.00 space per six students
d. Other places of public assembly, including    1.00 space per four seats or eight feet of bench length
churches
Commercial Amusement:
a. Theater                                       1.00 per six seats
b. Bowling alley                                 3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
c. Dance hall, skating rink                      3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
d. Racquet courts, health clubs                  3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Commercial
a. Retail shops (under 100,000 sq. ft. gross      2.00 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
leasable area)
b. Retail store handling exclusively bulky
merchandise such as furniture, automobile and     1.00 space per 1,000 square feet of sales floor area
service repair shops
c. Shopping center (over 100,000 square feet of   3.00 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area
gross leasable area)
d. Banks/savings and loans                        2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area
e. Medical/dental offices                         3.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area
f. General offices                                2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area
g. Real estate offices                            2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area
h. Government offices                             3.50 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area
i. Restaurant                                     8.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area
j. Take-out restaurant                            8.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area
k. Motel                                          0.75 spaces per rentable room
l. Residential hotel, rooming house, boarding     0.75 spaces per rentable room
house, or bed and breakfast
m. Hotel                                          0.75 spaces per rentable room
n. Club or lodge                                  1.00 space per 200 square feet of floor area
o. Day care , adult or child care; does not
include Family Daycare (12 or fewer children)     1.00 space per 500 square feet of floor area
under ORS 657A.250
p. All others                                     1.00 space per 550 square feet
q. Wireless telecommunication systems             1.00 space per site
r. Self-Storage (Mini) Warehouse                  2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of office space
Industrial:
                                                  2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of office space, plus 1.00 space
a. Manufacturing                                  per 1,000 gross square feet of non-office manufacturing space. Minimum of
                                                  5 parking spaces overall.
                                                  2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of office space, plus 1.00 space
b. Warehousing                                    per 1,000 gross square feet of non-office warehousing space. Minimum of 5
                                                  parking spaces overall.
                                                  2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of office space, plus 1.50 spaces
c. Wholesale establishments                       per 1,000 gross square feet of non-office wholesale space. Minimum of 5
                                                  parking spaces overall.
 
(Ord 1296, 2008, Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.10.060   Off-street loading facilities
   A.   The minimum number of off-street loading berths for commercial and
industrial uses is as follows:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA NUMBER OF BERTHS
Less than 5,000           0
5000 – 25,000           1
25,000 – 60,000         2
60,000 and over           3
   B.   Loading berths shall conform to the following minimum size
specifications:
      1.   Commercial uses – 13’ x 35’
      2.   Industrial uses – 12’ x 60’
      3.   Berths shall have an unobstructed minimum height of 14’.
   C.   Required loading areas shall be screened from public view, from public
streets, and adjacent properties by means of sight-site obscuring landscaping,
walls or other means, as approved through the site and design review process.
   D.   Required loading facilities shall be installed prior to final building
inspection and shall be permanently maintained as a condition of use.
   E.   A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles
for the purpose of loading and unloading children shall be located on the site
of a school or day care center having a capacity greater than twenty-five (25)
students.
   F.   The off-street loading facilities shall, in all cases, be on the same
lot or parcel as the structure they are intended to serve.  In no case shall
the required off-street loading spaces be part of the area used to satisfy the
off-street parking requirement. 
   G.   The Planning Commission may exempt a building from the loading berth
requirement, or delay the requirement, based on findings that loading berths
are not needed for a particular building or business.  (Ord. 854 section 2
[part], 1991; Ord. 848, Part V, section 1, 16.10.060, 1990; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.10.070    Parking lots and access.
       A.   Parking Lots.   A parking lot, whether as accessory or principal
use, intended for the parking of automobiles or trucks, shall comply with the
following:
      1.   Parking lot design shall comply with the dimensional standards set
forth in Figure 1 of this section.
      2.   Parking stalls of eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in
length for compact vehicles may comprise up to a maximum of thirty (30) percent
of the total number of parking stalls.  Such parking stalls shall be marked
“Compact Parking only” either on the parking surface or on a sign in front of
the parking stalls.
      3.   Areas used for standing or maneuvering of vehicles shall have paved
asphalt, concrete, solid concrete paver surfaces, or paved “tire track” strips
maintained adequately for all weather use and so drained as to avoid the flow
of water across sidewalks or into public streets, with the following exception:
         a.   The Planning Director or Planning Commission may approve the use
of an engineered aggregate system for outdoor storage and/or non-required
parking areas provided that the applicant can demonstrate that City Standards
related to:
            i.   minimizing dust generation,
            ii.   minimizing transportation of aggregate to city streets, and
            iii.   minimizing infiltration of environmental contaminants
including, but not limited to, motor oils, fuels, volatile organic compounds
(e.g. benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene), and ethylene glycol are met. 
The decision maker may impose conditions as necessary to meet City Standards.
         b.   Use of permeable surfacing materials for parking lots and
driveways is encouraged whenever site and soil conditions make permeable
surfacing feasible.  Permeable surfacing includes, but is not limited to: 
paving blocks, turf block, pervious concrete, and porous asphalt.  All
permeable surfacing shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards and the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Maintenance of permeable surfacing materials located on
private property are the responsibility of the property owner.
      4.   The full width of driveways must be paved in accordance with (3)
above:
         a.   For a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way line back into the
private property to prevent debris from entering public streets, and
         b.   To within 150 feet of all portions of the exterior wall of the
first story of any structure(s) served by the driveway to ensure fire and
emergency service provision.
      5.   Except for parking to serve residential uses, parking areas adjacent
to or within residential planning districts or adjacent to residential uses
shall be designed to minimize disturbance of residents. Artificial lighting,
which may be provided, shall be so deflected as not to shine or create glare in
any residential planning district or on any adjacent dwelling, or any street
right-of-way in such a manner as to impair the use of such way.
      6.   Groups of more than four (4) parking spaces shall be so located and
served by driveways that their use will require no backing movements or other
maneuvering within a street right-of-way other than an alley.
      7.   Off-street parking areas, and the accesses to them, shall be
designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum
safety of traffic access and egress and the maximum safety of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic on the site and in adjacent roadways.  The Planning Director
or Planning Commission may require engineering analysis and/or truck turning
diagrams to ensure safe and efficient traffic flow based on the number and type
of vehicles using the site, the classification of the public roadway, and the
design of the parking lot and access drives.
      8.   Parking bumpers or wheel stops shall be provided to prevent cars
from encroaching on the street right-of-way, adjacent landscaped areas, or
adjacent pedestrian walkways.
      9.   Accessible parking shall be provided, constructed, striped, signed
and maintained as required by ORS 447.233 and all Oregon Structural Specialty
Code requirements. 
 
TABLE 16.10.070
Minimum dimensional Standard for Parking
This table and Figure 16.10.070 provide the minimum dimensional standards for parking
areas and spaces.
A = Parking angle in degrees                                D = Minimum clear aisle width
                      B = Minimum stall width   E = Minimum clear stall distance at bay
side
                            C = Minimum stall depth         F = Minimum clear bay width
A          B    C      D     E     F
0          8'0" -      12'0" 22'0" 20'0"
(parallel)
30         8'6" 16'4"  12'0" 17'0" 28'4"
45         8'6" 18'9"  12'6" 12'0" 31'3"
60         8'6" 19'10" 18'0" 9'10" 37'10"
90         8'6" 18'0"  24'0" 8'6"  42'0"
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6832.png]
   B.   Access.
      1.   The provision and maintenance of vehicular and pedestrian ingress
and egress from private property to the public streets as stipulated in this
ordinance are continuing requirements for the use of any structure or parcel of
real property in the City of Canby.  No building permit or other permits shall
be issued until scale plans are presented that show how the ingress and egress
requirement is to be fulfilled.  Should the owner or occupant of a lot or
building change the use to which the lot or building is put, thereby increasing
ingress and egress requirements, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this
ordinance to begin or maintain such altered use until the required increase in
ingress and egress is provided.
      2.   The City of Canby encourages joint/shared access.  Owners of two (2)
or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may agree to, or may be required
by the City to, utilized jointly the same ingress and egress when the combined
ingress and egress of both uses, structures, or parcels of land satisfies their
combined requirements as designed in this ordinance, provided that satisfactory
legal evidence is presented to the City Attorney in the form of deeds,
easements, leases or contracts shall be placed on permanent files with the city
recorder.
      3.   All ingress and egress shall connect directly with public streets.
      4.   Vehicular access for residential uses shall be brought to within
fifty (50) feet of the ground floor entrances or the ground floor landing of a
stairway, ramp or elevator leading to dwelling units.
      5.   Required sidewalks shall extend from the ground floor entrances or
the ground floor landing of a stairs, ramps or elevators to the sidewalk or
curb of the public street or streets that provide the required access and
egress.
      6.   To afford safe pedestrian access and egress for properties within
the city, a sidewalk shall be constructed along all street frontages, prior to
use or occupancy of the building or structure proposed for said property.  The
sidewalks required by this section shall be constructed to city standards
except in the case of streets with inadequate right-of-way width or where the
final street design and grade have not been established, in which case the
sidewalks shall be constructed to a design, and in a manner approved by the
Site and Design Review Board.  Sidewalks approved by Board may include
temporary sidewalks and sidewalks constructed on private property; provided,
however, that such sidewalks shall provide continuity with sidewalks of
adjoining commercial developments existing or proposed.  When a sidewalk is to
adjoin a future street improvement, the sidewalk construction shall include
construction of the curb and gutter section to grade and alignment established
by the Site and Design Review Board.
      7.   The standards set forth in this ordinance are minimum standards for
access and egress, and may be increased through the site and design review
process in any particular instance where the standards provided herein are
deemed insufficient to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 890 section 12, 1993; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010)
 
Minimum Access Requirements
16.10.070(B)(8): Minimum access requirements for residential uses - ingress and
egress for residential uses shall not be less than the following (except that
in the case of flag lots, section 16.64.0400) shall apply):
Dwelling units Minimum number of   Minimum access width Sidewalks & Curbs (in
               accesses required                        addition to driveways)
1 or 2         1                   12 feet              none required
                                                        Minimum of one sidewalk
                                                        connection to
3-19           1                   20 feet              residences and parking
                                                        areas; curb required if
                                                        sidewalk adjacent to
                                                        driveway.
               Option A:                                Minimum of one sidewalk
               1 access                                 connection to
20-49          OR                  20 feet              residences and parking
               Option B:           12 feet              areas; curb required if
               2 accesses                               sidewalk adjacent to
                                                        driveway.
               Option A:                                Curbs required; Minimum
               1 access            30 feet              of one sidewalk
50-499         OR                  20 feet              connection to
               Option B:                                residences and parking
               2 accesses                               areas
Over 500       As required by Site and Design Review    As required by Public
               Board                                    Works Director
16.10.070(B)(9): Minimum access requirements for commercial or institutional
uses - ingress and egress for commercial uses shall not be less than the
following:
Parking spaces Minimum number of   Minimum access width Sidewalks & curbs (in
required       accesses required                        addition to driveways)
1-4            1                   12 feet              None required
                                                        Curbs required;
5-99           1                   20 feet              sidewalk on one side
                                                        minimum
                                                        Curbs required;
100-249        2                   20 feet              sidewalk on one side
                                                        minimum
               As required by Site
Over 250       and Design Review   As required by Public Works Director
               Board
16.10.070(B)(10): Minimum access requirements for industrial uses - ingress and
egress for industrial uses shall not be less than the following:
Parking spaces Minimum number of   Minimum access width Sidewalks & curbs (in
required       accesses required                        addition to driveways)
                                                        Curbs required;
1-250          1                   24 feet              sidewalks on one side
                                                        minimum
Over 250       As required by Public Works Director
      8.   One-Way Ingress or Egress – The hard surfaced pavement of one-way
drives shall not be less than twelve (12) feet for multi-family residential,
commercial or industrial uses. (Ord. 1514, 2019)
      9.   Driveways:
         a.   Access to private property shall be permitted with the use of
driveway curb cuts. The access points with the street shall be the minimum
necessary to provide access while not inhibiting the safe circulation and
carrying capacity of the street. Driveways shall meet all applicable guidelines
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Driveway distance shall be
measured from the curb intersection point [as measured for vision clearance
area (16.04.670)]. Distances to an intersection shall be measured from the stop
bar at the intersection.
         b.   Driveways shall be limited to one per property except for certain
uses which include large commercial uses such as large box stores, large public
uses such as schools and parks, drive through facilities, property with a
frontage of over 250-feet and similar uses.
         c.   Double frontage lots and corner lots may be limited to access
from a single street, usually the lower classification street. Single family
residential shall not have access onto arterials, and shall have access onto
collectors only if there is no other option.
         d.   If additional driveways are approved by the City Administrator or
designee, a finding shall be made that no eminent traffic hazard would result
and impacts on through traffic would be minimal. Restrictions may be imposed on
additional driveways, such as limited turn movements, shared access between
uses, closure of existing driveways, or other access management actions.
         e.   Within commercial, industrial, and multi-family areas, shared
driveways and internal access between similar uses are encouraged to reduce the
access points to the higher classified roadways, to improve internal site
circulation, and to reduce local trips or movements on the street system.
Shared driveways or internal access between uses will be established by means
of common access easements at the time of development.
         f.   Driveway widths shall be as shown on the following table.
Driveway Widths (Minimum/Maximum, Ft.)
   Street Classification       Res.          Comm.       Ind.   
   Arterial:            NA (1)       12/36          12/36
   Industrial:          NA (1)       12/36          12/36
   Collector:          12/24 (2)      12/36          12/36
   Neighborhood Route:    12/24 (2)       12/36          12/36
   Local:             12/24 (2)       12/36          12/36
   Cul-de-sac:          12/24 (2)       12/36          12/36
   Public Alley          12/24 (2)        NA           NA
 
   Res. = Residential Zone
   Comm. = Commercial Zone
   Ind. = Industrial Zone
Notes:   (1) Special conditions may warrant access.
   (2) 28' maximum width for 3-car garage.
         g. Driveway spacing shall be as shown in the following table.
Minimum Driveway Spacing
Street Classification         Intersection            Driveway
Arterial (2)             330' (1)             330' (1)
Industrial Streets (2)          100' (1)             100' (1)
Collector (2)             100' (1)             100' (1)
Neighborhood Route          50' (1)(3)             10'   
Local (all)             50' (1)(3)             10'
Cul-de-sac             50' (1)(3)             10'
Public Alley             50’ (1)(3)                  
Notes:    (1) Minimum distance or no closer than 60% of parcel frontage unless
this prohibits access to the site, in which case City Administrator or designee
may approve a deviation.
   (2) Direct access to this street will not be allowed if an alternative
exists or is planned.
   (3) For single-family residential houses, the minimum distance between
driveways and an intersection shall be thirty (30) feet.
         h.   Curb cuts shall be a minimum of five feet from the property line,
unless a shared driveway is installed. Single driveways may be paved up to an
adjacent property line but shall maintain a five (5) foot separation from the
side property line where the driveway enters the property. Driveways shall not
be constructed within the curb return of a street intersection. Deviations may
be approved by the City Administrator or designee.
         i.   For roads with a classification of Collector and above, driveways
adjacent to street intersections shall be located beyond the required queue
length for traffic movements at the intersection. If this requirement prohibits
access to the site, a driveway with restricted turn movements may be permitted.
         j.   Multi-family access driveways will be required to meet the same
access requirements as commercial driveways if the multi-family site generated
100 or more trips per day.
         k.   For circular type driveways, the minimum distance between the two
driveway curb cuts on one single-family residential lot shall be thirty (30)
feet. (Ord. 1514, 2019) 
      10.   When considering a public facilities plan that has been submitted
as part of site and design review plan in accordance with this ordinance, the
city Public Works Supervisor may approve the location of a driveway closer than
fifty (50) feet from the intersection of collector or arterial streets, based
on written findings of fact in support of the decision. Said written approval
shall be incorporated into the recommended decision of the City Planner for the
site and design review plan under the process set forth.
      11.   Where an existing alley is 20 feet or less in width, the property
line setback abutting the alley shall increase to provide a minimum of 24 feet
for maneuvering and backing movements from, garages, carports, or parking
areas. (Ord. 890 section 12, 1993; Ord. 872, 1991;  Ord. 854 section 2 [part],
1991; Ord 848, Part V, section 16.10.070 (A)(B) 1990; Ord. 955 section 3 & 4
1996; Ord. 981 section 44, 1997; Ord. 1019 section 5, 1999; Ord 1237, 2007;
Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.10.080    Street Tree Plan
A Street Tree Plan can be provided in lieu of meeting the requirement of
planting a tree every 30 lineal feet of street frontage as stated in Ordinance
1385 Exhibit B. The Street Tree Plan can compensate for driveways, utilities,
or other obstructions that inhibit the 30 foot spacing requirement. The
requirement for the planting of street trees is required under Chapter 12.32
CMC. (Ord. 854, 1991; Ord. 848, Part VI, section 1, 1990; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.10.090    Drive-up uses.
   A.   Drive-up uses shall provide a minimum stacking area clear of the public
right-of-way or parking lot aisle from the window service to the vehicles as
follows:
      1.   All drive-up uses. – Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for
two (2) to eight (8) automobiles, as determined by the Site and Design Review
Board.
      2.   For purposes of this section, an automobile shall be considered no
less than twenty (20) feet in length.  The width and turning radius of drive-up
aisles shall be approved by the City Public Works Director.
   B.   The stacking area shall not interfere with safe and efficient access to
other parking areas on the property.  Traffic aisles shall be wide enough to
accommodate backing movements where adjacent to parking stalls.  Parking
maneuvers shall not occur in the stacking area.  (Ord. 848, Part VII, section
16.10.090, 1990)
16.10.100    Bicycle Parking.
Bicycle parking shall be provided for all multi-family residential,
institutional, commercial, and industrial uses.
   A.   Dimensions and characteristics: Bicycle parking spaces shall be a
minimum of six (6) feet long and two (2) feet wide, and overhead clearance in
covered spaces shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet.  A minimum five (5) foot
aisle for bicycle maneuvering shall be provided and maintained beside or
between each row of bicycle parking.  Bicycle racks located on a sidewalk shall
provide a minimum of two (2) feet between the rack and a wall or other
obstacle, and between the rack and curb face.  Bicycle racks or lockers shall
be securely anchored to the surface or a structure.  Bicycle racks located in
the Downtown Commercial Zone shall be of the inverted U style (a.k.a. staple
racks).  See Figure 20 of the Canby Downtown Plan for correct rack placement.
   B.   Location: Bicycle parking shall be located in well-lit, secure
locations within fifty (50) feet of the main entrance to a building, but not
further from the entrance than the closest automobile parking space, and in no
case further than 50 feet from an entrance when several entrances are involved.
   C.   Number of spaces: The bicycle parking standards set out in Table
16.10.100 shall be observed. (Ord. 1019 section 1, 1999; Ord. 1076, 2001)
 
TABLE 16.10.100 BICYCLE PARKING STANDARD
LAND USE CATEGORY                               MINIMUM REQUIRED
                                                BICYCLE PARKING SPACES
Residential                                     1 space per unit
Multi-family residential, general
Multi-family residential, seniors or with    4, or 1 space per 5 units,
physical disabilities                           whichever is greater
Institutional                                   To be determined through design
Schools – Elementary                          review
Schools - Jr. High/Middle School                To be determined through design
                                                review
Schools - St. High                              To be determined through design
                                                review
College                                         To be determined through design
                                                review
                                                5% of auto spaces (or 100% of
Transit Centers/Park & Ride Lots                demand, depending on
                                                accessibility to bicyclists)
Religious Institutions                          1 space per 40 seat capacity
Hospitals                                       1 space per 5 beds
Doctor, Dentist Offices                         2, or 1 space per 1000 ft2,
                                                whichever is greater
Libraries, Museums, etc.                        2, or 1 space per 1000 ft2,
                                                whichever is greater
Commercial                                      0.33 space per 1000 ft2,
Retail Sales                                    whichever is greater
Auto-oriented Services                          2, or 0.33 space per 1000 ft2,
                                                whichever is greater
Groceries/Supermarkets                          0.33 space per 1000 ft2
Offices                                         2, or I space per 1000 ft2,
                                                whichever is greater
Restaurants                                     1 space per 1000 ft2
Drive-in Restaurants                            1 space per 1000 ft2
Shopping Centers                                0.33 space per I000 ft2
Financial Institutions                          2, or 0.33 space per
                                                10002,whichever is greater
Theaters, Auditoriums, etc.                     1 space per 30 seats
Downtown Commercial Zone                        4 spaces per block
Industrial                                      2, or .1 space per 1000 ft2,
Industrial Park                                 whichever is greater
Warehouse                                       2, or .1 space per 1000 ft2,
                                                whichever is greater
Manufacturing, etc.                             2, or .15 space per 1000 ft2,
                                                whichever is greater
NOTES:
Each individual use needs to be evaluated for bicycle parking – e.g., a
commercial accessory use in an industrial district may have different
requirements than the industrial uses around it. Similarly, in mixed-use
developments, the amount of each use and required bicycle parking needs"
evaluation. Finally, within each use category one needs to consider the
different user categories - residents, employees, customers, etc. - and parking
requirements for each. (Ord. 1019 section I, 1999; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000;
Ord. 1076, 2001)
Chapter 16.12
CLASSIFICATION OF ZONES
Sections:
   
16.12.010   Zones designated.
   
16.12.020   Uses permitted.
16.12.010   Zones designated.
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the city is
divided into zones designated as follows:
Base Zones         Abbreviation
Low Density Residential   R-1
Medium Density Residential   R-1.5
High Density Residential      R-2
Downtown Commercial   C-1
Residential/Commercial   C-R
Highway Commercial   C-2
Commercial/Manufacturing   C-M
Light Industrial   M-1
Heavy Industrial   M-2
Overlay Zones   
Planned Unit Development   PUD
Historical Protection   A
Hazard   H
Canby Industrial Area   I-O
Wetland   WO
Riparian   RO
(Ord .890 section 14, 1003; Ord. 740 section 10.3.15 [part], 1984; Ord. 1008
section 1, 1998; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.12.020   Uses Permitted
In each zone, the uses permitted outright or permitted subject to the issuance
of a conditional use permit are outlined in the following chapters. (Ord. 740
section 10.3.15 [part], 1984)
Chapter 16.13
PLAN DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
16.13.010   North Redwood Plan District
   16.13.020   Placeholder for future plan districts
   16.13.030   Placeholder for future plan districts
16.13.010   North Redwood Plan District
   A.   Purpose
      The North Redwood Plan District implements the North Redwood Development
Concept Plan (NRDCP) and is intended to ensure that development within the
North Redwood area is consistent with the land use pattern and transportation
network established by the NRDCP. The North Redwood Plan District is also
intended to provide some flexibility for new development in order to protect
natural resources and emphasize the Willow Creek corridor as a community
amenity.
   B.   Applicability
      The standards and regulations in this chapter apply to all land within
the North Redwood Plan District as shown on the City of Canby’s North Redwood
Plan District Map.
      The provisions in this chapter apply in addition to standards and
regulations established in the base zone and other applicable sections of the
Canby Zoning Code. Where standards in this chapter conflict with standards in
other sections of the Canby Zoning Code, this section will supersede.
   C.   Approval criteria
      The following criteria must be satisfied prior to approval of any new
subdivision or Planned Unit Development within the North Redwood Plan District
as they apply to the area proposed for development.
      1.   Generally, new road alignments should be consistent with those
identified on Figure 9 of the DCP. Changes to the identified road alignments
may be approved to allow for topographic or other conditions.
      2.   There shall be a minimum of five connections to existing roads on
the east side of North Redwood Street, built to the City’s Local Street
standard. To the extent possible, additional connections should not create
offset intersections and should meet spacing standards in the Transportation
System Plan.
      3.   A cul-de-sac shall only be allowed when environmental or
topographical constraints, or compliance with other standards in this code
preclude street extension and through circulation. The map in Figure 9 of the
DCP identifies three locations where cul-de-sacs could be allowed.
      4.   One loop road shall be built through the North Redwood community,
connecting NE 18th Place to NE 12th Avenue. The loop road shall be built to the
City’s Neighborhood Route standards. Where possible, the loop road should
travel adjacent to Willow Creek and provide access to Willow Creek trailheads
and open space.
      5.   Where possible, other local streets in North Redwood should
intersect with the loop road identified in (3) above.
      6.   At least one additional local street shall traverse the study area
from north to south, connecting the area zoned for low density residential with
the area zoned for high density residential.
      7.   Future local streets should be located to split parcel lines where
feasible.
      8.   The land east of Willow Creek shall be accessed from an extension of
North Teakwood Street and terminate in a cul-de-sac, hammerhead, or other
appropriate turnaround.
      9.   Block size shall be consistent with the following:
         i.   Block widths should be approximately 280 feet whenever possible.
Alternate block widths may be approved to allow for topographical variations
         ii.   Overall block length shall not exceed 600 feet
         iii.   A bicycle/pedestrian connection shall be provided at least
every 330 feet, consistent with provisions in the Canby Transportation System
Plan (TSP)
      10.   The park and open space corridor along Willow Creek, as identified
in Figure 7 of the DCP, shall be provided through required land dedication for
parks.
      11.   Applicants must demonstrate that future adjacent projects will be
able to connect to proposed roads and other infrastructure in a way that will
be consistent with the North Redwood DCP.
   D.   Lot area exceptions and lot size averaging.
      The following exceptions to the City’s lot size standards and lot size
averaging provisions will be allowed for developments in the North Redwood Plan
District.
      1.   The Planning Commission may allow public park land dedications to be
included in the lot size averaging calculation in order to achieve community
development goals and allow protection of natural resources.
      2.   The resulting average lot size shall not be less than 5,000 square
feet in the R1 zone.
      3.   The resulting average lot size shall not be less than 4,000 square
feet in the R1.5 zone.
      4.   Individual lot sizes may be less than prescribed in Sections
16.16.030 and 16.18.030 alternative lot layout option provided in Section
16.64.040 is used. (Ord. 1422, 2015)
Chapter 16.14
RESERVED
Chapter 16.16
R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Sections:
   
16.16.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.16.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.16.030   Development standards.
16.16.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the R-1 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Single-family dwelling; one single-family dwelling per lot;
   B.   Vegetable gardens, orchards and crop cultivation for personal use only,
including greenhouses. No large-scale commercial sale of produce is permitted
unless continued as a non-conforming use that was in place prior to the
existing zoning designation.  Keeping of animals other than domestic pets
requires a special permit from the City Administrator unless a continuation of
a non-conforming agriculture use.
   C.   Accessory uses and/or accessory structures;
   D.   Accessory dwelling, subject to review and approval through a Type 1
procedure (pursuant to Chapter 16.89.030) and must conform to the following
standards:
      1.   Compliance with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code;
      2.   A maximum of one accessory dwelling is allowed per legal single-
family dwelling. The unit may be a detached building, in a portion of a
detached accessory building (e.g. above a garage or workshop), or a unit
attached or interior to a primary dwelling (e.g. an addition or the conversion
of an existing floor).
      3.   A detached accessory dwelling may not exceed 800 square feet of
floor area or 75% of the primary dwelling’s floor area, whichever is smaller.
      4.   Accessory dwellings that result from the conversion of a level or
floor (e.g. basement, attic, or second floor) of the primary dwelling may
occupy the entire level or floor, even if the floor area of the accessory
dwelling would be more than 800 square feet.
      5.   Accessory dwellings must meet all other development standards (e.g.
height, setbacks, lot coverage, etc.) for buildings in the zoning district,
except that:
         a.   Conversion of an existing legal non-conforming structure to an
accessory dwelling is allowed, provided the conversion does not increase the
non-conformity; and 
         b.   Chapter 16.21, Residential Design Standards do not apply; and
         c.   An additional on-site parking space shall not be required but may
be provided.
   E.   Day care facility in a residential home, with twelve (12) or fewer
children;
   F.   Manufactured and mobile home subdivisions, where developed as planned
unit developments, subject to the requirements of Divisions IV and V;
   G.   Minor public facilities;
   H.   Manufactured home - with the following additional approval criteria:
      1.   Must be double-wide or wider and must enclose at least 1,000 square
feet.
      2.   Must be located not more than twelve (12) inches above grade on an
excavated and back-filled masonry foundation which is enclosed at the
perimeter.
      3.   Must have a pitched roof with a minimum slope of at least a nominal
three (3) feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width.
      4.   Exterior siding and roofing must be similar in color, material and
appearance to that used on surrounding dwellings within three hundred (300)
feet of the lot.
      5.   The exterior thermal envelope must meet performance standards
equivalent to those required for single family dwellings under the State
Building Code.
      6.   Must not have bare metal siding or roofing.
   I.   Home occupations which meet the strict definition of section
16.04.240. 
   J.   Residential Home/Adult Foster Home - for five or fewer individuals.
(Per ORS 197.665).
   K.   Foster Care Home; as defined in Section 16.04 (Ord. 890 section 15,
1993; Ord. 859 section 1, 1991; Ord. 740 section 10.3.18(A), 1984; Ord. 1080,
2001; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord 1514, 2019)
16.16.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the R-1 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Cemetery;
   B.   Church;
   C.   Day care facility, other than a residence or caring for more than
twelve (12) children;
   D.   Hospital;
   E.   Nursing home
   F.   School;
   G.   Major public facilities;
   H.   Golf courses, public or private, with facilities and structures that
are associated with the use;
   I.   Home occupations which otherwise meet the strict definition of section
16.04.240, but which involve the manufacture of products, nonresidential
storage of goods, or any activity which is likely to increase traffic;
   J.   Accessory use or structure (not a dwelling) located on a lot or lots
abutting the lot which houses the principal use of the property;
   K.   Manufactured and mobile home park or trailer park, subject to the
criteria of Chapter 16.44;
   L.   One two-family dwelling (duplex) where the lot contains a minimum of
twelve thousand square feet.  Through the conditional use process, the Planning
Commission may require the two dwellings in a duplex to share a common driveway
to minimize curb cuts and paving;
   M.   One duplex on a corner lot that contains a minimum of ten thousand
square feet, provided that the building is designed such that vehicle access to
the different units is taken from different streets;
   N.   Bed and Breakfast;
   O.   Residential Facility - for six to fifteen individuals (Per ORS 197.667
(4) and 443.400 (8))
   P.   Zero-lot line development for uses otherwise allowed, provided that the
minimum side yard setback shall be 7 feet when adjacent to housing with
standard setbacks.  Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall
submit a copy of a recorded easement for every zero-lot line housing that
guarantees rights for the purpose of construction and maintenance of structures
and yards.  The easement shall stipulate that no fence or other obstruction
shall be placed in a manner that would prevent maintenance of structures on the
subject lot; and the building placement, landscaping, and/or design of windows
shall provide a buffer for the occupants of abutting lots.
   Q.   Other developments customarily found within a residential zone, as
determined by the Planning Commission. 
   R.   Detached accessory structure (not dwelling) up to twenty-two feet high
which is located outside the allowed building footprint area for the principal
structure and which does not meet the step-up height standard described in
16.16.030(E)(2)(b).  (Ord. 890 section 16, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.18(B),
1984; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1111 section 7, 2003; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514,
2019)
16.16.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the R-
l zone:
   A.   Minimum and maximum lot area: seven thousand (7,000) square feet
minimum, and ten thousand (10,000) square feet maximum, per single-family
dwelling. The maximum lot area standard does not apply to single family
dwellings existing at the time of subdivision or partition plan approval; and
the Planning Commission may approve smaller or larger lots in conformance with
subsection B, below.  Preexisting, legally created lots of record shall be
considered to be legally buildable and separately saleable, provided they
contain at least five thousand (5,000) square feet; and further provided, that
any new structures on such lots meet the required setbacks.
   B.   Lot area exceptions:
      1.   The Planning Commission may approve an exception to the minimum and
maximum lot area standards in subsection
16.16.030.A as part of a subdivision or partition application when all of the
following standards are met:
         a.   The average area of all lots created through the subject land
division, excluding required public park land dedications, surface water
management facilities and similar public use areas, shall be no less than seven
thousand square feet and no greater than ten thousand square feet.  Non-
required significant natural resource areas shall be included in the average
lot size calculation to enable a transfer of density onto buildable portions of
the site. Required areas include identified parks, wetland areas, riparian
corridors, and other areas in which building is not permitted under local,
state, or federal laws or regulations. For land in the North Redwood DCP area,
the Planning Commission may allow public park land dedications to be included
in the lot size averaging calculation in order to achieve community development
goals and allow protection of natural resources; in this case, the resulting
average lot size shall not be less than 5,000 square feet.
         b.   No lot shall be created that contains less than six thousand
square feet, unless the alternative lot layout option provided in Section
16.64.040 is used;
         c.   The lot area standards for two-family dwellings, as provided in
Sections 16.16.010 and 16.16.020, shall be met; and
         d.   As a condition of granting the exception, the city will require
the owner to record a deed restriction with the final plat that prevents the
re-division of over-sized lots (e.g., ten thousand square feet and larger),
when such re-division would violate the average lot area provision in
subsection
16.16.030.B.1.a.  All lots approved for use by more than one dwelling shall be
so designated on the final plat.
      2.   A public benefit must be demonstrated in order to allow more than
ten percent of the lots to be outside of the minimum and maximum lot areas in
subsection
16.16.030.A.
      3.   The Planning Commission may modify the maximum lot area requirements
in 16.16.030.A if these cannot be met due to existing lot dimensions, road
patterns, or other site characteristics.
   C.   Minimum width and frontage: sixty feet, except that the Planning
Commission may approve lots having less frontage subject to special conditions
to assure adequate access.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard:  twenty feet on side with driveway; fifteen feet for
all other street sides; except that street yards may be reduced to ten feet for
covered porches only;
      2.   Rear yard:  all corner lots, ten feet single story or fifteen feet
two-story; all other lots, fifteen feet single story or twenty feet two-story. 
One story building components must meet the single story setback requirements;
two story building components must meet the two-story setback requirements;
      3.   Interior yard: Seven feet, except as otherwise provided for zero-lot
line housing.
      4.   Interior and rear yards may be reduced to three feet, or the width
of any existing utility easement, whichever is greater, for detached accessory
structures erected sixty feet or more from any street other than an alley. The
height limitations noted in subsection E.2 below apply to such structures.
Detached accessory dwellings are not eligible for the three foot reduction.
Utility easements may only be reduced with the approval of all utility
providers.
      5.   Infill standards may also apply. See CMC 16.21.050.
   E.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Principal building:  thirty-five feet.
      2.   Detached accessory structure:
         a.   If located inside the allowed building footprint for the
principal building, a detached accessory structure may be up to twenty-two feet
tall, as measured to the highest point of the roof.
         b   If located outside the allowed building footprint for the
principal building, a detached accessory structure is subject to a step-up
height standard, and is allowed outright only if it meets this standard.  The
structure shall not exceed eight feet tall, as measured to the highest point of
the roof, at a distance of three feet from the property line. The structure may
increase in height by one foot vertically for every one foot horizontally away
from the three foot line, up to the maximum height of twenty-two feet.
         c.   A conditional use permit is required to locate the structure
outside of the allowed building footprint for the principal building in
violation of the step-up height standard. 
         d.   Detached accessory structures over twenty-two feet tall are not
permitted.
      3.   For detached accessory dwellings, the Planning Commission may
approve building heights over twenty-two feet through the Conditional Use
process, but in no case shall the accessory dwelling be higher than the
principal building. The Planning Commission may only approve the use of
buildings over twenty-two feet in the case of existing structures where no
substantial changes to existing roof lines are proposed.
   F.   The maximum amount of impervious surface allowed the R-1 zone shall be
60 percent of the lot area.
      1.   Impervious surface includes all surface areas that create a barrier
to or hinder the entry of water into the soil in comparison with natural
conditions prior to development.  Impervious surfaces include, but are not
limited to, buildings, paved parking areas and driveways, roads, sidewalks,
patios, packed earth, and oiled surfaces.  Open, uncovered retention/detention
facilities, green roofs, and permeable surfacing materials shall not be
considered impervious surfaces.  Roof surfaces are also considered ‘pervious’
when 100% of the annual average roof runoff is captured and reused on-site for
irrigation or approved interior uses.
      2.   To limit impervious surface, alternative surfacing materials may be
used.  Alternative surfacing includes, but is not limited to paving blocks,
turf block, pervious concrete, and porous asphalt.  Other similar approved
materials are encouraged.  Utilization of alternative surfacing methods shall
be subject to review by the City Public Works Department for compliance with
applicable regulations and development standards. Maintenance of alternative
surfacing materials located on private property are the responsibility of the
property owner.
   G.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distance shall be ten feet from a street to an
alley or a street to a driveway, and thirty feet from a street to any other
street.
      2.   All setbacks to be measured from the foundation line of the
building; overhangs shall not exceed two feet; mechanical units, used for the
heating/cooling of residential units are exempt from interior and/or rear yard
setback requirements. A chimney for a fireplace or stove shall not exceed a two
foot projection.
      3.   To provide shade, required yards on southern and western exposures
may be reduced by not more than five feet for eaves, canopies, and covered
patios if patio posts still comply with required five foot setbacks.
      4.   Accessory buildings shall not have a larger footprint than the
primary building, unless lot area exceeds twelve thousand square feet.  (Ord.
890 section 17, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.18(C), 1984; Ord. 955 section 5,
1996; Ord. 981 section 45, 1997; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1111 section 7, 2003;
Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
Chapter 16.18
R-1.5 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Sections:
   
16.18.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.18.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.18.030   Development standards.
16.18.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the R-1.5 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Uses permitted outright in the R-1 zone;
   B.   Two-family or three-family dwellings.  One duplex or triplex on each
lot.  (Ord. 740 sect. 10.3.20 (A), 1984)
   C.   Single-family townhouse dwellings having common wall construction. The
townhouse construction is limited to a maximum grouping of three dwelling
units. If more than one group of dwellings is developed then a ten foot
distance shall be maintained between an adjacent group of dwelling units. (Ord.
740 sect. 10.3.20(B), 1984; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.18.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the R-1.5 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Uses listed as conditional in the R-1 zone; except as modified by
Section
16.18.010, above;
   B.   Four-family dwellings. (Ord. 740 sect. 10.3.20(B), 1984; Ord. 1080,
2001; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.18.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the R-
1.5 zone:
   A.   Minimum and maximum lot area:
      1.   For single family dwellings: five thousand (5,000) square feet
minimum and six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet maximum.
      2.   For townhome dwelling units having common wall construction: three
thousand (3000) square foot minimum lot size.
      3.   Minimum residential density: For two, three, and four family
dwellings: new development shall achieve a minimum density of 6 units per acre
and a maximum of 13 units per acre. Minimum density for a property is
calculated by multiplying its area in acres (minus area required for street
right-of-way and public park/open space areas) by the density standard. For
example, 0.32 acres x 6 units/acre = minimum of 1.92 units. Decimals are
rounded to the nearest whole number (e.g., a minimum of 1.92 units becomes a
minimum of 2 units per acre). The Planning Commission may modify the density
standard if it cannot be met due to existing lot dimensions, road patterns, or
other site characteristics.
      4.   The Planning Commission may approve smaller or larger lots in
accordance with subsection B, below.
   B.   Lot area exceptions:
      1.   The Planning Commission may approve an exception to the minimum and
maximum lot area standards in subsection
16.18.030.A as part of a subdivision or partition application when all of the
following standards are met:
         a.   The average area of all lots and open space tracts created
through the subject land division, excluding required public park land
dedications, surface water management facilities and similar public use areas,
shall be no less than five thousand square feet and no greater than six
thousand five hundred square feet. Non-required significant natural resource
areas shall be included in the average lot size calculation to enable a
transfer of density onto buildable portions of the site. Required areas include
identified parks, wetland areas, riparian corridors, and other areas in which
building is not permitted under local, state, or federal laws or regulations.
For land in the North Redwood DCP area, the Planning Commission may allow
public park land dedications to be included in the lot size averaging
calculation in order to achieve community development goals and allow
protection of natural resources; in this case, the resulting average lot size
shall not be less than 4,000 square feet;
         b.   No lot shall be created that contains less than four thousand
square feet,  unless the alternative lot layout option provided in Section
16.64.040 is used;and
         c.   As a condition of granting the exception, the city will require
the owner to record a deed restriction with the final plat that prevents the
re-division of over-sized lots (six thousand five hundred square feet and
larger), when such re-division would violate the average lot size provision in
subsection
16.18.030.B.1.a.  All lots approved for use by more than one dwelling shall be
so designated on the final plat.
      2.   A public benefit must be demonstrated in order to allow more than
ten percent of the lots to be outside of the minimum and maximum lot areas in
subsection
16.18.030.B.1.a.
      3.   The Planning Commission may modify the maximum lot area requirements
in subsection
16.18.030.B if these cannot be met due to existing lot dimensions, road
patterns, or other site characteristics.
      4.   The maximum lot area standard does not apply to dwellings existing
prior to subdivision or partition plan approval or to lots designated for open
space.
   C.   Minimum width and frontage: forty feet, except that the Planning
Commission may approve lots having less frontage subject to special conditions
to assure adequate access.  Twenty feet is permitted for single family attached
(common wall) housing on interior lots.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard: twenty feet on side with driveway; fifteen feet for all
other street sides; except that street yards may be reduced to ten feet for
covered porches only.
      2.   Rear yard: all corner lots, ten feet single story or fifteen feet
two-story; all other lots: fifteen feet single story ortwenty feet two-story. 
One story building components must meet the single story setback requirements;
two story building components must meet the two-story setback requirements;
      3.   Interior yard: seven feet, except as otherwise provided for zero-lot
line housing.
      4.   Interior and rear yards may be reduced to three feet, or the width
of any existing utility easement, whichever is greater, for detached accessory
structures, except accessory dwellings, erected sixty feet or more from any
street other than an alley. The height limitations noted in subsection E.2
below apply. Utility easements may only be reduced with the approval of all
utility providers.
      5.   Infill standards may also apply. See CMC 16.21.050.
   E.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Principal building: thirty-five feet.
      2.   Detached accessory structure:
         a.   If located inside the allowed building footprint for the
principal building, a detached accessory structure may be up to twenty-two feet
tall, as measured to the highest point of the roof.
         b.   If located outside the allowed building footprint for the
principal building, a detached accessory structure is subject to a step-up
height standard, and is allowed outright only if it meets this standard.  The
structure shall not exceed eight feet tall, as measured to the highest point of
the roof, at a distance of three feet from the property line. The structure may
increase in height by one foot vertically for every one foot horizontally away
from the three foot line, up to the maximum height of twenty-two feet.
         c.   A conditional use permit is required to locate the structure
outside of the allowed building footprint for the principal building in
violation of the step-up height standard. 
         d.   Detached accessory structures over twenty-two feet tall are not
permitted.
      3.   For detached accessory dwellings, the Planning Commission may
approve building heights over twenty-two feet through the Conditional Use
process, but in no case shall the accessory dwelling be higher than the
principal building.  The Planning Commission may only approve the use of
buildings over twenty-two feet in the case of existing structures where no
substantial changes to existing roof lines are proposed.
   F.   The maximum amount of impervious surface allowed the R-1.5 zone shall
be 70 percent of the lot area.
      1.   Impervious surface includes all surface areas that create a barrier
to or hinder the entry of water into the soil in comparison with natural
conditions prior to development.  Impervious surface include, but are not
limited to, buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, patios,
packed earth, and oiled surfaces.  Open, uncovered retention/detention
facilities, green roofs, and permeable surfacing materials shall not be
considered impervious surfaces.  Roof surfaces are also considered ‘pervious’
when 100% of the annual average roof runoff is captured and reused on-site for
irrigation or approved interior uses.
      2.   To limit impervious surface, alternative surfacing materials may be
used. Alternative surfacing includes, but is not limited to paving blocks, turf
block, pervious concrete, and porous asphalt.  Other similar approved materials
are encouraged.  Utilization of alternative surfacing methods shall be subject
to review and approval by the City Public Works Department for compliance with
other applicable regulations and development standards. Maintenance of
alternative surfacing materials located on private property are the
responsibility of the property owner.
   G.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distance shall be ten feet from a street to an
alley or a street to a driveway, and thirty feet from a street to any other
street.
      2.   All setbacks to be measured from the foundation line of the
building.  Overhangs shall not exceed two feet; mechanical units, used for the
heating/cooling of residential units are exempt from interior and/or rear yard
setback requirements. A chimney for a fireplace or stove shall not exceed a two
foot projection.
      3.   To provide shade, required yards on southern and western exposures
may be reduced by not more than five feet for eaves, canopies, and patio
covers, if the patio posts still comply with required setbacks.
      4.   Accessory buildings shall not have a larger footprint than the
primary building.  (Ord. 890 sect. 19, 1993; Ord. 740 sect. 10.3.20(C), 1984;
Ord. 955 sect. 6, 1996; Ord. 981 sect. 46, 1997; Ord. 1019 sect. 8, 1999; Ord.
1080, 2001; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
Chapter 16.20
R-2 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
(Ord 890 section 20, 1993)
Sections:
   
16.20.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.20.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.20.030   Development standards.
16.20.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the R-2 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Uses permitted outright in the R-1.5 zone, subject to the density
standards in Section
16.20.030(A);
   B.   Single family townhouse dwellings having common wall construction;
   C.   Boarding, lodging or rooming house;
   D.   Multi-family dwelling;
   E.   Manufactured and mobile home or trailer parks, subject to the criteria
of Chapter 16.44;
   F.   Bed and Breakfast. 
   G.   Residential Facility - for six or more individuals. (Per ORS 197.667(4)
and 443.400 (8))
(Ord. 890 section 21, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.21(A), 1984; Ord. 1019
section 9, 1999; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.20.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the R-2 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   A use listed as conditional in the R-1 zone and not listed as permitted
outright in section 16.20.010;
   B.   Uses listed as permitted outright in the C-R zone (Section
16.24.010), not to exceed 3,000 square feet, and only when part of a Planned
Unit Development. All such uses shall be subject to site and design review.
   C.   Zero-lot line development for uses otherwise allowed, provided that the
minimum side yard setback shall be 7 feet when adjacent to housing with
standard setbacks.  Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall
submit a copy of a recorded easement for every zero-lot line housing that
guarantees rights for the purpose of construction and maintenance of structures
and yards.  The easement shall stipulate that no fence or other obstruction
shall be placed in a manner that would prevent maintenance of structures on the
subject lot; and the building placement, landscaping, and/or design of windows
shall provide a buffer for the occupants of abutting lots. (Ord. 890 section 22
(A)(B), 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.21 (B), 1984; Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.20.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the R-
2 zone:
   A   Minimum residential density: New development shall achieve a minimum
density of 14 units per acre. Minimum density for a property is calculated by
multiplying its area in acres (minus area required for street right-of-way and
public park/open space areas) by the density standard. For example, 0.18 acres
x 14 units/acre = minimum of 2.52 units. Decimals are rounded to the nearest
whole number (e.g., a minimum of 2.52 units becomes a minimum of 3 units). The
Planning Commission may modify the density standard if it cannot be met due to
existing lot dimensions, road patterns, or other site characteristics.
   B.   Townhouses with common wall construction must be placed on a maximum
3000 square foot lot in order to meet the density required in this section.
   C.   Minimum width and frontage: Twenty feet except that the Planning
Commission may require additional width to ensure that all applicable access
standards are met.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard:  twenty feet on side with driveway; fifteen feet for
all other street sides; except that street yards may be reduced to ten feet for
covered porches only. Street yards for multifamily development (3 or more units
located on the same property) located adjacent and on the same side of the
street to an R-1 (Low Density Residential) or R-1.5 (Medium Density
Residential) zone shall establish a front yard setback that is within 5 feet of
the front yard setback of the adjacent home in the R-1 or R-1.5 zone but shall
not be less than 10 feet from the property line. This standard does not apply
if the closest adjacent home has a front yard setback greater than 30 feet.
      2.   Rear yard:  all corner lots, ten feet single story or fifteen feet
two-story; all other lots: fifteen feet single story or twenty feet two-story. 
One story building components must meet the single story setback requirements;
two story building components must meet the two-story setback requirements;
      3.   Interior yard: seven feet, except as otherwise provided for zero-lot
line housing.
      4.   Interior and rear yards may be reduced to three feet, or the width
of any existing utility easement, whichever is greater, for detached accessory
structures erected sixty feet or more from any street other than an alley. The
height limitations noted in subsection D.2 below apply to such structures.
Utility easements may only be reduced with the approval of all utility
providers.
      5.   Multifamily development (3 or more units on the same property) that
is adjacent to an R-1 (Low Density Residential) or R-1.5 (Medium Density
Residential) zone must provide a minimum 15-foot buffer area between the
multifamily development and the R-1 or R-1.5 zoned property.  Within this
buffer the following applies (see figure 16.20-1):
         a.   Site obscuring landscaping shall be required.  The Planning
Commission may require retention of existing vegetation; installation of a 6-
foot minimum height site-obscuring fence with shade trees planted a maximum of
30 feet on center; and/or other landscaping to provide visual buffering.
         b.   No active recreation areas (tot lots, swimming pools, etc.) shall
be allowed within the 15-foot buffer (garden spaces shall not be considered
active recreation areas);
      6.   Infill standards may also apply. See CMC 16.20.030(D)(3) and CMC
16.21.050.
   E.   Maximum building height and length:
      1.   Principal building:  thirty-five feet.
      2.   Detached accessory structure:
         a.   If located inside the allowed building footprint for the
principal building, a detached accessory structure may be up to twenty-two feet
tall, as measured to the highest point of the roof.
         b.   If located outside the allowed building footprint for the
principal building, a detached accessory structure is subject to a step-up
height standard, and is allowed outright only if it meets this standard.  The
structure shall not exceed eight feet tall, as measured to the highest point of
the roof, at a distance of three feet from the property line. The structure may
increase in height by one foot vertically for every one foot horizontally away
from the three foot line, up to the maximum height of twenty-two feet.
         c.   A conditional use permit is required to locate the structure
outside of the allowed building footprint for the principal building in
violation of the step-up height standard. 
         d.   Detached accessory structures over twenty-two feet tall are not
permitted.
      3.   Maximum building height for multifamily developments abutting an R-
1 (Low Density Residential) or R-1.5 (Medium Density Residential) zone shall
not exceed a building height greater than one foot for each foot of distance
from the R-1 and/or R-1.5 property line.
      4.   Maximum building length shall be 120 feet.
   F.   The maximum amount of impervious surface allowed in the R-2 zone shall
be 70 percent of the lot area.
      1.   Impervious surface includes all surface areas that create a barrier
to or hinder the entry of water into the soil in comparison with natural
conditions prior to development.  Impervious surfaces includes, but are not
limited to, buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, patios,
packed earth, and oiled surfaces.  Open, uncovered retention/detention
facilities, green roofs, and permeable surfacing materials shall not be
considered impervious surfaces.  Roof surfaces are also considered ‘pervious’
when 100% of the annual average roof runoff is captured and reused on-site for
irrigation or approved interior uses.
      2.   To limit impervious surface, alternative surfacing materials may be
used.  Alternative surfacing includes, but is not limited to paving blocks,
turf block, pervious concrete, and porous asphalt.  Other similar approved
materials are encouraged.  Utilization of alternative surfacing methods shall
be subject to review and approval by the City Public Works Department for
compliance with other applicable regulations and development standards.
Maintenance of alternative surfacing materials located on private property are
the responsibility of the property owner.      
   G.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distance shall be ten feet from a street to an
alley or a street to a driveway, and thirty feet from a street to any other
street.
      2.   All setbacks to be measured from the foundation line of the
building.  Overhangs shall not exceed two feet; mechanical units, used for the
heating/cooling of residential units are exempt from interior and/or rear yard
setback requirements. A chimney for a fireplace or stove shall not exceed a two
foot projection.
      3.   To provide shade, required yards on southern and western exposures
may be reduced by not more than five feet for eaves, canopies, and patio
covers, if patio posts still comply with required setbacks.
      4.   Multi-family developments exceeding ten units shall provide 150
square feet of recreation space per dwelling unit.  Recreation spaces shall be
no less than 1,500 square feet in size. 
      5.   Accessory buildings shall not have a larger footprint than the
primary building. 
      6.   Townhouse (common wall) development shall not exceed six dwelling
units as defined in Chapter 16.04.195. Where possible, the six unit development
should include the placement of an alley or sidewalk along the rear boundary of
the properties for fire and emergency access to the rear of the properties. If
more than one group of six dwelling units is constructed, then the groups shall
be separated by ten feet of open space. (Ord. 890 sect. 23, 1993; Ord. 740
sect. 10.3.21 (C),1984; Ord. 955 sect. 7, 1996; Ord. 981 sect. 47, 1997; Ord.
1080, 2001; Ord. 1107, 2002; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6834.png]
Chapter 16.21
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
Sections:
   
16.21.010   Purpose.
   
16.21.020   Applicability and review procedure for single and two-family
dwellings.
   
16.21.030   Single and two-family dwelling design menus.
   
16.21.040   Main entrances
   
16.21.050   Infill dwellings and lots.
   
16.21.060   Applicability and review procedure for multi-family dwellings.
   
16.21.070   Multi-family design standards.
16.21.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of the residential design objectives are to promote:
   A.   Community livability through thecreation of attractive design housing
and streetscapes.
   B.   Compatibility (in height, bulk, setback and overall design) between
infill housing and adjacent established housing, to the extent practicable. 
Additionally, the standards are intended to promote compatibility and
transitions between multi-family housing and adjacent uses.
   C.   Community safety for neighborhood streets and front yards by providing
“eyes on the street.”
   D.   Community interaction by designing neighborhood streets, front yards
and open spaces so that they are attractive and inviting places for neighbors
to interact.
   E.   Good design at reasonable cost through design standards that improve
residential design within reasonable cost parameters, process, and with options
for how to meet the standards. (Ord. 1107, 2002)
   F.   Low impact developments that manage stormwater through the use of on-
site features, preserve natural conditions and open space, minimize impervious
surfaces, and use land efficiently.    (Ord. 1107, 2002; Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.21.020   Applicability and review procedure for single family and two family
dwellings.
The standards in sections 16.21.030 through 16.21.050 apply to single family
dwellings, manufactured homes, and two family dwellings (duplexes). Where a
proposal is for an alteration or addition to an existing development, the
standards of this section apply only to the portion being altered or added.  If
the applicant can demonstrate that implementation of the standards would be
impractical due to lot size, shape, slope, or other natural feature of the
property that does not generally apply to other properties in the city, the
Planning Director may waive any of the standards which are demonstrated to be
impractical. (Ord. 1107, 2002)
16.21.030   Single family and two-family dwelling design menu.
   A.   Purpose: These standards are intended to ensure design of housing that
will reinforce and enhance Canby’s overall livability and provide options to
promote design variety and ease of administration of the standards.
   B.   All new single family dwellings, manufactured homes, townhouses, and
two-family dwellings (duplexes) shall comply with the design features in this
section along street facing facades.
      1.   Additions and alterations that add less than 50% to the existing
floor area of the house (not including garage floor area) are exempt from this
subsection, unless a new garage is being added. Additions or alterations that
are not visible from the street side of the home are exempt.
   C.   Garage Standards: These standards are intended to: provide a visual
connection between the living area of the residence and the street; prevent
garages from obscuring or dominating the main entrance of the house; and,
provide for a pleasant pedestrian environment in residential areas.  The garage
and design standards are:
      1.   Garage Façade Length Standards:
         a.   A garage up to 50% of the length of the street-facing facade (see
figure 16.21-1), shall meet 4 of the design standards in 16,21.030(D) or,
         b.   A garage up to 60% or more of the length of the facade,shall meet
6 of the design standards in 16.21.030(D).
         c.   On corner lots, the non-front street side of the lot shall comply
with 3 of the design menu standards in 16.21.030 (D).
      2.   Garage Façade Projection Standards:
         a)   A garage wall that faces the street may be no closer to the
street than the longest remaining front façade of the house, except as provided
in subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) below.
         b)   A garage may extend up to 6 feet in front of the longest
remaining portion of the front facade if:
            1.   There is a covered front porch and the garage does not extend
beyond the front line of the porch (see figure 16.21-3); or,
            2.   The garage is part of a dwelling’s multi-gabled façadeand has
a window (minimum 6 square feet, with 4" trim or shutters) above the garage
door or  placed on another front façade gable that faces the garage street
frontage (see figure 16.21-4).
      3.   On corner lots, and through lots, only one street-facing wall must
meet the design standards required in 1 or 2 above for the front of the lot as
defined in Section
16.04.320.
      4.   Garages may be side-oriented to the front lot line if windows occupy
a minimum of 15% of the street-facing wall of the garage (see figure 16.21-5).
      5.   The garage standards in this section do not apply to “flag lots”
when the proposed dwelling cannot be clearly seen from the public street
frontage or does not front on a public street.
   D.   Design Menu Standards
      1.   Dormers
      2.   Gables, hip roof, or gambrel roof form.
      3.   Recessed entries (minimum 2 foot recess)
      4.   Covered porch entries (minimum 48 square feet, minimum 4 feet deep)
      5.   Bay windows
      6.   Any eaves of 12 inches or greater
      7.   Off-set of 16 inches or greater on building face or roof
      8.   Windows and main entrance doors occupy a minimum of 15% of the
facade, not including the roof.
      9.   Window trim (minimum 4-inch) or shutters (minimum 8-inch)
      10.   Balconies or porch rail
      11.   Shakes, shingles, brick or other similar decorative materials
occupy at least 60 square feet of the street facade.
   E.   Residential Elevations
      1.   Residential dwelling permits shall include delineated top of curb
elevations at two property corners at the street frontage.
      2.   Finished floor elevations at the front street side of the dwelling
shall not exceed 30 inches above the average of the two measured elevations.
   F.   Garage Setback
      1.   A minimum 19 foot setback shall be provided from the garage to the
sidewalk when the sidewalk is an easement that extends onto private property to
prevent vehicles parked in the driveway from protruding into the sidewalk area.
   G.   Placement of Mobile Homes or Manufactured Homes on a lot in a
residential zone, outside of a mobile home park, that is used as the primary
residence must construct a carport or garage for at least one vehicle. (Ord.
1107, 2002; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.21.040   Main entrances for single family and two family dwellings.
   A.   Purpose. These standards are intended to ensure there is a visual
connection between the entry of the home and the street, and, provide for a
pleasant pedestrian environment in residential areas.
   B.   At least one main entrance for each structure must:
      1.   Additions or alterations that are not visible from the street side
of the home are exempt. or
      2.   Be at an angle up to 45 degrees from the street, or
      3.   Open onto a covered porch on the front or side of the residence that
is at least 48 square feet in area and at least 4 feet in depth. (Ord. 1107,
2002)
16.21.050   Infill Homes
   A.   Purpose.  The purposes of these standards are to promote compatibility
between new development and existing homes, and, to provide for the efficient
use of residential land.
   B.   Applicability.  These standards apply to all new infill homes as
defined by 16.04.255.  The standards also apply to remodels of existing infill
homes where the remodel increases the homes floor area by more than 50%, not
including garage area.
   C.   Standards for Infill Homes (see figure 16.21-6)
      1.   Lot Coverage - Infill homes exceeding one story shall not exceed a
lot coverage of 35%. In this standard, lot coverage applies to portion of the
lot covered by structures, not including garage area.
      2.   Garage Standards - Infill homes must meet the Option 1 garage
standards in 16.21.030.  The infill home is exempt from garage standards if
located on a flag lot, or, if an adjacent home fronting the same street does
not comply with the garage standards in 16.21.030(C).
      3.   Similar Front Setback - Infill homes shall establish a front yard
setback that is within 5 feet of the front yard setback for the closest
adjacent home on the same side of the street.  This standard does not apply if
the closest adjacent home has a front yard setback greater than 30 feet.
      4.   Maximum Height.  Infill homes shall have a maximum height of 28
feet.
      5.   Step-up Standard.  At the interior and rear setback line, the infill
home shall not exceed a single story exterior wall height (not to exceed 10
feet from finished floor to top plate).  The area within a gable is not
included in the wall height.  Finished vaulted ceilings or unfinished attic
spaces without exterior windows are allowed in the gable area.  The building
may increase in height by one foot vertically for every foot horizontally away
from the setback line, up to the maximum height allowed. Building height is
measured as defined by the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.  The Planning
Director or Planning Commission may exempt infill homes from this standard for
any yard that abuts a property on which the existing home is greater than one
story.
16.21.060   Applicability and review procedure for multi-family dwellings.
The standards in section 16.21.070 apply to multi-family dwellings. Where a
proposal is for an alteration or addition to an existing development, the
standards of this section apply only to the portion being altered or added.  If
the applicant can demonstrate that implementation of the standards would be
impractical due to lot size, shape, slope, or other natural feature of the
property that does not generally apply to other properties in the city, the
Planning Director may waive any of the standards which are demonstrated to be
impractical. (Ord. 1107, 2002)
16.21.070   Multi-family design standards.
   A.   For design review applications for multi-family dwellings (three or
more units) or for development that contain 3 or more units on a single lot
located in any zone, the menu in Table 16.21.070 shall apply.  This menu
replaces the general menu contained in Chapter 16.49 for such applications.
   A.   A design review application for multi-family dwellings shall be
considered to be compatible if
      1.   At least five of the Design Elements for Street Facing Facades are
achieved. 
      2.   A minimum of 60 percent of the total possible points from the Design
Menu are accumulated for the whole development;
      3.   10 percent of the points used to meet (2) above are from the LID
category; and,
      4.   The applicant has received a minimum of one point in each applicable
category.
   C.   Those elements that are not applicable to a project shall not be
counted toward the total possible points.  (Ord. 1338; 2010)
Table 16.21.070 Multi-Family Design Menu
As part of review of multi-family developments, the following menu shall be
used as part of the review. In order to “pass” this table 60% of total possible
points shall be earned,
(10% of the total possible points must be from LID elements)
 
Design Criteria Possible Points
Parking                                                                   0                        1            2            3         4
Screening of parking and/or loading facilities from public right-of-way   Not screened             Partially    Fully        -         -
                                                                                                   screened     screened
Parking lot lighting provided                                             No                       Yes          -            -         -
Parking location (behind building is best)                                Front                    Side         Behind       -         -
Number of parking spaces provided (% of minimum required)                 >120%                    101-120%     100%         -         -
Tree Retention                                                            0                        1            2            3         4
Percentage of trees retained                                              <10%                     10-50%       51-75%       >75%      -
Replacement of trees removed                                              <50%                     =50%         -            -         -
Building Orientation to the Street                                        0                        1            2            3         4
                                                                                                   Entrance     All
Primary entrances face the street                                         Not street-facing        breezeway    entrances    -         -
                                                                                                   faces street face the
                                                                                                                street
Building Orientation to the Street, cont.                                 0                        1            2            3         4
Site's frontage has buildings within 25 feet of front lot line. (Full                              26-50% of    =51% of
points may be given when courtyards are adjacent to the frontage.)        0-25% of street frontage street       street       -         -
                                                                                                   frontage     frontage
Screening of Storage Areas and Utility Boxes                              0                        1            2            3         4
Trash storage is screened from view by solid wood fence, masonry wall or  No                       Yes          -            -         -
landscaping.
                                                                                                   11 - 25 feet >25 feet
Trash storage is located away from adjacent property lines.               0 - 10 feet from         from         from         -         -
                                                                          adjacent property        adjacent     adjacent
                                                                                                   property     property
Utility equipment is screened from view.                                  Not screened             Partially    Fully        -         -
                                                                                                   screened     screened
Prevention of Monotonous and Incompatible Design                          0                        1            2            3         4
Horizontal length of all buildings is a maximum of 120 feet.              101 - 120 feet           81 - 100     =80 feet     -         -
                                                                                                   feet
Roofs have a gable, hip or gamble form, minimum pitch of 3 to 12 with at  No                       Yes          -            -         -
least 6-inch overhang.
A minimum of 15% of street façade areas contains windows or doors.  All No                       Yes          -            -         -
windows provide trim, recess, or other method of providing shadowing.
Garages are located to minimize their visual impact.                      Front of building        Side of      Back of      -         -
                                                                                                   building     building
                                                                                                   One design   Two or more
                                                                                                   feature      design
Exterior design features include offsets, balconies, projections, window  Less than one design     within every features
reveals, or similar elements to break up large building expanses.         feature within every 30  30 feet of   within every -         -
                                                                          feet of longest façade. longest      30 feet of
                                                                                                   façade.     longest
                                                                                                                façade.
Private Open Space and Landscaping                                        0                        1            2            3         4
                                                                                                   Patios or    Patios or    Sport
                                                                                                   balconies    balconies    court,
Private open space provided in addition to what is required for the base  No additional open       (at least 48 (at least 48 tot lot,
zone.                                                                     space.                   square feet) square feet) pool or   -
                                                                                                   provided for provided for community
                                                                                                   50% of       51-100% of   room is
                                                                                                   units.       units.       provided.
                                                                                                   At least one
                                                                                                   tree per 500
Number of non-required trees provided.                                    -                        square feet  -            -         -
                                                                                                   of
                                                                                                   landscaping.
Private Open Space and Landscaping, cont.                                 0                        1            2            3         4
Amount of grass (less grass is better) (% of total landscaped area)       >50%                     25-50%       <25%         -         -
Street and Block Framework                                                0                        1            2            3         4
                                                                                                   10-50% of    51-100% of
                                                                                                   units are    units are
                                                                                                   along a      along a
Multi-family developments 8 acres or larger are developed as a series of                           street with  street with
complete blocks bounded by a network of public or private streets with    No blocks or network.    sidewalks,   sidewalks,   -         -
sidewalks and street trees.                                                                        street       street
                                                                                                   trees, and   trees, and
                                                                                                   on-street    on-street
                                                                                                   parking.     parking.
Low Impact Development (LID)                                              0                        1            2            3         4
Use of pervious paving materials (% of total paved area)                  <10%                     -            10-50%       51-75%    >75%
                                                                                                                Open Space             Park (public or
Provision of park or open space area for public use                       None                     -            (Generally   -         privately owned for
                                                                                                                not for                public use)
                                                                                                                public use)
                                                                                                                25-50%       51-75%
Use of drought tolerant species in landscaping (% of total plants)        <25% drought tolerant    -            drought      drought   >75% drought tolerant
                                                                                                                tolerant     tolerant
Provision of additional interior parking lot landscaping (% of minimum    100%                     101-110%     111-120%     >120%     -
required)
Provision of an eco-roof or rooftop garden (% of total roof area)         <10%                     -            -            10-50%    >50%
Parking integrated within building footprint (below-grade, structured     <10%                     -            -            10-50%    >50%
parking, or tuck-under parking) (% of total on-site parking)
                                                                                                   Some         All
Disconnecting downspouts from city stormwater facilities                  None                     downspouts   downspouts   -         -
                                                                                                   disconnected disconnected
Shared parking with adjacent uses or public parking structure (% of total None                     <50%         =50%         -         -
required parking spaces)
Provision of rain gardens/bioretention areas for stormwater runoff (% of  None                     -            10-50%       51-75%    >75%
total landscaped area)
                                                                          Total Possible Points= 67 60%=40 points (rounding down),
                                                                                                                      10%=7 points (rounding up)
 
(Ord. 1338, 2010)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6836.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6838.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6840.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6842.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6844.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6846.png]
Chapter 16.22
C-1 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL ZONE
Sections:
   
16.22.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.22.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.22.030   Development standards.
   
16.22.040   Design Review Matrix.
16.22.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the C-1 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Residential. Residential uses shall be permitted only when part of a
mixed use development (residential with commercial, office, or public/
institutional use). Both vertical mixed use (housing above the ground floor)
and horizontal mixed use (housing on the ground floor) developments are
allowed, as follows:
      1.   Ground floor dwelling units that are incidental (less than 25% of
the ground floor gross area) attached to any use allowed in a C-1 zone, and
have access from a side or back entrance, or an entrance that is incidental to
the commercial main ground floor use.
      2.   Residential units occupying the second and/or third story of any
structure in the C-1 zone, provided the primary ground floor use is listed in
16.22.010.
      3.   Limitation on street-level housing. No more than fifty (50) percent
of a single street frontage may be occupied by residential uses. This standard
is intended to reserve storefront space for commercial uses and public/
institutional uses; it does not limit residential uses above the street level
on upper stories, or behind street-level storefronts. For parcels with street
access at more than one level (e.g., sloping sites with two street frontages),
the limitation on residential building space shall apply to all street
frontages.
         a.   Density. There is no minimum or maximum residential density
standard. Density shall be controlled by the applicable lot coverage and
building height standards.
         b.   Parking, garages, and driveways. All off-street vehicle parking
intended for residential use, including surface lots and garages, shall be
oriented to alleys, placed underground, placed in structures above the ground
floor, or located in parking areas behind or to the side of the building;
except that side yards facing a street (i.e., corner yards) shall not be used
for surface parking. All garage entrances facing a street (e.g., underground or
structured parking) shall be recessed behind the front building elevation by a
minimum of four (4) feet. On corner lots, garage entrances shall be oriented to
a side street when access cannot be provided from an alley.
         c.   Creation of alleys. When a residential subdivision (e.g., four or
more townhome lots) is proposed, a public alley shall be created for the
purpose of vehicle access. Alleys are not required when existing development
patterns or topography make construction of an alley impracticable. As part of
a subdivision, the City may require dedication of right-of-way or easements,
and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building
breaks) to provide pedestrian connections through a development site.
      4.   Existing dwelling units which are not incidental and attached to a
use allowed in the C-1 zone may be altered, expanded (or rebuilt within one
year of a fire or other act of nature) provided that any such additions or
rebuilding comply with the development standards for dwelling units in the R-
2 zone;
   B.   Retail store or shop, except those listed as permitted or conditional
uses in the C-2 zone;
   C.   Amusement enterprise, including pool hall, bowling alley, dance hall,
skating rink or theater, when enclosed in a building;
   D.   Bakery, for retail sale primarily on premises; Establishments primarily
engaged in the retail sale of bakery products. The products may be purchased
from others or made on the premises. Provided the manufacturing does not exceed
7000 square feet of floor space. SIC 5461
   E.   Barber or beauty shop, nail salon;
   F.   Bank or other financial institution;
   G.   Bed and Breakfast, in an existing residence;
   H.   Bicycle sales, service, or repair;
   I.   Blueprinting, Photostatting, printing or other reproduction process;
   J.   Bus depot;
   K.   Business college;
   L.   Catering establishment;
   M.   Church or places of worship;
   N.   Club or lodge hall;
   O.   Day care facility;
   P.   Laundry or cleaning establishment;
   Q.   Frozen food lockers;
   R.   Hardware store, not including lumber or other large building materials
requiring on-site outside or warehouse storage;
   S.   Hotel and apartment hotel;
   T.   Laboratory for experimental, photo or electronic testing research;
   U.   Locksmith or gunsmith;
   V.   Magazine or newspaper distribution agency;
   W.   Mortuary (including those used for pets);
   X.   Office, business or professional;
   Y.   Pawn shop;
   Z.   Public Transit Center;
   AA.   Restaurant, without drive-in service;
   BB.   Scientific or professional instrument sales or repair;
   CC.   Sales, rental or repair of small recreational, radio, television,
business or household equipment;
   DD.   Studio, including music, art, dancing, photography or health;
   EE.   Taxidermy shop;
   FF.   Telephone or telegraph exchange;
   GG.   Theater, except drive-in;
   HH.   Auto parts store and incidental shop facilities;
   II.   Upholstery shop;
   JJ.   Watch and clock repair;
   KK.   Similar commercial uses as determined by the Planning Commission;
   LL.   Public building or land use such as fire station, city hall, park,
playground, library or museum.
   MM.   Minor public facility.
   NN.   Drinking Places (alcoholic Beverages) Establishments primarily engaged
in the retail sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, and liquor,
for consumption on the premises. The sale of food frequently accounts for a
substantial portion of the receipts of these establishments. SIC 5813
   OO.   Brew Pub: General Manufacturing of products included in SIC 2082: Malt
Beverages, provided the manufacturing does not exceed 7,000 square feet of
total floor area per development site, and retail sales of the products
manufactured is provided on-site, and the sale of food frequently accounts for
a substantial portion of the receipts of the establishment.
   PP.   Confectionary Store: Establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing
confectionery for direct sale on the premises to household consumers provided
the manufacturing does not exceed 7000 square feet of floor space. SIC 5441
(Ord. 890 section 24, 1993; Ord. 805 section 2, 1987; Ord. 802 section 6, 1987;
Ord. 740 section 10.3.24(A), 1984; Ord. 955 section 8, 1996; Ord. 981 section
21, 1997; Ord. 1076, 2001; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.22.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the C-1 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   A use listed as conditional in the R-1 zone, except as modified in
Section
16.22.010, above;
   B.   Parking lot or parking structures;
   C.   Attached WTS facilities (see 16.08.120).  (Ord. 890 section 25, 1993;
Ord. 740 section 10.3.24(B), 1984; Ord. 981 section 22, 1997; Ord. 1076, 2001;
Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.22.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the C-
1 zone:
   A.   Minimum lot area: none;
   B.   Minimum width and frontage: none;
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard: none, except ten feet where adjoining a residential
zone.
      2.   Interior yard: none.
      3.   Rear yard:  none
   D.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Freestanding signs: thirty feet;
      2.   All other structures: forty-five feet.
   E.   Maximum lot coverage: no limit;
   F.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distances shall be ten feet from an alley and
fifteen feet from any other street.
      2.   Sidewalks a minimum of eleven (11) feet in width shall be required
in commercial locations unless existing building locations or street width
necessitate a more narrow design.
      3.   All setbacks to be measured from the foundation line of the
building.  Overhangs shall not exceed two feet (not including awnings);
mechanical units, used for the heating/cooling of residential units, are exempt
from interior and/or rear yard setback requirements.
      4.   New commercial buildings, particularly retail shopping and offices,
shall be oriented to the street, near or at the setback line. A main entrance
shall be oriented to the street.
      5.   Off-street motor vehicle parking for new commercial developments
shall be located at the side or behind the building(s). (Ord 740 section
10.3.24(C), 1984; Ord. 981 section 48, 1997; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord.
1076, 2001; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.22.040   Design Review Matrix.
For design review applications located in the C-1 zone the following matrix
shall apply. This matrix replaces the general matrix contained in Chapter 16.49
for such applications.
A design review application in the C-1 zone shall be considered to be
compatible if a minimum of 65 percent of the total possible points (not
including bonuses) are accumulated for the whole development, and if the
applicant has received a minimum of one point in each applicable category.
(Ord. 1076, 2001; Ord. 1080, 2001)
TABLE 16.22.040
 
CRITERIA                                                                      POSSIBLE
                                                                              SCORES
Building Location and Orientation
Building located at front of property line:  Parking in front = 0; 50% of
building front at property line = 1; 100% of building front at property line  0 1 2
= 2.
Building oriented to street:  No = 0; Yes = 2.                               0   2
Entrances
Major retail entrance on street: No = 0; Yes = 2                              0   2
Corner building entrances on corner lots: No = 0; Yes =1                      0 1
Entrance inset (not more than 3 feet behind front glass line except at corner 0   2
entries): No = 0; Yes = 2.
Windows
Regularly spaced and similar-shaped windows – around 70% of storefront area
is glass (includes doors).  (No mirrored glass): <50% = 0; 50% to 70% = 1;   0 1 2
>70% = 2.
Second story windows (where applicable): No = 0; Yes = 2.                     0   2
Architectural Details
Blade sign or painted wall sign (no internally illuminated box signs): No =   0   2
0; Yes = 2
Brick, stucco, and horizontal lap or ship lap painted wood siding; concrete
wood or wood siding = 0; concrete masonry, stucco, or similar material = 1;   0 1 2
brick or similar appearance = 2.
Colors from recommended color palettes (on file with the City of Canby), or   0   2
as otherwise approved: No = 0; Yes = 2.
Cornice treatments to emphasize building tops at parapet-type buildings: flat
roofs behind parapets acceptable, otherwise visible roofs should be pitched:  0 1 2
no treatment = 0; pitched roof = 1; parapet roof = 2.
All walls have doors, widows, or display windows (no blank walls).  Murals,
art niches, benches, or light sconces at blank walls where windows are not    0 1 2
feasible:  no treatment = 0; mural or other treatment = 1; windows or display
windows = 2.
Awnings and rain protection of durable canvas, vinyl, glass or acrylic.  No
awning slope over 45 degrees, with flat or semi-flat awnings along First
Avenue and at buildings with windows above entries.  Awnings are             0   2
discontinuous, with lengths generally under 30 linear feet for longer
buildings:  no awnings = 0; awnings meet criteria = 2.
Parking
Off-street parking (if required) located behind or to side of building:  No =0 1 2
0; side = 1; behind = 2
Bonus Points
Provide usable pedestrian space such as plaza, outdoor seating, or extra-wide 0 1
pathway/sidewalk near one or more building entrances:  No = 0; Yes = 1.
Planters and window boxes: No = 0; Yes = 1.                                   0 1
Public art (e.g., fountain, sculpture, etc.):  No = 0; Yes = 1.              0 1
Second story residential or office:  No = 0; Yes = 1                         0 1
 
Chapter 16.24
C-R RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL ZONE
Sections:
   
16.24.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.24.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.24.030   Development standards.
16.24.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the C-R zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Uses permitted outright in the R-1.5 zone, conforming to the
development standards of the R-1.5 zone;
   B.   Parking lots or parking structures;
   C.   Bakery, for retail sale primarily on premises; Establishments primarily
engaged in the retail sale of bakery products. The products may be purchased
from others or made on the premises. Provided the manufacturing does not exceed
7000 square feet of floor space. SIC 5461
   D.   Barber or beauty shop;
   E.   Bicycle service and repair shop with all business and storage conducted
within an enclosed building;
   F.   Church or places of worship;
   G.   Ceramic, arts, crafts, or hobby shop, provided that adequate parking
exists for any classes given;
   H.   Day care center serving fifteen or fewer children or adults;
   I.   Locksmith shop;
   J.   Magazine or newspaper distribution agency;
   K.   Sales, rental or repair of small recreational, radio, television,
business or household equipment;
   L.   Studio, including music, art, dance, photography or health;
   M.   Upholstery shop;
   N.   Watch or clock repair;
   O.   Business or professional offices;
   P.   Rooming or boarding houses;
   Q.   Shoe repair;
   R.   Dwelling units attached to any use allowed in the C-R zone.
   S.   Brew Pub: General Manufacturing of products included in SIC 2082: Malt
Beverages, provided the manufacturing does not exceed 7,000 square feet of
total floor area per development site, and retail sales of the products
manufactured is provided on-site, and the sale of food frequently accounts for
a substantial portion of the receipts of the establishment.
   T.   Confectionary Store: Establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing
confectionery for direct sale on the premises to household consumers provided
the manufacturing does not exceed 7000 square feet of floor space. SIC 5441
(Ord. 890 section 26, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.25(A), 1984; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.24.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the C-R zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Uses listed as conditional in R-1 or R-1.5 zones, and not listed as
permitted in section 16.24.010; residential development shall conform to the
development standards of the R-2 zone.
   B.   Uses listed as permitted outright in R-2 zones, and not listed as
permitted in section 16.24.010. Such uses shall conform to the development
standards of the R-2 zone.
   C.   Motels or hotels.
   D.   Attached WTS facilities (see 16.08.120).
   E.   Food services, excluding auto-oriented uses. 
   F.   Self-Storage/Mini-Storage Warehouse Units. As defined in 16.04.547.
(Ord. 890 section 27, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.25(B), 1984; Ord. 981 section
23, 1997; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.24.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the C-
R zone:
   A.   Minimum lot area: seven thousand square feet, except for residential
development.  The minimum lot area for residential development shall be
according to 16.18.030(A) for residential uses permitted outright, and shall be
according to 16.20.030(A) for residential uses permitted conditionally;
   B.   Minimum width and frontage:  sixty feet except that the Planning
Commission may approve lots having less frontage, subject to special conditions
to assure adequate access;
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard: twenty feet;
      2.   Interior yard: none, except ten feet where adjoining a residential
zone.  May be reduced to three feet for detached accessory structure not
exceeding one story and erected sixty feet or more from all streets other than
an alley;
      3.   Rear yard: none, except ten feet where adjoining a residential
zone.  May be reduced to three feet for detached accessory structure not
exceeding one story and erected sixty feet or more from all streets other than
an alley.
   D.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Freestanding signs: thirty feet;
      2.   All other structures: forty-five feet.
   E.   Maximum lot coverage: sixty percent;
   F.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distances shall be fifteen feet from any alley and
thirty feet from any other street or railroad.
      2.   All setbacks to be measured from the foundation line of the
building.  Overhangs shall not exceed two feet.  (Ord. 830, 1989; Ord. 740
section 10.3.25(C), 1984; Ord. 955 section 9, 1996; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514,
2019)
Chapter 16.26
RESERVED
Chapter 16.28
C-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE
Sections:
   
16.28.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.28.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.28.030   Development standards.
16.28.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the C-2 zone are as follows:
   A.   A use permitted outright in a C-1 zone;
   B.   Miniature golf courses;
   C.   Automobile, motorcycle, boat or truck sales, service, repair, rental,
storage or parking;
   D.   Theaters;
   E.   Restaurant, including drive-in;
   F.   Kennel;
   G.   Lumber yard;
   H.   Machinery, farm equipment or implement sales, service or rental;
   I.   Hotel or motel;
   J.   Service station;
   K.   Tire shop, including incidental tire recapping;
   L.   Veterinarian's office or animal hospital;
   M.   Fuel oil distribution, retail, provided all fuel oil storage is
underground;
   N.   Nursery and greenhouse;
   O.   Feed and seed store;
   P.   Department store:
   Q.   Similar commercial uses as determined by the Planning Commission.
   R.   Attached WTS facilities (see 16.08.120).
   S.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole), less than 100 feet in height (see
16.08.120).
   T.   Self-Storage/Mini-Storage Warehouse Units.  As defined in 16.04.547.
(Ord. 890 section 28, 1993; Ord. 830 section 6, 1989; Ord. 740 section 10.3.28
(A), 1984; Ord. 981 section 25, 1997; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)   
16.28.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the C-2 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   A use permitted outright in an M-1 zone;
   B.   A use listed as conditional in a C-1 zone and not listed in section
16.28.010.
   C.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole), equal to or over 100 feet in height
(see 16.08.120).  (Ord. 890 section 29, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.28(B),
1984; Ord. 981 section 26, 1997)
16.28.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the C-
2 zone:
   A.   Minimum lot area:  none;
   B.   Minimum width and frontage:  none;
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard: twenty feet where abutting Highway 99-E and S. Ivy
Street.  Gas station canopies shall be exempted from the twenty foot setback
requirements.  Remaining property none, except ten feet where abutting a
residential zone.  Sign setbacks along Highway 99-E and S. Ivy Street are to be
measured from the face of the curb rather than the lot line.  Where no curb
exists, the setback shall be measured from the property line.  Other than signs
which are nonconforming structures and street banners which have been approved
per the requirements of the Uniform Sign Code, no signs will be allowed to be
located within or to project over a street right-of-way;
      2.   Interior yard: none, except ten feet where abutting a residential
zone.
      3.   Rear yard:   none, except ten feet where abutting a residential
zone.
   D.   Maximum building height:
      A.   Freestanding signs: thirty feet;
      A.   All other structures: forty-five feet.
   E.   Maximum lot coverage: sixty percent;
   F.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distances shall be fifteen feet from any alley or
driveway and thirty feet from any other street or railroad;
      2.   Except in cases where existing building locations or street width
necessitate a more narrow design, sidewalks eight feet in width shall be
required;
         a.   In those locations where angle parking is permitted abutting the
curb, and
         b.   For property frontage along Highway 99-E.
      3.   All setbacks to be measured from the foundation line of the
building.  Overhangs shall not exceed two feet.  (Ord. 830 section 7, 8, 1989;
Ord. 802 section 7 [part], 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.28(C), 1984; Ord. 981
section 49, 1997; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)   
Chapter 16.30
C-M HEAVY COMMERCIAL MANUFACTURING ZONE
Sections:
   
16.30.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.30.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.30.030   Development standards.
16.30.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the C-M zone shall be as follows:
   A.   A use permitted outright in a C-2 zone, other than dwelling units;
   B.   Contractor's equipment yard;
   C.   Dwelling for watchman or caretaker working on premises;
   D.   Fuel distribution, wholesale;
   E.   Laundry or Laundromat, with or without dry cleaning operation;
   F.   Motor or rail freight terminal;
   G.   Railroad tracks and related facilities;
   H.   Stone cutting and sales;
   I.   Tire retreading, recapping and sales;
   J.   Transfer or storage;
   K.   Utility storage or service yard;
   L.   Similar heavy commercial, storage, or light manufacturing uses as
determined by the Planning Commission.
   M.   Attached WTS facilities (see 16.08.120).
   N.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole), less than 100 feet in height
   O.   Self-Storage/Mini-Storage Warehouse Units.  As defined in 16.04.547.
(See 16.08.120).  (Ord. 890 section 30, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.29(A),
1984; Ord. 981 section 27, 1997; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.30.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the C-M zone shall be as follows:
   A.   A use permitted outright in an M-1 zone and not listed in section
16.30.010 or below;
   B.   A use permitted conditionally in a C-1 or C-2 zone, other than dwelling
units, and not listed in section 16.30.010 or below;
   C.   Other light industrial uses as determined by the Planning Commission;
   D.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole), equal to or over 100 feet in height
(see 16.08.120);  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.29(B), 1984; Ord. 981 section 28 & 29,
1997; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.30.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the C-
M zone:
   A.   Minimum lot area: none.
   B.   Minimum width and frontage: none.
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard: twenty feet where abutting Highway 99E and S. Ivy
Street.  Gas station canopies shall be exempted from the twenty foot setback
requirements.  Properties not fronting on Highway 99E or S. Ivy Street shall
maintain a 10 foot street yard setback.  Sign setbacks along Highway 99-E and
S. Ivy Street are to be measured from the face of the curb rather than the lot
line.  Where no curb exists, the setback shall be measured from the property
line.  Other than signs which are nonconforming structures and street banners
which have been approved per the requirements of the Uniform Sign Code, no
signs will be allowed to be located within, or to project over, a street right-
of-way.
      2.   Interior yard:  none, except ten feet where abutting a residential
zone.
      3.   Rear yard:  none, except ten feet where abutting a residential zone.
   D.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Freestanding signs: thirty feet;
      2.   All other structures: forty-five feet.
   E.   Maximum lot coverage:  sixty percent.
   F.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distances shall be fifteen feet from any alley or
driveway and thirty feet from any other street or railroad.
      2.   Except in cases where existing building locations or street width
necessitate a more narrow design, sidewalks eight feet in width shall be
required:
         a.   In those locations where angle parking is permitted abutting the
curb, and
         b.   For property frontage along Highway 99-E.
      3.   All setbacks to be measured from the foundation line of the
building.  Overhangs shall not exceed two feet.
      4.   Outside storage areas abutting a residential zone shall be screened
from view by a site-blocking fence, landscaping, or berm and shall be of such
material and design as will not detract from adjacent residences. (Ord 830
section 9, 10, 1989; Ord. 802 section 7 [part], 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.29
(C), 1984; Ord. 981 section 50, 1997; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514. 2019) 
Chapter 16.32
M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE
Sections:
   
16.32.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.32.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.32.030   Development standards.
16.32.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the M-1 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, compounding, assembling or
packaging of products made from previously prepared materials such as cloth,
plastic, paper, metal, wood (but not including sawmills or lumber mills), the
operation of which will not result in
      1.   The dissemination of dusts, gas, smoke, fumes, odors, atmospheric
pollutants or noise which exceed Oregon Department of Environmental Quality
standards
      2.   Danger by reason of fire, explosion or other physical hazard;
      3.   Unusual traffic hazards;
   B.   Automobile body shop, or heavy repair shop;
   C.   Contractor’s equipment or storage yard;
   D.   Dwelling for watchman or caretaker working on the property;
   E   .Food processing plant;
   F.   Fuel distribution, wholesale or retail;
   G.   Ice or cold storage plant;
   H.   Laundry or dry-cleaning plant;
   I.   Lumber yard;
   J.   Machinery, farm equipment or implement sales, service or rent;
   K.   Motor or rail freight terminal;
   L.   Railroad tracks and related facilities;
   M.   Restaurant, when related and incidental to primary industrial uses of
the area;
   N.   Service station, when related and incidental to primary industrial uses
of the area;
   O.   Stone, marble, or granite cutting;
   P.   Tire retreading or recapping;
   Q.   Transfer and storage company;
   R.   Utility storage or service yard;
   S.   Veterinarian’s office or animal hospital;
   T.   Warehouse;
   U.   Wholesale distribution, including warehousing and storage;
   V.   Wireless or cellular communications facility/tower;
   W.   Other light industrial uses as determined by the Planning Commission;
   X.   Business or professional office, when related and incidental to primary
industrial uses of the area;
   Y.   Public building or uses such as fire station, or park or playground.
   Z.   Attached WTS facilities (see 16.08.120).
   AA.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole or lattice tower), under 150 feet in
height and at least 660 feet from the nearest land zoned or planned for
residential use or Highway 99E (see 16.08.120).
   BB.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole), under 100 feet in height and less
than 660 feet from the nearest land zoned or planned for residential use or
Highway 99E (see 16.08.120).
   CC.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole), equal to or over 150 feet in
height and at least 660 feet from the nearest land zoned or planned for
residential use or Highway 99E (see 16.08.120).
   DD.   Minor public facility.
   EE.   Brewery: General manufacturing of products included in SIC 208:
Beverages. (Ord. 890 section 31, 1993; Ord. 749 section 1(A), 1984, Ord. 740
section 10.3.31(A), 1984; Ord. 995 section 10 & 11, 1996; Ord. 981 section 30 &
31, 1997; Ord. 1019 section 10, 1999; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.32.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the M-1 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Commercial recreation uses;
   B.   Motels, hotels and similar accommodations;
   C.   Other heavy commercial or light industrial uses as determined by the
Planning Commission;
   D.   Waste and/or recycling transfer operations.
   E.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole), equal to or over 100 feet in height
and less than 660 feet from the nearest land zoned or planned for residential
use or Highway 99E (see 16.08.120).
   F.   Detached WTS facilities (lattice tower), equal to or over 150 feet in
height and at least 660 feet from the nearest land zoned or planned for
residential use or Highway 99E (see 16.08.120).
   G.   Major public facility, except as modified by Section
16.32.010.  (Ord. 960, section 2, 12/18/96; Ord. 890, section 32, 1993; Ord.
740 section 10.3.31(B), 1984; Ord. 981 section 32, 1997; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.32.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the M-
1 zone:
   A.   Minimum lot area: five thousand square feet;
   B.   Minimum width and frontage: fifty feet;
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard: twenty feet where abutting Highway 99E and S. Ivy
Street.  Gas station canopies shall be exempted from the twenty foot setback
requirements.  Properties not fronting on Highway 99E or S. Ivy Street shall
maintain a 10 foot street yard setback.  Sign setbacks along Highway 99-E and
S. Ivy Street are to be measured from the face of the curb rather than the lot
line.  Where no curb exists, the setback shall be measured from the property
line.  Other than signs which are nonconforming structures and street banners
which have been approved per the requirements of the Uniform Sign Code, no
signs will be allowed to be located within, or to project over, a street right-
of-way.
      2.   Interior yard:  none, except ten feet where abutting a residential
zone.
      3.   Rear yard:  none, except ten feet where abutting a residential zone.
   D.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Freestanding signs: thirty feet;
      2.   All other structures: forty-five feet.
   E.   Maximum lot coverage:  no limit.
   F.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distances shall be fifteen feet from any alley or
driveway and thirty feet from any other street or railroad.
      2.   All setbacks to be measured from the foundation line of the
building.  Overhangs shall not exceed two feet.
      3.   Prior to issuance of a building permit, wireless/cellular towers
require written certification of approval/compliance from the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration and the Oregon
Department of Transportation (Department of Aeronautics). 
      4.   Outside storage areas abutting a residential zone shall be screened
from view by a site-blocking fence, landscaping, or berm and shall be of such
material and design as will not detract from adjacent residences. (Ord. 890
section 33, 1993; Ord. 830 section 11, 12, 1989; Ord. 740 section 10.3.31(C),
1984; Ord. 955 section 12, 1996; Ord. 981 section 51, 1997; Ord. 1237, 2007;
Ord. 1514, 2019)
Chapter 16.34
M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE
Sections:
   
16.34.010   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.34.020   Conditional uses.
   
16.34.030   Development standards.
16.34.010   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the M-2 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   A use permitted outright in an M-1 zone.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.33(A),
1984)
16.34.020   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the M-2 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Aggregate removal operations;
   B.   All other uses when evaluated on the standards and criteria specified
in Chapter 16.50 and the point system set out in Table 16.34.020 for evaluating
heavy industrial development proposals.
   C.   Detached WTS facilities (monopole), equal to or over 100 feet in height
and less than 660 feet from the nearest land zoned or planned for residential
use or Highway 99E (see 16.08.120).
   D.   Detached WTS facilities (lattice tower), equal to or over 150 feet in
height and at least 660 feet from the nearest land zoned or planned for
residential use or Highway 99E (see 16.08.120).  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.33(B),
1984; Ord. 981 section 33, 1997)
16.34.030   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the M-
2 zone:
   A.   Minimum lot area: five thousand square feet;
   B.   Minimum width and frontage: fifty feet.
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Street yard:   ten feet, twenty feet where abutting a residential
zone;
      2.   Interior yard:   none, except twenty feet where abutting a
residential zone.
      3.   Rear yard:   none, except twenty feet where abutting a residential
zone.
   D.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Freestanding signs: thirty feet;
      2.   All other structures: forty-five feet.
   E.   Maximum lot coverage:  no limit.
   F.   Other regulations:
      1.   Vision clearance distances shall be fifteen feet from any alley or
driveway and thirty feet from any other street or railroad;
      2.   Outside storage areas abutting a residential zone shall be screened
from view by a site-blocking fence, landscaping, or berm and shall be of such
material and design as will not detract from adjacent residences. (Ord. 1514,
2019)
M-2 Conditional Use Review Matrix
Table 16.34.020
Explanation: When considering conditional use applications for the M-2 Zone,
each of the following characteristics will be evaluated by the Planning
Commission and assigned a certain number of points (positive and negative).  A
net point total of "0" will be considered to be the prerequisite for approval
of an M-2 conditional use.  In entering its findings of fact for its decision,
the Commission shall indicate its findings regarding the following:
 
CRITERIA POINTS
Traffic impacts, particularly heavy truck traffic and its impact on non-        -10 – 0
industrial areas and streets
Noise impacts, especially loud and high-pitched noise and noise expected to     -10 – 0
occur at night
Air pollution, including odors as well as measurable pollutants                 -10 – 0
Water pollution, including impacts on groundwater and surface water as well as  -10 – 0
any unusual or hazardous discharges to the city sewage treatment facility
Water consumption, especially where city water is utilized rather than a        -10 – 0
private source
Electrical consumption                                                          -10 – 0
Other adverse impacts, which may include factors not listed above or may be
used to add more negative point to any of the items already listed, where       -40 – 0
extreme adverse impacts are expected
Tax benefits to the community, particularly for property taxes beyond the costs 0 - +20
of providing public services
Total number of persons to be employed                                          0 - +10
Number of local persons who can expect to be employed, based upon percentages   0 - +10
of skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled positions
Reliance on locally produced resources and locally processed materials          0 - +10
Export characteristics and residual benefits to other local industries          0 -+10
Other community benefits, including particularly advantageous design
characteristics, etc.  May also be used to add more positive points to each of 0 - +40
the factors listed above where extremely beneficial impacts are expected
Low Impact Design and sustainability Features                                   0 - +20
 
Chapter 16.35
CANBY INDUSTRIAL AREA OVERLAY (I-O) ZONE
Sections:
   
16.35.010   Purpose.
   
16.35.020   Applicability.
   
16.35.025   Pre-application review and conditions of approval.
   
16.35.030   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.35.040   Conditional uses.
   
16.35.045   Prohibited uses.
   
16.35.050   Development standards.
   
16.35.060   Design guidelines.
   
16.35.070   I-O design review matrix.
16.35.010   Purpose.
The purpose of the Canby Industrial Area Overlay (I-O) zone is to implement the
design guidelines and standards of the Canby Industrial Area Master Plan
(Master Plan):
   A.   Provide efficient circulation and access;
   B.   Allow flexibility in siting development, including a range of
industrial and commercial/industrial land uses;
   C.   Provide visual continuity for streetscapes and developments;
   D.   Encourage durable, high quality building materials.
The zone is intended to ensure high-quality industrial development with a mix
of employment types and uses. (Ord. 1008 section 1 [part], 1998; Ord. 1057
section 2 [part], 2000)
16.35.020   Applicability.
It is the policy of the City of Canby to apply the I-O zone to all lands within
the Canby Pioneer Industrial Park Master Plan area and other areas determined
by the City, as defined in the Industrial Area Master Plan. The Master Plan
area generally includes the area bound by Highway 99E and 1st Avenue to the
north, Mulino Road to the east, SE 13th Avenue to the south, and the Molalla
Forest Logging Road Trail to the west. The I-O zone has the following affect
with regard to other chapters of this ordinance:
   A.   Incorporates the Canby Industrial Area Master Plan into Title 16. The
Master Plans design guidelines, standards, and plan maps are hereby
incorporated by reference.
   B.   Permits land uses which are permitted by the underlying zone districts
(C-M, M-1, M-2), with some exceptions.
   C.   Replaces selected development standards contained in the C-M, M-1, and
M-2 zones, for continuity and quality of site design within the Master Plan
area.
   D.   Utilizes the City’s processes for development review, including land
divisions, conditional uses, and design reviews. Provides a design review
matrix (i.e., replacing the table in Chapter 16.49) which is tailored to the
Master Plan area.
   E.   Provides additional conditional use standards to ensure development
compatibility.
   F.   Lists uses that are prohibited outright due to incompatibility with the
goals for the area. (Ord. 1008 section 1 [part], 1998; Ord. 1057 section 2
[part], 2000)
16.35.025   Pre-application review and conditions of approval
   A.   A pre-application meeting with utility and service providers is
required prior to any land use application, building permit application, or
business license application in the I-O zone, unless this requirement is waived
by the City Planner. The City Planner shall provide application forms for this
purpose indicating all required information. The pre-application meeting shall
allow utility and service providers to make a detailed assessment of the
proposed use prior to forming a recommendation on approval. In addition, this
meeting will allow the City to evaluate whether a Conditional Use Permit will
be required.
   B.   At the pre-application meeting, the City shall determine the need for a
Hazardous Materials Management Plan. If required by the City, the applicant
shall prepare a plan meeting the relevant sections of the Oregon Fire Code as
determined by the City. The Plan shall allow utility and service providers to
review the health and safety impacts of any proposed use and ensure an adequate
plan will be in place to address those impacts prior to forming a
recommendation on approval.
   C.   The Planning Commission or City Council may impose conditions to
protect public health and safety on any discretionary land use application.
(Ord. 1057 section 2 [part], 2000; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.35.030   Uses permitted outright.
Unless limited by sections 16.35.040 or 16.35.045, uses permitted outright in
the C-M zone, M-1 zone, and M-2 zone are permitted outright in the I-O zone,
subject to the respective zone district boundaries. (Ord. 1008 section 1
[part], 1998; Ord. 1057 section 2 [part], 2000)
16.35.040   Conditional uses.
Unless limited by subsection A below or section 16.35.045, conditional uses
permitted in the C-M zone, M-1 zone, and M-2 zone are permitted as conditional
uses in the I-O zone, subject to the respective zone district boundaries.
   A.   Any proposed site development, change in use, land division, or other
action that results in any of the following requires conditional use approval
in the I-O zone:
      1.   Less than 3 employees per developed acre. For the purposes of this
section only, “developed” means all areas used for buildings, landscaping,
vehicle maneuvering and parking areas, outdoor storage, and other areas
occupied by the use. For the purposes of this section only, employees means
full-time equivalents unless the City specifically allows other
interpretations;
      2.   More than 60 acres total in I-O zoning that is occupied by a single
use or business. For the purposes of this section, businesses classified in the
same NAICS industry group (four-digit code) are considered to be in the same
use. This section is intended to apply cumulatively to all properties in the
zone;
      3.   Utilization of any public service or utility to such an extent that
the utility would not be able to supply all other uses projected in its current
long-range plans;
      4.   Uses requiring an H occupancy under the Oregon Structural Specialty
Code;
      5.   In any C-M zoning overlain by I-O zoning, any retail or commercial
use with a building footprint exceeding 50,000 square feet;
      6.   In any M-1 or M-2 zoning overlain by I-O zoning, any retail or
commercial use not related to or supportive of the primary industrial use of
the park; or
      7.   In any M-1 or M-2 zoning overlain by I-O zoning, retail areas
occupying more than 15% of the building footprint.
   B.   To approve a conditional use in the I-O zone, the Planning Commission
shall find that each of the following additional criteria are either met, or
can be met by observance of conditions, unless it is not applicable:
      1.   The proposed use is compatible with the industrial nature of the
park and will have minimal negative impact on the development and use of
surrounding properties;
      2.   The proposed use does not pose a threat to public health or safety;
and
      3.   The proposed use is beneficial to the overall economic diversity and
vitality of the City.
These criteria are in addition to those provided in Section
16.50.010. In all other aspects, the conditional use process shall be as
specified in Chapter 16.50. (Ord 1008 section 1 [part], 1998, Ord. 1057 section
2 [part], 2000; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019).
16.35.045   Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the I-O zone:
   A.   Slaughter house;
   B.   Rendering, reduction, or distillation of, or manufacturing from,
animals, fish and their by-products;
   C.   Auto, truck or motorcycle race track;
   D.   Auto, truck, or motorcycle wrecking or salvage yard;
   E.   Scrap metal storage and sales;
   F.   Reclamation or manufacturing of steel barrels or drums;
   G.   Dump or landfill, including rubbish, slag, organic materials, offal, or
garbage in general;
   H.   Livestock feeding pen, other than those associated with existing
agricultural uses;
   I.   Fireworks manufacturing or the manufacturing of ammunition or
explosives;
   J.   Nuclear power plant or similar use;
   K.   Curing and storage of hides;
   L.   Incinerator, smelter, blast furnace, or coke oven;
   M.   Manufacture of oils, gasoline, or products made directly from
petroleum, other oils, or tar products;
   N.   Fertilizer production;
   O.   Creosote production;
   P.   Insecticide production;
   Q.   Tire manufacturing;
   R.   Saw, shingle, or lumber mill; and
   S.   In any M-1 or M-2 zoning overlain by I-O zoning, commercial or retail
uses over 50,000 square feet are prohibited.
This list should not be used to imply that any other use is permitted. (Ord.
1057 section 2 [part], 2000)
16.35.050   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the I-
O zone. These standards replace the standards of the C-M zone, M-1 zone, and M-
2 zone, as follows:
   A.   Minimum lot area: none.
   B.   Minimum lot width and frontage: none.
   C.   Minimum yard requirements (measured from building foundation to right-
of-way line):
      1.   Street yards(s): 20 feet for buildings up to 25 feet in height; 35
feet for buildings between 25 feet and 45 feet in height. Parking and internal
drives (except curb cuts and entrance drives) are prohibited within the
required 20 foot street yard.
      2.   Interior yard: 10 feet, except 20 feet where abutting a residential
zone. Common-wall lot lines (attached buildings), and development which provide
shared parking and circulation with abutting developments, are exempt from
interior yard standards.
      3.   Rear yard: 10 feet, except 20 feet where abutting a residential
zone. Common-wall lot lines (attached buildings), and development which provide
shared parking and circulation with abutting developments, are exempt from
interior yard standards.
   D.   Maximum building height: 45 feet.
   E.   Maximum lot coverage: 60 percent in the C-M zone; none in the M-1 and
M-2 zones.
   F.   Street access (curb cuts) spacing shall be a minimum of 200 feet on
designated parkway and collector streets.
   G.   Street right-of-way improvements shall be made in accordance with the
Canby Transportation System Plan (TSP).
   H.   Building orientation standards. The following standards are intended to
ensure direct, clear, and convenient pedestrian access:
      1.   Development in the M-1 zone and M-2 zone shall provide at least one
public entrance facing the street. A direct pedestrian connection shall be
provided between the primary building entrance and public sidewalk.
      2.   Developments within the C-M zone shall provide continuous, straight-
line pedestrian connections between the street(s), buildings, and parking
areas.
   I..   Right-of-way plantings: Street trees and ground cover plantings shall
be installed with development, as approved by the City. Shrubs are prohibited
within the public right-of-way.
   J.   Metal building exteriors are prohibited, except that the Planning
Commission may approve architectural metal elements that accent and enhance the
aesthetics of building entrances and office areas
   K.   Lighting shall be required for all streets, sidewalks, and pedestrian
ways. Applications for land division approval and site plan review shall
include photometric plans.
   L.   Shared access: The City may require the provision of shared access
drives through the land division review process. Shared access drives are
intended to maintain adequate driveway spacing and circulation along the
designated Parkway and Collector streets.
   M.   All landscaped areas shall be irrigated unless drought tolerant plants
are installed and watered until well established and replaced in event of
failure.
   N.   Other regulations: The C-M zone, M-1 zone, and M-2 zone provide other
applicable regulations related to vision clearance, Highway 99E sidewalk width,
setback measurement, outside storage, and wireless/cellular tower
certification.
   O.   Open storage or “laydown yards” shall be screened by a six foot site-
obscuring fence or hedge-type vegetation that would become a solid site
obscuring barrier within three years of planting. (Ord. 1008 section 1[part],
1998; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1299, 2008; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.35.060   Design guidelines.
The Industrial Area Master Plan provides design guidelines for reviewing
development applications. The guidelines, which are incorporated into Table
16.35.040, encourage:
   A.   Flexibility to align local streets based on parcelization and
development requirements;
   B.   Tree retention, planting of large (3-inch) caliper trees, and use of
lawn/ground cover planting in front yard setbacks;
   C.   Placement of buildings at or near the setback line;
   D.   Placement of parking areas to the side or rear of buildings;
   E.   Placement of smaller commercial buildings at or near the street;
   F.   Building entries visible from the street with direct pedestrian
connections;
   G.   Use of quality building materials;
   H.   Architectural detail to break up and articulate large surfaces and
volumes, and to accentuate building entries; and
   I.   Open space retention and trail connections, as designated by the Master
Plan. (Ord. 1008, section 1[part], 1998)
16.35.070   I-O Design review matrix.
The City uses the following matrix to evaluate compliance with the I-O design
guidelines. The matrix substitutes for the general design review matrix
provided in Chapter 16.49. Design review applications must comply with all
other applicable provisions of Chapter 16.49, and achieve scores equal to or
greater than the minimum acceptable scores in the matrix. (See Master Plan for
illustrations.)
   A.   Exception: The City may reduce the minimum acceptable score(s) upon
finding that certain provisions do not apply to a proposed development.
Industrial Overlay Design Review Matrix
Table 16.35.040
 
                                            CRITERIA                                          Possible Scores
Parking
Parking areas located to the side or rear of buildings as viewed from public right-of-way: <50% of     0    1    2
parking spaces=0; 50%-75%=1; 75%-100%=2.
Increase minimum interior parking lot landscape over the base 15%: 15%-18%=0; 18%-22%=1; >22%=2.       0    1    2
Increase the base number of trees required by 16.49.120 (all landscape islands must contain 1 tree, 1
tree for every 40’ along the required setback): 100%-105% of base requirement=0; 105%-110% of base   0    1    2
requirement=1;>110%=2;
(# of trees proposed/# of trees required x100=% of base requirement)
Number of parking spaces provided: (% of required minimum): >110%=0; 110%-105%=1; 105%-100%=2. See
Table 16.10.050 for required parking.                                                                  0    1    2
(# of spaces proposed/# of spaces required x100=% of required minimum)
Minimum Acceptable Score                                                    4 points 
 
Transportation/Circulation
Design private, on-site pedestrian pathways: 6’ painted ways=0; 6’ brick/pave0    1    2
ways=1; 6’ brick/paver & raised concrete ways=2
Number of pedestrian connections between the street sidewalk and internal        0    1    2
circulation system: One connection = 0  Two or more connections = 1
Minimum Acceptable Score (some provisions may not apply)  2points
 
Landscaping
Trees installed at 3 inch caliper: <25% of trees=0; 25%-50%=1; 50%-100%=2.                            0    1    2
Usable outdoor amenity provided with development (e.g., water features, plazas, seating areas, and    0    1    2
similar features): no=0; yes=1; yes and for public use =2.
Amount of grass (less grass is better) (% of total landscaped area)>50%=0; 25%-50%=1; <25%=2          0    1    2
Minimum Acceptable Score                                                            3 points
 
Building Appearance and Orientation
Building orientation at or near the street: parking or drive separates building from street=0; at
least 20% of elevation within 5 feet of minimum setback=1;      at least 20% of elevation is at    0    1    2
minimum setback=2.
Building entrances visible from the street: no=0; yes=1.                                              0      1     
Buildings use quality materials: concrete, wood, or wood siding=0; concrete masonry, stucco, or       0    1    2
similar material=1; brick or stone=2.
Articulation and/or detailing to break up large building surfaces and accentuate the building         0      2
entrance(s): no=0; yes=2.
Minimum Acceptable Score                                                            4 points
 
Chapter 16.36
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE (PUD)
Sections:
   
16.36.010   Purpose.
   
16.36.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.36.030   Conditional uses.
   
16.36.040   Development standards.
16.36.010   Purpose.
The Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone is intended to be used in conjunction
with any of the city's underlying base zones (example:  R-1/PUD, M-1/PUD, etc.)
to assure that the ultimate development of the site will meet the requirements
of a planned unit development.  The Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone is
intended to be applied only to those specific properties which, because of
unique characteristics such as size, shape and location of the parcel, are most
suitable for development as planned unit developments.  (Ord. 740 section
10.3.35 (A), 1984)
16.36.020   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the PUD Overlay Zone are the uses permitted outright
in the underlying base zone, provided they are developed in conformance with
the city's regulations and procedures for planned unit developments.  (Ord. 740
section 10.3.35 (B), 1984)
16.36.030   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the PUD overlay zone are the uses listed as conditional in
the underlying base zone.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.35 (C), 1984)
16.36.040   Development standards.
Development regulations for the Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone are as
provided in Chapters 16.70 through 16.76 of this title.  (Ord. 890 section 35,
1993)
Chapter 16.37
RIPARIAN OVERLAY ZONE (RO)
Sections:
   
16.37.010   Purpose
   
16.37.020   Wetlands and Riparian Map
   
16.37.030   Uses permitted outright and conditional uses
   
16.37.040   Development standards
   
16.37.050   Severability
16.37.010   Purpose
The Riparian Overlay Zone is intended to be used in conjunction with any of the
city's underlying base zones (example: R-1/RO, C-2/RO, etc.) to assure that the
future development of the site will provide ample protection for riparian
areas, thereby protecting and restoring the hydrologic, ecological and land
conservation functions these areas provide.  The Riparian Overlay (RO) Zone
implements the policies of the Canby Comprehensive Plan and is intended to
resolve conflicts between developments and conservation if riparian corridors
identified in the City of Canby Local Wetlands and Riparian Inventory.  (Ord.
905 sections 4, 1994)
16.37.020   Canby Wetlands and Riparian Map
The Canby Wetlands and Riparian Inventory Map is adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this chapter.  Copies of this map shall be kept on file
with the official zoning map of the city.  (Ord. 905 sections 4, 1994)
16.37.030   Uses permitted outright and conditional uses.
Uses permitted outright and conditional uses in the Riparian Overlay Zone are
the uses permitted outright and conditionally in the underlying base zone,
provided the provisions of Chapter 16.130, Riparian Preservation, are met. 
(Ord. 905 sections 4, 1994)
16.37.040   Development standards.
Development regulations for the Riparian Overlay Zone are as provided in
Chapters 16.130.01 through 16.130.130 of this title.  (Ord. 905 sections 4,
1994)
16.37.050   Severability
Invalidity of a section or part of a section of this ordinance shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections or parts of sections.  (Ord. 905
sections 4, 1994)
Chapter 16.38
HISTORICAL PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE (A)
Sections:
   
16.38.010   Purpose.
   
16.38.020   Uses permitted.
   
16.38.025   Exemptions.
   
16.38.030   Conditional uses.
   
16.38.040   Severability.
16.38.010   Purpose.
The Historical Protection Overlay Zone is intended to be used in conjunction
with any of the city's underlying base zones (example: R-1/A, C-2/A, etc.) to
assure that the future development of the site will provide ample protection
for identified historically architecturally significant structures, features or
sites.  The Historical Protection Overlay Zone is intended to be applied only
to those specific properties which, because of generally recognized
significance to the community, warrant protection, preservation, or enhancement
of their historical or architectural characteristics.  Additional to the
regulatory aspects of this zoning, it should be noted that city staff will
provide information or tax benefits and landmark requirements to interested
persons.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.36(A), 1984)
16.38.020   Uses Permitted.
Primary Uses.  A Historic Landmark or properties within a Historic District may
be used for any use which is allowed in the underlying district, including home
occupations, provided such use is not detrimental to the preservation of the
historic resource, subject to the specific requirements for the use, and all
other requirements of this section. Uses permitted outright in the Historical
Protection Overlay Zone are the uses permitted outright in the underlying base
zone, provided that a site plan review is to be conducted prior to the issuance
of any permit for construction.  This site plan review is to focus on those
particular aspects of the site which are of historical or architectural
significance.  If the City Planner, in conducting the site plan review,
determines that the proposed development will result in the removal,
demolition, or exterior alteration of the site or building which will tend to
affect the historical or architectural characteristics of the site, he shall
process the application according to the provisions of Chapter 16.110, Historic
Preservation.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.36(B), 1984; Ord. 905, 1994; Ord 1061,
2000)
16.38.025   Exemptions.
The following are exempt from requirements of CMC 16.38.
Approved Public Art Murals as defined in CMC Chapter 2.80.020.  (Ord. 1341,
2011)
16.38.030   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the Historical Protection Overlay Zone shall be as follows:
   A.   The uses listed as conditional in the underlying base zone.
   B.   Uses listed below under subsection C, which are not otherwise allowed
in the underlying district, may be allowed, subject to the specified review
procedure. Approval shall not be granted unless the proposal satisfies the
criteria under section 16.50 and the applicant demonstrates that the use, if
allowed:
      a.   will preserve or improve a resource which would probably not be
preserved or improved otherwise; and
      b.   will not significantly adversely affect surrounding uses; and
      c.   will utilize existing structures rather than new structures.
Alterations and additions to existing structures shall satisfy the provisions
of section 16.110.080.
   C.   Public Hearing Review.  The following uses may be permitted by the
Planning Commission as conditional uses in all districts, after a public
hearing, when the proposal satisfies the requirements under subsection B,
above:
      a.   art and music studios
      b.   galleries
      c.   offices
      d.   craft shops
      e.   bed and breakfast establishments
      f.   gift shops
      g.   museums
      h.   catering services
      i.   book stores
      j.   boutiques
      k.   restaurants
      l.   antique shops
      m.   community center for civic or cultural events.
      n.   other uses determined by the Planning Commission to be similar to
those above.
The State Historical Preservation Office will receive notice of any public
hearing scheduled for such use permits. 
Note:  All the above listed uses would probably also require a "Change of
Occupancy" permit, approval of handicapped access, and approval of change of
stairs, doors, etc., under the Uniform Building Code. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.36
(C), 1984; Ord. 905 section 3, 1994; Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.38.040   Severability
Invalidity of a section or part of a section of this ordinance shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections or parts of sections.  (Ord. 905
sections 4, 1994)
Chapter 16.39
WETLAND OVERLAY ZONE (WO)
Sections:
   
16.39.010   Purpose
   
16.39.020   Wetlands and Riparian Map
   
16.39.030   Uses permitted outright and conditional uses
   
16.39.040   Development standards
   
16.39.050   Severability
16.39.010   Purpose
The City of Canby recognizes significant wetlands as community assets that
provide educational, recreational and aesthetic values, that contribute to the
City’s long-term goals of sustainable community development. The Wetlands
Overlay Zone  (WO) is intended to be used in conjunction with any of the city’s
underlying base zones (example: R-1/WO, C-2/WO, etc.) to assure that the future
development of the site will provide ample protection for locally significant
wetlands. The Wetlands Overlay (RO) zone implements the policies of the Canby
Comprehensive Plan and is intended to resolve conflicts between development and
conservation of riparian corridors identified in the City of Canby Local
Wetlands and Riparian Inventory.  (Ord. 905 sections 4, 1994)
16.39.020   Wetlands and Riparian Map
The Canby Wetlands and Riparian Inventory Map is adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this chapter.  Copies of this map shall be kept on file
with the official zoning map of the city.
16.39.030   Uses permitted outright and conditional uses.
Uses permitted outright and conditional uses in the Riparian Overlay Zone are
the uses permitted outright and conditionally in the underlying base zone,
provided the provisions of Chapter 16.140, Wetlands Preservation, are met. 
(Ord. 905 sections 4, 1994)
16.39.040   Development standards
Development regulations for the Wetlands Overlay Zone are as provided in
Chapters 16.140.01 through 16.140.110 of this title.  (Ord. 905 sections 4,
1994)
16.39.050   Severability
Invalidity of a section or part of a section of this ordinance shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections or parts of sections.  (Ord. 905
sections 4, 1994)
Chapter 16.40
HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE (H)
Sections:
   
16.40.010   Purpose.
   
16.40.014   Flood insurance maps.
   
16.40.016   Floodways - alteration of watercourse.
   
16.40.018   Subdivisions, partitions and lot line adjustments.
   
16.40.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.40.030   Conditional uses.
   
16.40.040   Specific conditions relating to fish and wildlife protection.
   
16.40.050   Special conditions relating to mobile homes and travel trailers.
16.40.010   Purpose.
The Hazard Overlay Zone is intended to be used in conjunction with any of the
city's underlying base zones (example:  R-1/H, M-2/H, etc.) to assure that the
development of the site will not result in an unacceptable level of risk
because of hazardous conditions.  The Hazard Overlay Zone is intended to be
applied only to those specific properties which have been identified as having
steep slopes or potential for flooding.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.37(A), 1984)
16.40.014   Flood insurance study.
The flood insurance study, including the flood insurance rate map, dated June
17, 2008, as presently adopted, and as may be amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, are adopted by reference and declared to be part of this
chapter.  Copies of the flood insurance rate maps shall be kept on file with
the official zoning map of the city. (Ord. 804 section 3(A), 1987; Ord. 1286,
2008)
16.40.016   Floodways - alteration of watercourse.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the
Planning Commission shall work closely with the city Building Official to
assure that encroachments into floodways are minimized and the requirements of
the Flood Hazard Protection Ordinance (Chapter 15.12 of this code) are met. 
(Ord. 804 section 3(B), 1987)
16.40.018   Subdivisions, partitions and lot line adjustments.
In approving applications for subdivisions, land partitions and lot line
adjustments in H overlay zones, it must be found that the proposed development
will:
   A.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, based upon
accurate base flood elevation data;
   B.   Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
   C.   Have adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood damage.  (Ord. 804
section 3(C), 1987)
16.40.020   Uses permitted outright.
Uses permitted outright in the Hazard Overlay Zone shall be as follows:
   A.   One single-family dwelling per lot, provided that it is designed,
located and constructed with a base floor elevation which is at least one foot
above the base flood elevation determined in compliance with the requirements
of the Federal Flood Insurance Program;
   B. Agriculture, including all accessory structures necessary to the conduct
of agricultural activity, provided that such structures comply with the
requirements of the Federal Flood Insurance Program, and excluding commercial
processing, sales, manufacturing, or packaging plants, except when used for
items grown primarily on the premises;
   C.   Accessory structures and use, provided that they comply with the
requirements of the Federal Flood Insurance Program;
   D. Water intake or sewer outflow structures which meet county and state
requirements for construction, as well as the requirements of the Federal Flood
Insurance Program.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.37(B), 1984)
16.40.030   Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the Hazard Overlay Zone shall be as follows:
   A.   All uses not listed in section 16.40.020 as permitted outright, but
listed as either permitted or conditional uses in the underlying base zone.  In
reviewing such conditional use permit applications, the Planning Commission
shall require full compliance with the requirements of the Federal Flood
Insurance Program, proof of base floor elevations at least one foot above base
flood levels, and may impose special conditions to mitigate or minimize hazards
to life and property;
   B.   Aggregate removal operations.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.37(C), 1984)
16.40.040   Special conditions relating to fish and wildlife protection.
In reviewing any discretionary application for development in an "H" overlay
zoned area, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the
potential impacts of the development upon fish, wildlife and open space
resources of the community.  Whereit is found that the potential for such
impacts is significant, the hearing body shall impose whatever conditions or
restrictions upon the development are necessary to mitigate or minimize such
impacts.  Grading plans shall be submitted for the review of the Planning
Commission prior to the commencement of any road building or major site
grading. Tree-cutting plans shall be submitted for review prior to the removal
of any trees having trunks of greater than six inches in diameter.  Grading
plans and tree-cutting plans shall be reviewed by the commission except in the
case of minor tree cutting in isolated cases which shall require only the prior
approval of the city forester.  The commission may require the developer to
plant selected species of trees or other vegetation to stabilize slopes and
enhance wildlife habitat areas.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.37(D), 1984)
16.40.050   Special conditions relating to mobile homes and travel trailers.
All manufactured housing units to be placed or substantially improved within
the areas designated A-1 through A-30, AH or AE, on the flood insurance rate
map of the City of Canby, as now drawn or as may be amended, shall be:
   A.   Elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
unit is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation; and
   B.   Anchored to a foundation system in compliance with the standards
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  (Ord. 804 section 3
(D), 1987)
Chapter 16.41
DOWNTOWN CANBY OVERLAY (DCO) ZONE
Sections
   
16.41.010   Purpose.
   
16.41.020   Applicability.
   
16.41.030   Uses permitted outright.
   
16.41.040   Conditional uses.
   
16.41.050   Development standards.
   
16.41.060   DCO site and design review guidelines.
   
16.41.070   DCO site and design review standards.
16.41.010   Purpose.
The purpose of the Downtown Canby Overlay (DCO) zone is to:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6848.png]
Figure 1
Commercial development example concept
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6850.png]
Figure 2
Cohesive architectural elements create a human-scale environment
   A.   Encourage more intense development in the Core Commercial area and
allow for more intensive development in the Transitional Commercial area over
time.  Intensity of development and the relationship between setbacks, lot
coverage and floor area ratio address this objective.  Floor area ratios (FAR)
are intended to work with building height and setback standards to control the
overall bulk of the building.  The proposed FAR in conjunction with the maximum
lot coverage ensures that the development will be a minimum of two floors along
the street in the C-1 portion of the Core Commercial area.
   B.   Create a pedestrian friendly environment in the Core Commercial and
Transitional Commercial areas while allowing for a more auto-oriented focus in
the Outer Highway Commercial area.  A comfortable pedestrian-oriented
environment and limited setbacks are important in the Core Commercial and
Transitional Commercial areas.  In the Outer Highway Commercial area, a portion
of development should be closer to the road to provide visual connection and
signal that drivers are entering an urban area.  Larger setbacks in the Outer
Highway Commercial area also allows for more landscaping, access and other
improvements between buildings and street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6852.png]
Figure 3
A high degree of transparency (windows) helps create a sense of interaction
between activities inside and outside the building
   C.   Ensure that building sizes reflect desired uses in the Core Commercial
and Transitional Commercial areas.  Requirements limit the size of the building
footprint to 40,000 square feet in these areas.  For the purpose of
understanding the scale of development, the proposed maximum allows for the
creation of a high end grocery store (e.g., New Seasons, Whole Foods or
Zupans).  The proposed maximum differentiates developments in this area from
those in the Outer Highway Commercial area.  Maximum building footprints are
much larger in the Outer Highway Commercial area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6854.png]
Figure 4
More auto-oriented uses in the Outer Highway Commercial area
   D.   Ensure compatibility among adjacent uses within the Transitional
Commercial area as it changes over time.  Requirements for massing and form
will help ensure compatibility if uses in this area increase over time, while
allowing for a broader range of building sizes than currently exists.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6856.png]
Figure 5
Smaller-scale commercial use in the Transitional Commercial area
   E.   Maintain an attractive, visually pleasing environment that is
relatively free of structures or activities that detract from it.  Most
buildings have areas devoted to services and equipment.  These uses can be
noisy, noxious and unsightly.  Screening requirements reduce the impact of
these structures and activities.  Placement on an alley also may be an option. 
Furthermore, limitations on exterior storage and display will help reduce
visual clutter while allowing flexibility for retail merchants and eating and
drinking establishments.
   F.   Ensure adequate accessibility to and within sites by a variety of
travel modes, along with attractively designed parking and loading areas. 
Parking standards for automobiles and bicycles are intended to allow for ready
access to commercial uses by all modes and create attractive “green” sites that
enhance human and environmental health.  (Ord 1296, 2008)
16.41.020   Applicability.
   A.   It is the policy of the City of Canby to apply the DCO zone to all
lands located within the boundaries illustrated on the Downtown Canby Framework
Diagram; the boundaries of the overlay district, and boundaries of the three
sub-areas, are as shown in this chapter, Figure 11.  The three sub-areas are
established as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6858.png]
Figure 6
Example of high-quality screening design
      1.   Core Commercial Area.This area straddles Highway 99E and includes
portions of both the C-1 and C-2 zones and forms the densest commercial area of
the city, as well as the city’s primary community facilities – city hall,
police station, library, etc.
      2.   Transitional Commercial Area.  This is the transitional area that
lies between the more intense Downtown Core Commercial area and the established
single-family neighborhoods to the north and northeast.  The two Transitional
Commercial nodes are tucked between 3rd and 4th and Fir and Douglas on the west
side of Downtown, and 3rd and 4th and Holly and Knott on the east side.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6860.png]
Figure 7
Example of well-planned landscaping
      3.   Outer Highway Commercial Area.  The Outer Highway Commercial area
extends along Highway 99E both south of Elm Street and north of Locust Street. 
This area is quite different from the Core Commercial and Transitional
Commercial areas, by nature of its highway access and orientation.  The design
focus in this area is less about creating a high-quality pedestrian experience,
and more about ensuring that automobile-oriented design is built to the highest
standard possible.
   B.   The DCO zone has the following effect with  regard to other chapters of
this ordinance:
      1.   Permits land uses which are permitted by the underlying zone
districts, with some exceptions, as set forth in Sections 16.41.030 and
16.41.040.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6862.png]
Figure 8
These buildings in the commercial core illustrate desired design features in
that area
      2.   Replaces selected development standards in the underlying zone
districts, as set forth in Section
16.41.050.
      3.   Sets forth alternative design review standards and criteria tailored
to implement the goals of the overlay zone, as set forth in Section
16.41.060.  (Ord. 1296, 2008)
   C.   The DCO does not apply to approved Public Art Murals as defined in CMC
Chapter 2.80.020.  (Ord. 1341, 2011)
16.41.030   Uses permitted outright.
Unless modified pursuant to the following Subsection, uses permitted outright
in the underlying base zones are permitted outright in the DCO zone, subject to
the respective zone district boundaries.
   A.   Uses permitted in the C-1 zoneare permitted in the DCO zone, except in
the Transitional Commercial (TC) sub-area, the following residential uses are
also permitted, provided they meet all R-2 development standards in Chapter
16.20:
      1.   Single-family dwelling having common wall construction;
      2.   Two-family dwelling;
      3.   Multi-family dwelling;
      4.   Accessory dwelling attached to a primary dwelling (sharing a common
wall);
      5.   Boarding, lodging or rooming house;
      6.   Nursing home: as defined in Section 16.04 
      7.   Zero-lot line development for uses otherwise allowed, provided that
the minimum side yard setback shall be 7 feet when adjacent to housing with
standard setbacks;
      8.   Accessory uses. 
      9.   Foster Care Home; as defined in Section 16.04 (Ord 1296, 2008; Ord.
1514, 2019)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6864.png]
Figure 9
Examples of less intensive development in the Transitional Commercial area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6866.png]
Figure 10
Examples of development in the Outer Highway Commercial area
16.41.040   Conditional uses.
Unless modified pursuant to the following Subsection, conditional uses in the
underlying base zones are conditionally permitted in the DCO zone, subject to
the respective zone district boundaries.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted in the C-1 zone are conditionally
permitted in the DCO zone, except in the Transitional Commercial (TC) sub-area,
any use listed above in 16.41.030 is permitted outright.  (Ord. 1296, 2008)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6868.png]
Figure 11
Downtown Canby Overlay Zone
16.41.050   Development standards.
The following subsections indicate development standards required in the DCO
zone.  These standards supplement, and in some cases replace, the development
standards in the underlying base zones.  Where the standards set forth in the
following subsections conflict with standards in the underlying base zone, the
DCO development standards set forth below supersede the base zone standards.
   A.   Setbacks, Floor Area Ratio, Building Footprint and Height Requirements.
      1.   Setbacks.  Minimum and maximum setbacks for each DCO subarea are
described in Table 1 and must meet the following requirements:
         a..   Mechanical units used for the heating/cooling of dwelling units
are exempt from interior yard and rear yard setback requirements.
         b.   At least x% of the length of each lot frontage shall be developed
with a building(s) built at the minimum setback from the street lot line (see
Table 1 and 2 and Figure 12). The remainder of the building frontage shall be
setback no more than the maximum setback listed in Table 1 below,
         Buildings located in the OHC and intended for uses that require a
“drive through” and are permitted outright in the zone can increase the setback
to a 20 foot maximum from the street lot line frontage.
         c.   Where feasible, buildings should be located at one or both
street-facing corners of a lot.
         d.   At the street intersections identified as gateways in Figure 11
(Downtown Canby Overlay Zone Map), any new building shall be located at the
corner of the lot facing the intersection.
Table 1. Setback Requirements
 
Standards                             CC subarea TC subarea OHC subarea
Minimum setback                       0 feet     0 feet     10 feet
Maximum setback from street lot lines 10 feet    15 feet    --
 
Table 2. Street Lot Minimum Setback Requirements
 
Standards              CC subarea TC subarea OHC subarea
Minimum percentage (x) 60%        60%        40%
Figure 12
Illustration of Building Façade Requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6870.png]
      2.   Floor area ratio, building footprint, and building height.  Minimum
floor area ratio, maximum building footprint, and maximum building height
requirements for each DCO subarea are described in Table 3 and illustrated in
Figures 13, 14, and 15.  Footprints are exclusive of exterior displays or
merchandise (e.g., garden centers).
Table 3. Floor Area Ratio Requirements
 
Standards               CC subarea         TC subarea   OHC subarea
Minimum floor area      0.8, C-1 zone only 0.4          0.15 
ratio
                                                        80,000 per use
Maximum building        30,000 total       20,000 total 100,000 all uses within
footprint (square feet)                                 footprint if more than
                                                        1 use (see Figure 13)
Maximum building height 60 feet            45 feet      45 feet
(see Figure 14)
Figure 13
Building Footprint for Multi-Use Structure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6872.png]
Figure 14
Building Height Limitations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6874.png]
Figure 15
Building Height Limitations (continued)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6876.png]
      3.   Screening.  All exterior garbage collection areas, recycling
collection areas and mechanical equipment shall be screened with a site
obscuring fence, landscaping on all sides, wall, other enclosure, or
architectural element per the requirements below (see Figure 16 for examples of
good screening design). All non-conforming/non-screened exterior garbage
collection areas, recycling collection areas and mechanical equipment may be
brought into conformance.
         a.   Location.  Wherever possible, locate screened areas away from the
street away from public view. Shared garbage/recycling collection areas are
encouraged.
         b.   Materials.  Materials used to construct screening structures
shall be consistent and compatible with the exterior materials on adjacent
buildings located on the same lot as the screened area or located on a
contiguously-owned abutting lot, and shall be consistent with the material
requirements of Section
16.41.070.E and 16.41.070.F.
         c.   Buffering.  Screening structures shall be buffered from
surrounding areas on all sides with landscaping or other buffering elements.
         d.   Rooftop structures.  Rooftop mechanical structures shall be
screened and not visible from any visible public right-of-way at the same
elevation as, or lower than, the base of the building.  Screening structures
should be compatible with the overall building design and may include the
following elements or approaches:
            (1)   By providing parapets as tall as the tallest part of the
equipment with a minimum height of 3 feet and 6 inches;
            (2)   By incorporating an architectural screen around all sides of
the equipment;
            (3)   By setting the equipment back from the building edge with a
setback of at least 3 feet for every 1 foot of building height.
   4.   Parking.  Parking areas shall meet the following standards in addition
to all other applicable requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6878.png]
Figure 16
Screening examples
         a.   Location.  In the CC and TC subareas, parking and vehicle
maneuvering areas shall not be located between a building and the street.  This
standard applies to primary street facing facades and secondary street facing
facades, as defined in Sections 16.41.060.C.
         b.   Side of building parking areas.  In the CC, TC, and OHC subareas,
parking shall be permitted between a building and an interior lot line that is
not a rear lot line, provided the following standards are met:
            (1)   Parking and maneuvering areas shall be set back a minimum of
15 feet from the front lot line;
            (2)   A minimum 5 foot wide landscaped strip shall surround and
abut the perimeter of the parking and maneuvering area, except where vehicular
driveways and pedestrian accessways are permitted to interrupt the landscaped
strip, and except where the parking and maneuvering area is part of a larger
parking area in which case a perimeter landscaping strip is not required
between the side of building parking area and the remainder of the parking
area;
            (3)   Parking and maneuvering areas, including accessways and
driveways, must not exceed 40 percent of a lot frontage in the TC and CC
subareas, or 60 percent of a lot frontage in the OHC subarea;
            (4)   On lots greater than 120,000 square feet, side parking areas
shall be broken up into multiple smaller parking areas rather than concentrated
in one portion of the lot.  This may be done through the use of landscaping or
the location of multiple buildings on a lot.
         c.   Off-street vehicle parking space reduction.  The minimum number
of off-street vehicle parking spaces required for all uses located on a lot, as
set forth in Chapter 16.10, may be reduced by the total number of on-street
vehicle parking spaces located within the width of the frontage of the lot on
which the use or uses are located.  Such reduction shall be calculated on a
one-for-one basis, and shall include only parking spaces located on the same
side of the street as the lot frontage.  Where an on-street parking space is
located adjacent the frontage of two abutting lots, only the lot adjacent the
larger portion of the parking space may count the entirety of the parking space
towards its off-street parking requirement.  (Ord. 1296, 2008; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.41.060    DCO site and design review guidelines.
   A.   Findings and objectives.
      1.   The City Council finds that physical appearance and design of
buildings in the city’s primary commercial areas has a strong impact on the
community’s economic well-being, quality of life and sense of character and
identity.  High-quality design of these buildings, with special attention to
the relationship between buildings, people and the surrounding physical space
will help spur investment in the city; enhance use and value of land and
improvements; improve the stability and value of property; and generally
improve the experience of residents and visitors who use these commercial
areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6880.png]
Figure 17
A high degree of transparency (windows) helps create a sense of interaction
between activities inside and outside the building
      2.   Administration of design standards should be efficient and effective
and provide a level of certainty for property and business owners, as well as
other community members.  It is important to provide a set of clear and
objective standards that may be administered relatively quickly and easily for
most applicants.  At the same time, it is important to provide an alternative
path that provides flexibility for applicants that may want to take a more
innovative approach which meeting the intent of the clear and objective
standards.
      3.   The objectives of the design standards in this section include the
following:
         a.   Create a pedestrian-oriented environment through design of ground
floors.  Fostering interaction between activities within buildings and
activities within the public realm (the sidewalk and street) is crucial to
creating a vibrant and interesting built environment.  A high degree of
transparency between the two realms creates visual interest for the pedestrian
on the sidewalk, and promotes a more active, engaging pedestrian experience. 
Design of ground floor windows and building entries is important to achieving
this goal.  In addition, courtyards, arcades and special paving enhance the
pedestrian environment by providing pleasing, semi-public transitions between
the public and private realms, effectively creating a “threshold” between the
sidewalk and the building (see Figure 17).
         b.   Establish cohesive architectural elements.  Well-designed,
repetitive building elements tend to create a strong sense of place and leave a
lasting physical memory. Cohesive and repetitive architectural “bays” along the
street-facing ground floor of a building create a pleasing sense of rhythm for
the pedestrian, and help to scale and order the built environment as it is
experienced from the sidewalk and street (see Figure 18).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6882.png]
Figure 18
Cohesive visual elements like columns and lighting improve the pedestrian
experience
         c.   Ensure that buildings have a unified design.  Providing clear
distinctions between different portions of a building is important for the
building’s appearance, consistency of design within a larger area and the
ability of people to read or understand how the building functions.  Building
facades should have a clear and distinct base, middle, and top (Figure 19),
utilizing horizontal bands and changes in color and / or material / or building
massing and form to differentiate these breaks.  The base of the building
typically extends from the sidewalk to the bottom of the second story or the
belt course / string course that separates the ground floor from the middle of
the building (see Figure 19).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6884.png]
Figure 19
Design details such as a recessed entry, columns and decorative transom windows
help articulate the ground floor and distinguish it from the upper floors
         Given Canby’s desire to create a thriving pedestrian and business
district, it is important that uses above the ground floor encourage housing
and allow for commercial uses. Upper floor windows should reflect this change
in use (see Figure 20). The middle of the building often contains smaller,
vertically-oriented windows to reflect changes in use on upper floors. Finally,
the top of the building contains a “capping” element which visually terminates
the façade and creates visual interest at the top of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6886.png]
Figure 20
Upper stories on these uses allow for non-retail uses which are reflected in
differing window treatments and other design
         d.   Reinforce the appearance and function of corners within core
commercial area.  Incorporating strong architectural elements where streets
intersect not only results in a more visually interesting built environment,
but enhances the way pedestrians “read” and understand city blocks by creating
recognizable and memorable design elements at the corner of each block.  For
this reason, buildings on corner lots should be designed to not only address,
but celebrate the corner (see Figure 21).
         e.   Use materials that reflect the character and values of Canby. 
Materials evoke emotions among visitors and residents and help define the
character of the community.  On the positive side, they can evoke a sense of
timelessness, permanence, quality, strength and creativity.  On the negative
side, they may connote feelings of transience, incongruity or inconsistency,
weakness or tedium.  Standards for materials are important to reflect and
enhance the community’s values and quality of life (see Figure 22).
   B.   Applicability.
      1.   General applicability.
         a.   Subsection 16.41.060.C and section 16.41.070 define how and where
different types of standards apply.
         b.   Design standards apply only to the following:  (1) new
developments; (2) remodels which represent 60 percent tax assessed or more of
the value of the existing building; (3) façade improvements that would alter
the exterior structure of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6888.png]
Figure 21
The chamfered entry on this building reinforces the corner
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6890.png]
Figure 22
Use of materials such as stone and stucco add to a feeling of permanence
         c.   Design standards do not apply to the following:
            (1)   Interior remodels not combined with exterior changes and
valued at less than 60 percent of the total improvement value of the property;
            (2)   Repair and maintenance of buildings, accessory structures,
parking lots and pedestrian areas that present an immediate or potential risk
of public safety;
            (3)   Normal or routine maintenance and repair of existing
structures;
            (4)   Any type of construction that does not require a building
permit;
            (5)   Temporary structures and emergency structures permitted
pursuant to applicable code standards.
      2.   Sub-Areas.  Site and design review standards are applied differently
within the three sub-areas described below (see Figure 11).
         a.   Core Commercial Sub-Area (CC).  The “downtown” portion of this
area extends primarily along 1st and 2nd Avenues between Cedar and Knott
Streets, and extends northward, away from Highway 99E along Grant and Holly,
past Wait Park to 4th Avenue. This area is the “heart” of Canby. Here one will
find the City’s more historic, traditional commercial structures. The built
environment is characterized by one to two story buildings with commercial
storefronts, built up to the sidewalk, and containing a more or less solid
“building wall.” The result is a more active and vibrant street life than may
be found elsewhere in the City. Future development in this area should continue
this trend, designing commercial and mixed-use buildings that adequately
address the sidewalk and create an engaging experience for pedestrians (see
Figures 23 and 24).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6892.png]
Figure 23
These buildings in the commercial core illustrate desired design features in
that area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6894.png]
Figure 24
The Canby Herald Building in the commercial core incorporates many good design
elements including a recessed entry, sign frieze, engaged columns and
decorative lighting
         The inner highway portion of the Core Commercial area spans the length
of Highway 99E between Elm and Locust.  In many ways, it serves as an extension
of the Downtown Core, just across the highway. Because this area serves as a
“gateway” from Highway 99E into the traditional downtown and serves many of the
same purposes and types of uses, buildings here should be appropriately scaled,
inviting to pedestrians, and demonstrate high-quality architectural design. As
a result, architectural standards for this area and the downtown are identical,
although some development standards differ as described in section 16.41.050.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6896.png]
Figure 25
Example of “cottage commercial” design in the Transitional Commercial sub-area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6898.png]
Figure 26
Example of commercial development in the Transitional Commercial sub-area
         b.   Transitional Commercial Sub-Area (TC).  This area is
characterized by a mix of single-family homes and smaller-scaled commercial
developments, which often take the form of conversions of existing single-
family homes. Larger front setbacks and landscaping (including front yards)
characterize the area. The future of this area will likely include commercial
storefronts that address the sidewalk, albeit less intense than those in the
Core, and residential developments. The overall result will be a truly mixed-
use neighborhood, less intense than the Commercial Core, and with more
greenscape and residential uses. Over time, commercial uses in portions of the
Transitional Commercial district may transition to more intensive uses similar
to the core downtown area and over time the relative boundaries between the two
zones may shift somewhat. Requirements within the Transitional Commercial zone
allow for this flexibility, while ensuring appropriate transitions between this
area and the Core Commercial sub-area, as well as between buildings within the
Transitional Commercial sub-area (see Figures 25 and 26).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6900.png]
Figure 27
Examples of development in the Outer Highway Commercial sub-area
         c.   Outer Highway Commercial Sub-Area (OHC).  The design focus in
this area is less about creating a high-quality pedestrian experience, and more
about ensuring that automobile-oriented design is built to the highest standard
possible. While this goal will be largely accomplished through the development
standards (i.e., locating parking lots next to and behind building and the
street, requiring high quality landscaping, particularly in front setbacks and
around parking areas, and requiring that buildings orient to walkways),
architectural design standards will also aid in this effort. The result will be
automobile-oriented highway uses that demonstrate high-quality design and that
evoke a sense of permanence (see Figure 27).
   C.   Definitions.
      1.   Arcade – An exterior covered passageway along a building façade that
is open to the street frontage (see Figure 28).
      2.   Awning – An overhead cover extending above the sidewalk (usually
above windows and doors) as a shelter and/or sunshade.
      3.   Band – Any horizontal flat member or molding or group of moldings
projecting slightly from a wall plane and usually marking a division in the
wall.
      4.   Bay – (a) Within a structure, a regularly repeated spatial element
defined by beams or ribs and their supports (see Figure 29). (b) A protruded
structure with a bay window.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6902.png]
Figure 28
Arcade example
      5.   Belt Course – A horizontal band or molding set in the face of a
building as a design element (also called a string course).
      6.   Bulkhead – The section of a building between the sidewalk and first
story window sill.
      7.   Canopy – A covered area which extends from the wall of a building,
protecting an entrance or loading dock.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6904.png]
Figure 29
Repeating bays with a continuous awning
      8.   Cap – Usually the topmost member of any vertical architectural
element, often projecting with a drip as protection from the weather.  The
upper member of a column, pilaster, cornice, molding, or the like.
      9.   Chamfer – To cut off the edge or corner of (see Figure 30).
      10.   Clerestory – The upper level of a room that extends beyond the
single-story height; often penetrated by windows.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6906.png]
Figure 30
Chamfered corner entry
      11.   Column – In structures, a relatively long, slender structural
compression member such as a post, pillar, or strut; usually vertical,
supporting a load which acts in (or near) the direction of its longitudinal
axis.
      12.   Cornice – Decorative projection or crown along the top of a wall or
roof (see Figure 31).
      13.   Eaves – The lower edge of a sloping roof; that part of a roof of a
building which projects beyond the wall.
      14.   Entry – The space comprising a door and any flanking or transom
windows associated with a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6908.png]
Figure 31
Cornice details near the top of building
      15.   Frieze – A decorative horizontal band, as along the upper part of a
wall in a room; often used for signage in modern buildings, but derived from
classical architectural principles.
      16.   Marquee – A permanent roof-like shelter over an entrance to a
building.
      17.   Medallion – A decorative element set into the upper portion of a
building façade periodically, typically aligning with columns or pilaster.
      18.   Mullion – A vertical post or upright element dividing a window or
other opening into two or more sections.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6910.png]
Figure 32
Top of building features a parapet
      19.   Parapet – A low, solid, protective screening or decorative wall as
an extension of exterior building walls beyond the roof or deck level (see
Figure 32).
      20.   Primary Street Facing Façade – The façade of the building facing
the primary (east-west) adjacent street.  These streets include Highway 99E,
and North and South 1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd , and 4 th Avenues.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6912.png]
Figure 33
Building entry features a transom window above the door
      21.   Secondary Street Facing Façade – The façade of the building facing
the secondary (north-south) adjacent street.  These streets include Birch,
Cedar, Douglas, Elm, Fir, Grant, Holly, Ivy, Juniper, Knott, and Locust
Streets.
      22.   String Course – A horizontal band or molding set in the face of a
building as a design element (also called a belt course).
      23.   Transom – A horizontal glass plane, typically encased in a wood or
metal frame that separates the storefront from the upper façade (see Figure
33).
      24.   Turret – A very small and slender tower attached to a larger
building.
      25.   Visible Transmittance – A measure of the amount of visible light
transmitted through a material (typically glass).  Information about visible
transmittance typically is or can be provided by window manufacturers.  (Ord
1296, 2008)
16.41.070   DCO site and design review standards.
The following design standards provide a framework for how a building should
look, function, and feel.  The standards are organized by topic and consist of
the following elements:
      ∙   Intent Statement - the big idea or the goal to be accomplished (ex.
“protect pedestrians from sun, wind, and rain”).  In addition to providing
context for specific standards, these statements are used to evaluate
applications as part of an alternative review process administered by the
City’s Design Review Board (see Section
16.49.035).
      ∙   Standards which provide clear, objective guidance related to specific
design elements, in many cases providing options for how to meet a specific
goal, and varying by sub-area.
      ∙   Illustrative graphics, including photos and diagrams, with an
emphasis on examples of good design found in Canby and other communities.
   A.   Pedestrian oriented ground floor design standards.
      1.   Intent.  Design standards in this section are intended to help
create an active, inviting street and sidewalk-facing storefronts and entryways
that are friendly and easily accessible to passersby.  They also will help
ensure that the ground floor promotes a sense of interaction between activities
in the building and activities in the public realm.
      2.   Design standards and applicability.
 
Standards                                                                   Applicability
1. Ground floor windows
a. Visible transmittance.  All commercial ground floor windows must have a
Visible Transmittance (VT) of 0.6 or higher, with the exception of medical  CC, TC, OHC
and dental offices which may have tinted windows.
 
 
                                                                                   OHC:
                                                                                   x=50% for
                                                                                   buildings
                                                                                   with less
                                                                                   than
                                                                                   6,000
                                                                                   square
                                                                                   feet of
                                                                                   floor
b. Primary Street facing façade - primary façade coverage.  Transparent windows area and
shall be used along a minimum of x% of the length of the ground-level primary      25% for
street-facing façade, and along x% ground-level primary street-facing wall area   buildings
(See Figure 34). Ground level walls include all exterior wall areas up to 10 feet  with more
above the finished grade.  Primary and secondary street facing facades are definedthan
in section 16.41.060.                                                              6,000
                                                                                   square
                                                                                   feet of
                                                                                   floor
                                                                                   area or
                                                                                   located
                                                                                   more than
                                                                                   75 feet
                                                                                   from a
                                                                                   lot line.
c. Secondary Street facing façade – secondary façade coverage.  Transparent
windows shall be used along a minimum of x% of the length of the ground-level
secondary street-facing façade, and along x% of the overall secondary street-
facing wall area (See Figure 35). Ground level walls include all exterior wall     CC: x=60%
areas up to 10 feet above the finished grade.CC: x=50%TC: x=45%OHC: x=40% for      TC: x=50%
buildings with less than 6,000 square feet of floor area; 25% for buildings with
more than 6,000 square feet of floor area or located more than 75 feet from a lot
line.
                                                                                   CC, TC:
d. Alley facing façade coverage.  Facades facing alleys shall provide windows    x=50%;
along x% of the length of the alley-facing façade and along y% of the overall wally=25%
area of the alley-facing façade.  Wall area shall be measured to a height of 10OHC:
0” above the finished grade.                                                     x=30%;
                                                                                   y=20%
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6914.png]
Figure 34 Primary and secondary street façade definition
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6916.png]
Figure 35 Illustration of percent transparency requirement
 
Standards                                                                       Applicability
2. Building entries and doors
a. Orientation.  All buildings shall have a prominent entry oriented to and
directly connected to the sidewalk. When buildings are set back from the
sidewalk, a direct, perpendicular connection between the building and the
sidewalk is required.  Additional customer entries may be provided and serve asCC, TC
principal entries (e.g., oriented to parking areas to the side or rear of
buildings) and treatment of these entrances with awnings, lighting, signage,
etc. is required.  (See Figure 36)
b. Transparency.  The street-facing building entry door on all buildings should
be comprised of at least 40% transparent glass. The entry door includes any     CC, TC, OHC
flanking or transom windows. (See Figure 37)
c. Flanking or transom windows.  Commercial and mixed-use building doors shall
include flanking glass windows on either side of the principal door and/or      CC, TC, OHC
clerestory/transom windows.  (See Figure 38).
d. Design features.  Commercial and mixed-use building entries must comply with
at least x of the following:
 (1) Recessed entries.  If recessed, principal entries shall be recessed a
 minimum of 3 feet into the building façade (see Figure 39).
 (2) Awnings or canopies.  These may be used to provide weather protection and
 a visual element and meet standards (see Figure 40).
 (3) Architectural features.  Principal entries may be reinforced with         CC: x=3;
 prominent architectural features such as towers, turrets, increased heights,   TC: x=2;
 articulated parapets, large storefront windows and doors, or entry awnings     OHC: x=2
 (see Figure 41).
 (4) Decorative features.  Entries may be reinforced through the use of
 decorative exterior light fixtures (i.e., wall sconces) or decorative features
 (see Figure 42).
 (5) Engaged columns or piers may be used to reinforce and highlight entries
 (see Figure 43).
 (6)Use of blade signs.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6918.png]
Figure 36 Example of principal entry with direct sidewalk connection
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6920.png]
Figure 37 Example of entry that meets transparency standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6922.png]
Figure 38 Example of entry with transom and flanking glass
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6924.png]
Figure 39 Recessed entry
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6926.png]
Figure 40 Awning or canopy
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6928.png]
Figure 41 Entry with awning and increased mass/decorative features
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6930.png]
Figure 42 Recessed entry with lighting and accent material
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6932.png]
Figure 43 Entry flanked by engaged columns and lighting
 
Standards                                                                       Applicability
3. Transition areas.  One of the following design elements (a or b) is required
for buildings that span more than 75% of a city block or 350 feet.  The City
encourages smaller property owners to work together to collaboratively provide
similar features in other areas.
a. Arcades as defined in section 16.41.060 and that meet all of the following
standards:
 (1) Front entries must be set back a minimum of 6’ (clear) behind an arcade
 that is located at the front property line or the adjusted property line.
 (2) Spacing between columns and/or posts along building be a minimum of 10’  CC only;
 (clear) and a maximum of 25’ (clear).  (See Figure 44)                      Encouraged
b. Courtyards or plazas that meet all of the following standards (see Figure    but not
45):                                                                            required in
 (1) Courtyards or plazas shall be located along the sidewalk-facing façade of the TC or OHC
 the building within the front setback.  Internal courtyards may be provided
 but will not satisfy these requirements.
 (2) Courtyard-facing facades shall include windows along a minimum of 50% of
 the length of the ground level courtyard-facing façade, and along 25% of the
 overall courtyard-facing wall area.
 (3) Courtyards/ plazas shall incorporate special paving (see Figure 46) and/or
 landscaping.
 (4) Courtyards/plazas shall provide seating, including but not limited to
 benches, tables, planter boxes, and other design elements.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6934.png]
Figure 44  Arcades create a semi-public transition from the sidewalk to the
building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6936.png]
Figure 45 Courtyards or plazas
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6938.png]
Figure 46 Entry with special paving
 
Standards                                                                       Applicability
4. Additional standards for residential-only buildings.
a. Weather protected entries.  Residential only buildings with ground floor
units must provide covered, weather-protected front entries for individual
units on the ground floor. Weather-protected entries may take the form of
awnings, canopies, or building overhangs such as eaves extending over front
doors, covered front porches, or inset front doors (see Figure 47).  Awnings or
canopies must be a minimum of 5 feet deep.
b. Entries or porches.  Ground floor units in residential buildings shall
include individual entry or porches for each unit which are oriented to the
sidewalk.                                                                      TC
c. Connection to sidewalk.  Ground floor residential units must include a
direct, perpendicular pedestrian connection to the sidewalk.
d. Lobby entrances.  All lobbies leading to residential units must orient the
principal lobby entrance to the sidewalk, and maintain a direct perpendicular
connection to the sidewalk.
e. Window coverage.  Transparent windows shall be used along a minimum of 50%
of the length of the ground-level primary and secondary street-facing façades,
and along 50% of the overall street-facing wall area.  Ground level walls
include all exterior wall areas up to 10 feet above the finished grade.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6940.png]
Figure 47 Residential development that conforms to design standards
   B.   Cohesive architectural elements standards.
      1.   Intent.  Build upon downtown Canby’s traditional architectural
vernacular by incorporating cohesive and repetitive architectural elements into
the ground floor of street facing facades.
      2.   Design standards and applicability.
 
Standards Applicability
1. Architectural bays
a. Bay divisions.  Ground floors of commercial and mixed-use buildings shall CC,
be divided into distinct street-facing architectural bays that are no more    TC:
than x feet on center. (See Figure 48). For the purpose of this standard, an  x=30;
architectural bay is defined as the zone between the centerlines of two       OHC:
columns. Applicants are encouraged (but not required) to divide the ground    x=50
floor into an odd (rather than even) number of architectural bays.
b. Height of bays.  For large single-story buildings (greater than 6,000
square feet), taller than 16 feet, design and decorative elements required in OHC
sections 3, 4 and 5 will extend to the top of the ground floor (i.e., just
below the roof, cornice or parapet).
c. Design elements.  Each architectural bay within a commercial or mixed-use
building shall incorporate at least x of the following elements (see Figure
49):                                                                          CC:
 (1) Engaged columns or piers.                                                x=3;
 (2) Transom windows over doorways.                                           TC:
 (3) Storefront cornice or beltcourse                                         x=2;
 (4) Canopies, awnings, or overhangs provided along a minimum of 50 percent   OHC:
 of the overall street-facing building length.                                x=2
 (5) Storefront frieze or sign band.
 (6) Bulkheads.
d. Decorative accents.  Each architectural bay within a commercial or mixed-
use building shall incorporate at least x of the following elements (See
Figure 50):                                                                   CC:
 (1) Projecting window sills (12 to 24 feet above grade).                     x=3;
 (2) Window mullions.                                                         TC:
 (3) Building lighting (minimum of 2 lights), including wall sconces,         x=2;
 pendants, gooseneck fixtures, or lighting recessed into awnings.  Wall-     OHC:
 mounted fluorescent lights and internally lit awnings are not permitted.     x=2
 (4) Medallions (minimum of 2).
 (5) Projecting or blade signs (8 to 12 foot clearance from bottom of
 sidewalk).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6942.png]
Figure 48  Illustration of replicating bays
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6944.png]
Figure 49  Design elements for bays
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6946.png]
Figure 50  Decorative accents in bays
   C.   Integrated building façade standards.
      1.   Intent.  Build upon Canby’s traditional downtown architecture by
creating an attractive and unified building façade that celebrates ground floor
activities, the top of the building (where the edifice meets the sky), and
everything in between.
      2.   Design standards and applicability.
 
Standards Applicability
1. Distinct base, middle, and top of building
a. All buildings (regardless of height or number of stories) shall have a clear and
distinct base, middle and top to break up vertical mass. (See Figure 51).  Buildings
must utilize horizontal bands and/or changes in color, material, form and/or pattern
to differentiate the base, middle, and top of the building subject to the following
requirements.  These elements are required on all street facing facades and the side
of the building on which the primary entrance is located if it does not face a
street.                                                                              CC, TC, OHC
 (1) Horizontal bands or other changes in pattern or material shall be a minimum of
 8 inches high (the length of a standard brick), and must project a minimum of 3/
 4 to one inch from the building face.
 (2) Changes in building massing and form may also be used to differentiate a
 building’s base, middle, and top.  This may include architectural setbacks or
 projections, measuring a minimum of 3 inches (see Figure 52).
2. Ground floor design elements
a. The ground floor of the building shall range from 12 feet to 16 feet in height    CC , TC;
and shall be broken up into three distinct areas – a base/bulkhead, middle, and top(commercial
(See Figure 53).  This requirement applies to all street facing facades and the sideand mixed
of the building on which the primary entrance is located if it does not face a       use
street.                                                                              buildings
                                                                                     only)
b. Ground floor “bulkhead/base”.  The “base” of the ground floor facade extends from
the top of the finished grade or sidewalk to the bottom of the window sill.  It
shall contain at least x of the following elements (See Figure 54):  This           CC: x=2;
requirement applies to all street facing facades and the side of the building on     TC: X=1;
which the primary entrance is located if it does not face a street.                  (commercial
                                                                                     and mixed
 (1) Projected window sills, 12 to 24 inches above.                                  use
 (2) Bulkhead (the area directly below the projected window sill) should typically   buildings
 be constructed of concrete, brick, or stone. This element serves to anchor the      only)
 facade to the ground, and with the exception of the entry door, this element
 usually extends the length of the elevation.

c. Ground floor “middle”.  The middle of the ground floor is typically comprised of
storefront windows and shall contain at least x of the following elements (see
Figure 55):  This requirement applies to all street facing facades and the side of  CC: x=2;
the building on which the primary entrance is located if it does not face a street.  TC: x=1;
                                                                                     (commercial
 (1) Integrated window mullions.                                                     and mixed
 (2) Window plant box (minimum of one pair).                                         use
 (3) Decorative building light fixtures, sconces, or medallion (minimum of one       buildings
 pair).                                                                              only)


d. Ground floor “top”.  For a multi-story building, the “top” of the ground floor
facade is the area between the storefront and the upper stories of the building and
shall contain at least x of the following elements (See Figure 56):  This
requirement applies to all street facing facades and the side of the building on     CC: x=3;
which the primary entrance is located if it does not face a street.                  TC: x=2;
 (1) A marquee or projecting or blade sign that extends in a minimum of 5 feet       (commercial
 perpendicular manner from the building façade (the bottom of the marquee or sign   and mixed
 shall be 8 to 12 feet above grade).                                                 use
 (2) Sign frieze.                                                                    buildings
 (3) Storefront awning or canopy.  The bottom of the awning or canopy shall be 8 to only)
 12 feet above grade.
 (4) Storefront cornice or belt course.
 (5) Transom window(s).
3. Middle of building design elements
a. The middle of the building should be differentiated from the bottom and top by at
least x of the following design elements (see Figure 57):                            CC: x=2;
 (1) Residential windows, which are smaller than ground floor windows, and oriented  TC: x=1;
 vertically at a ratio of approximately 2:1.  Individual vertical windows may be    (buildings
 organized into larger window assemblies.                                            of 2 or
 (2) Balcony.                                                                        more
 (3) Step back.                                                                      stories
 (4) Signage band.                                                                   only)

4. Top of building design elements.
a. Roof forms may be flat or sloped.  Requirements for chosen roof forms are as     CC, TC, OHC
follows:
b. Flat roofs.  All flat roofs shall employ a detailed, projecting cornice or
projecting parapet to visually “cap” the building and meet all of the following
requirements:
 (1) Cornices shall project horizontally a maximum of 3 feet (see Figure 58).        CC; TC; OHC
 (2) Parapets must be a minimum of 24 inches in height.  Parapets must include a
 cornice, molding, trim, or variations in brick coursing (see Figure 59).
 (3) Cornices and parapets shall wrap around all sides of the building visible from
 any adjacent street or parking area.
c. Sloped roofs must meet all of the following requirements:
 (1) All sloped roofs shall provide a minimum 1-foot overhang.                       CC; TC; OHC
 (2) All sloped roofs must have a minimum slope of 4:12 (see Figures 14 and 60).
d. Roof top gardens are encouraged on flat roofs, as they help to manage stormwater
run-off that would otherwise go into storm sewers, and eventually rivers and         CC; TC; OHC
streams. Roof gardens with plant materials that are visible from the sidewalk and
the street are particularly encouraged.  (See Figure 61).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6948.png]
Figure 51  Example of distinct bottom, middle & top of building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6950.png]
Figure 52  Example of change in height of roofline or top of building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6952.png]
Figure 53  Elements of the bottom of the building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6954.png]
Figure 54  Building base elements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6956.png]
Figure 55  Middle and top of ground floor elements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6958.png]
Figure 56  Top of building elements and treatments
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6960.png]
Figure 57  Middle of building elements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6962.png]
Figure 58  Cornice used on flat roof
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6964.png]
Figure 59  Parapet used on flat roof
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6966.png]
Figure 60  Varying sloped rooflines are used on this building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6968.png]
Figure 61  Examples of rooftop gardens
   D.   Corner intersection standards.
      1.   Intent.  Create a strong architectural statement at street corners
to create a strong identity.  Establish visual landmarks and enhance visual
variety.
      2.   Design standards and applicability.
 
Standards                                                         Applicability
1. Corners
a. Commercial and mixed-use buildings located on corner lots must
address the corner by employing one of the following:
 (1) Chamfer the corner of the building (i.e., cut the building
 at a 45 degree angle for a minimum of 10 feet) (see Figure 62).
 (2) Incorporate an arcade at the corner as a way of creating a
 semi-public zone (see Figure 62).
 (3) Using special paving, plantings, or lighting, create a       CC
 formal gathering space at the corner by notching the building so
 it operates as an extension of the sidewalk (see Figure 63).
 (4) Employ prominent architectural elements within 25 feet of
 the corner to highlight the corner of the building, such as
 increased building height or massing, turrets, cupolas, a
 pitched roof, or other prominent features (see Figure 63).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6970.png]
Figure 62  Corner options
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6972.png]
Figure 63  Corner of building elements
   E.   Materials standards.
      1.   Intent.  Use building materials that evoke a sense of permanence and
are compatible with Canby’s business areas and the surrounding built
environment.
      2.   Design standards and applicability.  Materials allowed in the CC, TC
and OHC sub-areas are summarized in the following table in terms of primary,
secondary and accent materials.  Other materials may be permitted through the
design review process described in Chapter 16.49.
 
Standards                                                                    CC       TC       OHC
                                                                                               Brick
                                                                                               Stone
                                                                                               Stucco/
                                                                                               EIFS
                                                                                      Brick    Wood
                                                                                      Stone    siding
                                                                             Brick    Stucco/  Hardy
Primary materials – 70% or more of building façade, excluding windows and Stone    EIFS     Plank
transparent doors.                                                           Stucco/  Wood     Split-
                                                                             EIFS     siding   face CMU
                                                                                      Hardy    Tilt-up
                                                                                      Plank    concrete
                                                                                               Spandrel
                                                                                               glass
                                                                                               curtain
                                                                                               walls
                                                                             Brick    Brick    Brick
                                                                             Stone    Stone    Stone
                                                                             Stucco/  Stucco/  Stucco/
                                                                             EIFS     EIFS     EIFS
                                                                             CMU      CMU      CMU
                                                                             (split   (split   (split
                                                                             and      and      and
                                                                             ground   ground   ground
Secondary materials – up to 25% of building façade, excluding windows and face)    face)    face)
transparent doors.                                                           Concrete Concrete Concrete
                                                                             Wood     Wood     Wood
                                                                             siding   siding   siding
                                                                             Hardy    Hardy    Hardy
                                                                             Plank    Plank    Plank
                                                                             Spandrel Spandrel Spandrel
                                                                             glass    glass    glass
                                                                             curtain  curtain  curtain
                                                                             walls    walls    walls
                                                                             Brick    Brick    Brick
                                                                             Stone    Stone    Stone
                                                                             Stucco/  Stucco/  Stucco/
                                                                             EIFS     EIFS     EIFS
                                                                             CMU      CMU      CMU
                                                                             (split   (split   (split
                                                                             and      and      and
                                                                             ground   ground   ground
                                                                             face)    face)    face)
                                                                             Concrete Concrete Concrete
                                                                             Wood     Wood     Wood
                                                                             siding   siding   siding
Accent materials – up to 10% of building façade, excluding windows and    Hardy    Hardy    Hardy
transparent doors.                                                           Plank    Plank    Plank
                                                                             Spandrel Spandrel Spandrel
                                                                             glass    glass    glass
                                                                             curtain  curtain  curtain
                                                                             walls    walls    walls
                                                                             Metal    Metal    Metal
                                                                             Ceramic  Ceramic  Ceramic
                                                                             tile     tile     tile
                                                                             Wood,    Wood,    Wood,
                                                                             vinyl    vinyl    vinyl
                                                                             and/or   and/or   and/or
                                                                             metal    metal    metal
                                                                             for trim for trim for trim
                                                                                      Metal
                                                                             Metal    Wood     Metal
Roof materials (sloped roofs only)                                           Wood     shingles Wood
                                                                             shingles Tile     shingles
                                                                             Tile     Asphalt  Tile
                                                                                      shingles
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6974.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6976.png]
   F.   Color palette
      1.   Intent.  Use colors on buildings that are generally compatible with
Canby’s business areas and the surrounding built environment.
      2.   Design standards and applicability.  Applicants are strongly
encouraged to use colors from, or consistent with, the Sherwin-Williams Arts
and Crafts color palette (i.e. with the same paint color codes).  Additional
information about this color palette is available from the City of Canby, Canby
Business Development and/or the Sherwin-Williams Web site.  (Ord. 1296, 2008)
Chapter 16.42
SIGNS
Sections:
   
16.42.010   Purpose.
   
16.42.015   Definitions and interpretation.
   
16.42.020   Administration and permit requirements.
   
16.42.025   General sign standards.
   
16.42.030   Temporary community event sign plan.
   
16.42.040   Design standards for signs.
   
16.42.045   Permanent signs permitted in the right-of-way
   
16.42.050   Size, type, and location of signs permitted by zoning district and
use.
   
16.42.060   Automobile service station sign standards.
   
16.42.070   Measurements.
   
16.42.140   Severability.
16.42.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      1.   Protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the public;
      2.   Provide a neat, clean, orderly and attractive appearance in the
community;
      3.   Encourage well-designed and wisely located signs;
      4.   Provide for safe construction, location, erection and maintenance of
signs;
      5.   Prevent proliferation of signs and sign clutter, minimize adverse
visual safety factors to travelers in the public right-of-way;
      6.   Facilitate economic development and enhance the city’s ability to
retain and attract businesses and customers;
      7.   Contribute to a simple and efficient regulatory process; and
      8.   Achieve these purposes consistent with state and federal
constitutional limits on the regulation of speech.
   B.   To achieve this purpose, it is necessary to regulate the design,
quality of materials, construction, location, electrification, illumination,
and maintenance of signs that are visible to the public.
   C.   Nothing in these regulations is intended to control the construction or
location of directional or informational signs installed by the city, county or
state for the purpose of controlling traffic, indicating street names,
providing legal or public notice, or other public purposes.
(Ord 1299, 2008; Ord. 955 sections 13-16, 1996; Ord. 913 section 1, 1994; Ord.
830 section 13, 1989; Ord. 740 section 10.3.10(A), 1984)
16.42.015   Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in
this section.  Words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined
elsewhere in the Land Development and Planning Ordinance of the city, shall be
given the meanings set forth in such ordinance.  Principles for computing sign
area and sign height are contained in section 16.42.070.  All other words and
phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.  Section headings or captions are for reference
purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this ordinance.
   A.   A-Frame Sign.  A double-faced temporary sign composed of two sign
boards attached at the top and separate at the bottom, not permanently attached
to the ground.
   B.   Abandoned Sign. An abandoned sign has one or more of the following 
characteristics:
      a.   A sign or sign structure that has been damaged, and in which repairs
and restoration are not started within 90 days of the date the sign was
damaged, or are not diligently pursued once started.
      b.   A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person,
advertises a business, lessor, property/space for sale/lease, owner, products,
or activity conducted on the premises where such sign is displayed. 
   C.   Alter.  To make a change to a sign or sign structure, including but not
limited to, changes in area, height, projection, illumination, shape,
materials, placement and location on a site. Altering a sign does not include
ordinary maintenance or repair, repainting an existing sign surface, including
changes of message or image, or exchanging the display panels of a sign.
   D.   Automobile Service Station.  A retail place of business engaged
primarily in the sale of motor fuels.
   E.   Awning Sign.  A sign attached to or incorporated into an overhead cover
extending above the sidewalk or ground (usually above windows and doors).
   F.   Balloon Sign.  A sign consisting of a membrane that relies on internal
gaseous pressure or a semi-rigid framework for maintaining its form.
   G.   Banner Sign.  A sign made of fabric or other non-rigid material with no
enclosing framework.  National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official
flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
   H.   Beacon.  Any light, excluding street lights and traffic signals, with
one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more
points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one
or more beams that rotate or move.
   I.   Bench Sign.  A sign on an outdoor bench.
   J.   Blade/Overhang Sign.  A sign, other than a wall sign, that projects
from, and is supported by or attached to a roof or wall of a building or
structure.
   K.   Building Elevation Area.  The area of a single side of a building,
measured in square feet and calculated by multiplying the length of the side of
the building by the height of the building to the roof line. If the roof line
height varies along the side of the building, the average of the lowest and
highest roof line height on that side shall be used in the calculation.
   L.   Building Frontage, Primary.  The ground floor lineal length of a
building wall that faces a street, driveway, parking lot, courtyard or plaza
and has an entrance or exit open to the general public.
   M.   Building Frontage, Secondary.  The ground floor lineal length of a
building wall that faces a street, driveway, parking lot, courtyard or plaza
and does not have an entrance or exit open to the general public.
   N.   Bulletin Board.  A board that provides information in a horizontal
linear format, that can be changed either manually through placement of letters
or symbols on tracks mounted on a panel, or electronically through use of an
array of lights in a dot matrix configuration.  A bulletin board is not a sign
in itself, but rather is an element that is allowed as part of a monument sign,
pole sign, marquee sign, blade/overhang sign, or wall sign.
   O.   Business Complex.  A site consisting of one or more lots sharing
appurtenant facilities, such as driveways, parking and pedestrian walkways.
      1.   Minor Business Complex.  A site proposed for or consisting of
multiple uses and/or multiple tenants, where the building(s) contain a maximum
of 14,999 square feet in gross floor area.
      2.   Major Business Complex.  A site proposed for or consisting of
multiple uses and/or multiple tenants, where the building(s) contain 15,000 to
99,999 square feet in gross floor area.
      3.   Industrial/Research Business Complex.  A site proposed for or
consisting of multiple uses and/or multiple tenants, where the building(s)
contain a minimum of 100,000 square feet in gross floor area.
   P.   Canopy Sign.  A sign that is a part of or attached to a permanent
roofed structure which may be freestanding or attached to a building and is not
a completely enclosed structure.
   Q.   Community Event Sign Plan.  A sign plan approved by City Council which
permits temporary banners or seasonal holiday decorations to extend over a
street, over a private road providing vehicle access into a property, or to be
attached to utility or streetlight poles.
   R.   Directory Signs.  Directory signs include signs that are attached to
the building and are a directory of the occupants of the building, signs that
provide vehicular clearance information, signs that identify parking lot
sections or direct vehicles in a parking lot, and similar signs as determined
by the City Planner.  The sign face of each directory sign shall not exceed two
(2) square feet, or in the case of an occupant directory, shall not exceed one
(1) square foot per occupant listed on the directory sign.
   S.   Electronic Message Board.  A board that, through the use of moving
structural elements, flashing or sequential lights, or lights in a dot matrix
or LED configuration which may be changed intermittently or by other automated
method, results in a message or image display that changes, moves or appears to
move.  An electronic message board is not a sign in itself, but rather is an
element that is allowed as part of a monument sign, pole sign, marquee sign,
blade/overhang sign, or wall sign.
   T.   Flag.  A rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design that is
displayed hanging free from a staff, halyard or building to which it is
attached. A flag is often used to display the symbol of the United States, a
nation, state, or other governmental entity.
   U.   Flashing Sign.  A sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light
source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by
means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
   V.   Grade.  For freestanding signs, “grade” is the average level of the
ground measured five feet from either end of the base of the sign, parallel to
the sign face. For signs mounted on buildings, the grade is the average level
of the sidewalk, alley or ground below the mounted sign measured five feet from
either end of the sign face.
   W.   Illuminated Sign.  A sign illuminated by an internal light source or an
external light source primarily designed to illuminate the sign. The
illumination is “external” when the light source is separate from the sign
surface and is directed to shine upon the sign and “internal” when the light
source is contained within the sign, but does not include signs where the text
or image is composed of dot matrix or LEDs. External illumination is “direct”
when the lamp fixture is directly seen by the public, such as a floodlight, and
“indirect” when the source of light is not directly seen by the public, such as
cove lighting.
   X.   Lawn Sign.  A temporary freestanding sign that is supported by a frame,
pole, or other structure placed directly in or upon the ground without other
support or anchor.
   Y.   Maintenance.  Normal care or servicing needed to keep a sign functional
or perpetuate its use, such as cleaning, changing light bulbs, and replacing or
repairing a part made unusable by ordinary wear.
   Z.   Marquee Sign.  A sign that is a permanent roof-like structure attached
to and projecting from a building, that is used in part to display changeable
sign copy.
   AA.   Menu Board Sign.  A sign not designed to be viewed from any public
right-of-way, and is placed near the public entrance to, or near the drive-up
service lane of, a food service establishment.  A menu board sign shall not
exceed 12 feet in height.
   BB.   Monument Sign.  A freestanding sign that is placed on a solid-
appearing base that extends a minimum of 12 inches above the ground and extends
at least 75 percent of the length and width of the sign. The above ground
portion of the base is considered part of the total allowable height of a
monument sign.
   CC.   Name Plate.  A wall sign less than 2 square feet in size, permanently
affixed to the front façade of a residential structure.
   DD.   Neon Sign.  A sign internally illuminated by a light source consisting
of neon or other gas contained in a tube, except for fluorescent lights.
   EE.   Owner.  The person owning title to real property on which a sign is
located, or the contract purchaser of the real property.  “Owner” also includes
the owner of a sign who has a continuing lease of the real property on which
the sign is located.
   FF.   Pennant.  A sign device made from a strip of flexible material
intended to wave in the wind.
   GG.   Pole Sign.  A sign that is a freestanding sign connected to the ground
by one or more supports with the lower edge of the sign physically separated
from the ground (in contrast to a monument sign).
   HH.   Portable Sign.  A sign which is not affixed to a building, other
permanent structure, or to the ground in a permanent manner, and which is
designed to be moved from place to place.
   II.   Principal Use.  The purpose for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged, or for which it is occupied or maintained.  Multiple principal uses
may be located on a lot, a site, or in a business complex.
   JJ.   Public Sign.  A sign erected, constructed, or placed within the public
right-of-way or on public property by or with the approval of the governmental
agency having authority over, control of, or ownership of the right-of-way or
public property.
   KK.   Repair.  Mending or replacing broken or worn parts with comparable
materials.
   LL.   Roof Line.  The top edge of a roof or a building parapet, whichever is
higher, excluding any cupolas, chimneys or other minor projections.
   MM.   Seasonal Holiday Decorations.  Every type of decoration displayed
during and around a federally recognized holiday or on a seasonal basis,
whether illuminated or not, and whether attached to utility poles, buildings or
any other structure.
   NN.   Sign.  Any writing, video projection, illumination, pictorial
representation, illustration, decoration, emblem, symbol, design, trademark,
banner, flag, pennant, captive balloon, streamer, spinner, ribbon, sculpture,
statue, or any other figure or character that:
      1.   Is a structure or any part thereof (including the roof or wall of a
building); or
      2.   Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed, or otherwise
placed or displayed upon or designed into a structure or an outdoor screen or
monitor, or a board, plate canopy, awning, marquee, or a vehicle, or upon any
material object, device, or surface whatsoever; and
      3.   Communicates, or is designed to communicate on any subject
whatsoever. points of a sign, but excluding essential sign structure,
foundations, or supports.
   OO.   Sign Copy.  The message or image conveyed by a sign:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6978.png]
   PP.   Sign Face.  The sum of the surfaces of a sign face as seen from one
plane or elevation included within the outer dimensions of the sign board,
frame or cabinet.
   QQ.   Site.  The area, parcel, or lot of land owned by or under the lawful
control of an owner.  Abutting lots shall be considered one site when they
share appurtenant facilities, such as driveways, parking and pedestrian
walkways.
   RR.   Street Frontage.  The length or width of a site, measured along the
lot line separating the site from a street.
   SS.   Supporting Structure.  A structure specifically intended for
supporting or containing a sign.
   TT.   Temporary Sign.  A sign that is temporarily attached or tethered to a
building, structure, or the ground. Temporary signs include, but are not
limited to, A-frames, banners, flags, pennants, balloons, blimps, streamers,
lawn signs and portable signs.
   UU.   Utility Sign.  A sign constructed or placed by a public utility on or
adjacent to a pole, pipe, or other type of utility facility within a public
right-of-way or utility easement.
   VV.   Vehicle Sign.  A sign placed in or attached to a motor vehicle,
trailer, or rail car that is parked on public or private property in a publicly
visible location for more than 72 consecutive hours, the principal purpose of
which is to display signage rather than to use the vehicle for transportation
purposes.  This is not meant to include signs and logos attached to any vehicle
that is regularly used in the normal course of business for transportation
purposes.
   WW.   Video Sign.  A sign providing information in both a horizontal and
vertical format (as opposed to linear), through use of pixel and sub-pixel
technology having the capacity to create continuously changing sign copy in a
full spectrum of colors and light intensities.
   XX.   Wall Sign.  A sign that is painted on the wall of a building, or a
sign attached to the wall of a building and extending no more than twelve
inches from a wall, or attached to or erected against a roof with a slope not
more than 20 degrees from vertical, with the exposed face of the sign in a
plane that is vertical or parallel to the plane of that roof, and which does
not project more than18 inches from the wall or roof.
   YY.   Window Sign.  A sign attached to, or painted on a window, or displayed
inside the building in a manner so that it is clearly viewable from outside the
building.  (Ord. 913 section 1[part], 1994; Ord. 955 sections 13-16, 1996; Ord.
1299, 2008)
16.42.020   Administration and permit requirements.
   A.   Permit Required.  All signs erected after the effective date of this
chapter, other than signs exempt from permit requirements per 16.42.025, shall
require a sign permit.  Application shall be made on forms provided by the
Planning Director.  Sign permits issued for signs which encroach into the
public right-of-way are subject to the standards of 16.42.045. 
   B.   Fee.  A fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be
paid to the City of Canby upon the filing of an application.  Such fees shall
not be refundable.
   C.   Construction and Maintenance.  Each sign shall be constructed to meet
the requirements of applicable building, electrical, and mechanical codes.
      1.   All signs and component parts shall be kept in good repair and
maintained in a safe, neat, clean and attractive condition.
      2.   No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that any
portion of its surface or its supports will interfere in any way with the free
use of, or any access to, any fire escape, exit or standpipe.  No signs shall
be erected or maintained so as to obstruct any window so that light or
ventilation is reduced below standards required by any applicable law or
building code.
      3.   It is unlawful to erect or maintain a sign which, by reason of its
size, location or placement, creates an immediate danger to the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the city by blocking vision for either
pedestrians or motorists, at public and/or private roadways, intersections,
driveways, or railroad crossings.
   D.   Appeal.  Appeals are governed by the procedures set forth in Chapter
16.89.
   E.   Permit Expiration.  Every permit issued by the Building Official under
the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within
180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by
such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced
for a period of 180 days.  Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit
shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half of
the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have
been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such
work; and provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not
exceeded one year.
   F.   Permit Suspension or Revocation.  The City Planner or duly authorized
representative may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under
provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued on the basis of
incorrect information supplied, or in violation of applicable ordinance or
regulation or any of the provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Variance.  The procedures which allow variations from the strict
application of the regulations of this Title, by reason of exceptional
circumstances and other specified conditions, are set forth in Chapter 16.53.
   H.   Conditional Use Signs or Signs under Site and Design Review.  Signs
proposed at the time of a conditional use application or site and design review
application shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission regarding size,
height, and location at the time of conditional use review or site and design
review.  If sign review was not part of the original conditional use review or
original site and design review, the applicant may apply for a sign permit
under the normal sign review procedures and policies, provided the application
is made at least six (6) months after the original review.  In conditional use
signs or signs reviewed under design review, provisions of this chapter shall
apply.
   I.   Nonconforming Signs.  Provisions for nonconforming signs are set forth
in Chapter 16.52.
   J.   Oregon Motorist Information Act Requirements.  The Oregon Motorist
Information Act (OMIA) provides the Oregon Department of Transportation purview
over the approval of any signage which is “visible” to a State highway running
through a community.  In addition to being subject to provisions of this
chapter, all such signs are subject to requirements identified in Oregon
Revised Statutes (ORS) ORS 377.700 – 377.840 and ORS 377.992.   
(Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 955 section 19, 1996; Ord. 913 section 1[part], 1994;
Ord. 830 section 13[part], 1989; Ord. 740 section 10.3.40 (B), 1984; Ord 1299,
2008; Ord. 1339, 2010)
16.42.025   General sign standards.
   A.   Prohibited Signs.  Except for legal nonconforming signs, the following
signs are unlawful and are nuisances:
      1.   Abandoned signs. A sign that has been abandoned for 30 days or more
shall have the sign copy area removed by the property owner on or prior to 30
days after abandonment.
      2.   Vehicle sign.
      3.   Video sign.
      4.   Sign that may be confused as a traffic control device.
      5.   Signs that impede movement or create a physical hazard.
      6.   Signs with rotating or other moving parts, except barber shop poles
and clocks.
      7.   Signs illuminated by flashing lights.
      8.   Searchlights or beacons, except for temporary events such as grand
openings, in which case a permit is required.
      9.   Signs affixed to power, utility, or traffic control poles, or other
public utility structures, other than city-approved traffic control signs,
utility signs, and pole identification placards.
   B.   Exempt Signs.  The following signs are exempt from the provisions of
this Chapter, except as specified below, and shall not be counted towards the
amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this Chapter.  Such signs shall
conform to all other applicable provisions of this title.
      1.   All signs which are placed inside a structure or building, and which
are either not visible through windows or building openings, or are not
intended to be visible from outside the structure or building, as determined by
the City Planner.
      2.   Bench signs as defined in 16.42.015, provided that the bench sign
copy does not exceed 15 square feet and the bench sign is approved by the bench
owner.
      3.   Signs attached to mass transit shelters which are approved by the
mass transit agency and the transit shelter owner.
      4.   Directory signs as defined in 16.42.015.
      5.   Menu board signs as defined in 16.42.015.
      6.   Nameplate signs as defined in 16.42.015.
      7.   Utility signs as defined in 16.42.015.
      8.   Flags as defined in 16.42.015.
      9.   Approved Public Art Murals as defined in CMC Chapter 2.80.020.
   C.   Temporary Signs.  The following temporary signs do not require a sign
permit, shall not be counted towards the amount or type of signage otherwise
allowed by this Chapter, and may be displayed only in compliance with the
following standards.  Such signs shall conform to all other applicable
provisions of this title.  Except as may be approved in accordance with
16.53.015, Minor Sign Variance, temporary signs in excess of the standards of
this section are not permitted. 
      1.   Except as approved in a Community Event Sign Plan, as set forth in
16.42.030, no temporary sign shall be internally illuminated or be illuminated
by an external light source primarily intended for the illumination of the
temporary sign.
      2.   A temporary sign shall be attached to a site or constructed in a
manner that both prevents the sign from being easily removed by unauthorized
persons or being blown from its location, and allows for the easy removal of
the sign by authorized persons.  Except as approved in a Community Event Sign
Plan, as set forth in 16.42.030, temporary signs shall not be attached to
trees, shrubbery, utility poles or traffic control signs or devices.
      3.   No temporary sign shall be erected or maintained that, by reason of
its size, location or construction, constitutes a hazard to the public.
      4.   Temporary Signs Allowed in Residential Zones (R-1, R-1.5, R-2).
         a.   One or more temporary signs no taller than 4 feet in height, and
not exceeding 6 square feet in area each, may be displayed on a lot during the
period from 120 days before a public election or the time the election is
called, whichever is earlier, to five days after the public election.
         b.   One temporary sign no taller than 4 feet in height, and not
exceeding 6 square feet in area, may be displayed on a lot for a maximum of 8
days in any calendar month, provided it is removed by sunset on any day it is
erected.
         c.   One temporary sign no taller than 5 feet in height, and not
exceeding 6 square feet in area, may be displayed on a lot during the time the
property, or building or dwelling thereon, is for sale or lease, provided that
the sign is removed within 14 days after the sale or lease is completed.
         d.   One temporary sign not exceeding 6 square feet in area may be
displayed on a lot during the time that construction activities are occurring
on site, provided that the sign is removed within 7 days of the completion of
the construction activities.  If the site has frontage on more than one street,
one additional sign of the same size may be displayed facing the second street
frontage, provided the signs are not visible simultaneously from either
street.  On lots of more than 2 acres, the sign area may be increased to no
more than 32 square feet.  In no case shall such sign be displayed for more
than 12 months.
         e.   On property that has received tentative subdivision or partition
approval from the City, from the time of that approval until issuance of a
building permit for construction on the last lot, one temporary sign no taller
than 8 feet in height, and not exceeding 32 square feet in area, may be
displayed on a site less than 4 acres in size.  If the site is greater than 4
acres in size, two temporary signs no taller than 8 feet in height, and not
exceeding 64 square feet each, may be displayed.
         f.   Banner or Balloon Signs Allowed Twice Per Year for no Longer Than
30 Days Each Occurrence.  On a lot used for a permitted or conditional use
other than a single-family dwelling, one banner sign or balloon sign may be
displayed up to 30 consecutive days only twice during a calendar year.  A
banner sign may not exceed 50 square feet in size.  A balloon sign may not
exceed 80 cubic feet in size.  Temporary banner and balloon signs do not
require a sign permit, but must be registered with the Planning Department,
specifying the sign-owner’s Canby business license number (if applicable), the
start and stop dates, sign area and proposed location of each temporary banner
or balloon sign.  Temporary banner and balloon signs regulated by this
subsection shall display a weatherproof label from the City that such sign is
registered.  Temporary banner and balloon signs displayed beyond dates provided
to the City shall be in violation of this code.
      5.   Temporary Signs Allowed in Commercial and Industrial Zones (C-R, C-
1, C-2, C-M, M-1, M-2).
         a.   One or more temporary signs no taller than 5 feet in height, and
not exceeding 32 square feet in area each, may be displayed on a lot during the
period from 120 days before a public election or the time the election is
called, whichever is earlier, to five days after the public election.
         b.   One temporary sign no taller than 8 feet in height, and not
exceeding 32 square feet in area, may be displayed on a lot during the time the
property, or building or dwelling thereon, is for sale or lease, provided that
the sign is removed within 14 days after the sale or lease is completed.
         c.   One temporary sign no taller than 8 feet in height, and not
exceeding 32 square feet in area, may be displayed on a lot during the time
that construction activities are occurring on site, provided that the sign is
removed within 7 days of the completion of the construction activities.  If the
site has frontage on more than one street, one additional sign of the same size
may be displayed facing the second street frontage, provided the signs are not
visible simultaneously from either street.  In no case shall such sign be
displayed for more than 12 months.
         d.   One temporary sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area may be
displayed on a lot during the period of a charitable fundraising event being
conducted on the site where the sign is displayed.  The sign shall not be
displayed more than 7 days prior to the event, and must be removed within 2
days following the event.
         e.   Banner or Balloon Signs Allowed Four Times Per Year for no Longer
Than 30 Days Each Occurrence.  One banner sign or balloon sign may be displayed
on a lot by each business license holder who operates their business at that
location per City business license records.  A banner sign may not exceed 50
square feet in size.  A balloon sign may not exceed 80 cubic feet in size.  A
balloon sign may not be taller than the maximum allowed height of a pole sign
permitted in the same zone as prescribed in Section
16.42.050, Tables 1 through 7 of this code.  Each business license holder may
display such signage up to 30 consecutive days only four times during a
calendar year.  Temporary banner and balloon signs do not require a sign
permit, but must be registered with the Planning Department, specifying the
sign-owner’s Canby business license number (if applicable), the start and stop
dates, sign area and proposed location of each temporary banner or balloon
sign.  Temporary banner and balloon signs regulated by this subsection shall
display a weatherproof label from the City that such sign is registered. 
Temporary banner and balloon signs displayed beyond dates provided to the City
shall be in violation of this code. 
         f.   Miscellaneous Small Signs.  Miscellaneous small signs, such as
those indicating hours of operation, with an aggregate area not to exceed 3
square feet and located either within a window or within 5 feet of an entrance
to a building.
      6.   Temporary Signs Allowed in Right-of-Way in All Zones. 
         a.   No temporary sign in the right-of-way shall interrupt the normal
flow of vehicle, pedestrian or bicycle traffic, and shall provide for a minimum
of 5 feet of clear passage for pedestrians on a sidewalk where a sidewalk
exists.  No temporary sign shall encroach into a vision clearance area.
         b.   As referenced in 16.42.010.C, signs installed by the city,
county, or state for public purposes are allowed in the public right-of-way.
         c.   Temporary safety and directional signs installed by non-
governmental persons, such as those displayed at or in close proximity to a
road crew or construction project, shall get specific written approval from the
Public Works Director prior to erecting the signs.  Such signs shall be removed
after the construction activity is complete.
         d.   A-frame signs and lawn signs no taller than 3 feet in height, and
not exceeding 6 square feet in area, may be displayed by real estate brokers
only on weekends and holidays in the right-of-way in relative close proximity
to a property where an open house is being held for the sale or lease of the
property. 
         e.   Miscellaneous Small Signs.  Miscellaneous small signs, such as
those indicating hours of operation, with an aggregate area not to exceed 3
square feet and located either within a window or within 5 feet of an entrance
to a building.
      7.   Temporary Signs Allowed in Right-of-Way Only in Commercial and
Industrial Zones (C-R, C-1, C-2, C-C, C-M, M-1, M-2).  A-frame signs may be
displayed on public sidewalks provided they comply with the following
standards:
         a.   A-frame sign dimensions shall not exceed a maximum width of 3
feet, nor a maximum above-ground height of 4 feet.  Each sign face shall not
exceed 12 square feet.
         b.   One A-frame sign per business license holder may be displayed on
a public sidewalk in the right-of-way abutting the physical address that is on
file with the City as the location where that business license holder operates
the business.  A weatherproof label which displays the sign-owner’s Canby
business license number shall be affixed to the backside of the A-frame sign. 
The business license must be current, and City personnel must be able to read
the business license number upon inspection at all times.
         c.   A-frame signs shall be displayed only during the business hours
of the responsible enterprise.
         d.   A-frame signs shall be placed so as to allow at least 5 feet of
unimpeded pedestrian sidewalk maneuvering space.  A-frame signs shall not
encroach into any required vision clearance area.  A-frame signs shall be set
back from the curb so as not to interfere with on-street parking, or shall be
set back a minimum of 10 feet from the edge of the street travel lane where no
curb exists.
         e.   The owner of the property abutting the right-of-way on which an
A-frame sign is placed assumes all liability for incidents involving the sign.
 
(Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1111 section 7, 2003; Ord. 1076, 2001; Ord. 955 section
17, 1996; Ord. 913 section 1[part], 1994; Ord. 830 section 13[part], 1989, Ord.
802 4, 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.40(C), 1984; Ord. 1299, 2008; Ord. 1339,
2010; Ord. 1341, 2011; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.42.030   Temporary community event sign plan.
Temporary banners or seasonal holiday decorations which extend over a street,
over a private road providing vehicle access into a property, or are attached
to utility or streetlight poles, shall be permitted only after the City Council
has approved a Community Event Sign Plan. 
   A.   Application for approval of a Community Event Sign Plan shall be made
on forms provided by the Planning Director, and shall be accompanied by all
required information and fees.
   B.   Applicant shall obtain all encroachment permits and other agency
approvals required, prior to submitting an application for a Community Event
Sign Plan.  If signage is proposed within a right-of-way controlled by another
agency, the applicant shall provide written consent from the appropriate agency
regarding the signage prior to submitting an application for a Community Event
Sign Plan.  The consent shall identify any restrictions desired by the owner of
the right-of-way. 
   C.   The applicant shall assume all liability for incidents involving the
sign by signing a document exempting the City from liability and providing
liability insurance in the form required by the City Attorney and in an amount
not less than the current tort liability limitations.
   D.   Applications for permanent geographic identification banners or signage
which extend over a street, over a private road providing vehicle access into a
property, or are attached to utility or streetlight poles, shall be submitted
following the same application procedures as described for temporary signage,
and shall be submitted by a neighborhood association that is officially
recognized by the City, or shall be accompanied by a petition indicating the
consent of at least 51 percent of the property owners in the geographic area
delineated on the Sign Plan application.
   E.   Except for permanent banners or signage identifying a geographic area
or district of the City, all banners and signage approved in a Community Event
Sign Plan shall be removed within 2 days after the associated event or activity
has ended, or no later than directed by City Council in the Sign Plan approval,
whichever date is later.
16.42.040   Design standards for signs.
The following standards apply to signs in all zone districts.
   A.   Setbacks.  Signs are required to meet the setback requirements of the
applicable zone district, except however the street yard setback for signs may
be reduced to fifty (50) percent of that required for other structures in the
zone.  Signs shall not obstruct a vision clearance area required in the
applicable zone district.
   B.   Illumination.
      1.   External illumination is allowed.  The external illumination may be
either “direct” or “indirect”, provided that the source of light (e.g., bulb)
is shielded such that it is not directly seen by the public.  External light
sources shall be carefully located, directed, and shielded in order to avoid
direct illumination of any off-site object or property. 
      2.   Internal illumination is allowed.
      3.   External or internal sign illumination shall not result in glare
onto neighboring properties or onto public right-of-way, such that due to level
of brightness, lack of shielding, or high contrast with surrounding light
levels, the sign illumination results in discomfort or visual disability for
persons.
      4.   Sign illumination shall not appear to flash, undulate, pulse, or
portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking or chasing lights.
   C.   Monument signs.
      1.   Monument signs shall have a distinct base, middle, and top.  These
elements of the sign shall vary from one another in terms of their thickness,
materials, or color. 
      2.   Monument signs shall incorporate the following materials, unless
otherwise approved pursuant to subsection 4 of this section.
         a.   The base and top shall be constructed of stone, brick, or wood.
         b.   The middle shall be constructed of stone, brick, wood, metal with
a matte/non-reflective finish, vinyl, or other materials as noted in subsection
c.
         c.   Other materials may be used for bulletin board or electronic
message board components in the middle portion of a monument sign, as needed to
allow the bulletin board or electronic message board to function.
      3.   Monument signs shall provide street addresses when street addresses
are not visible from the street.
      4.   A monument sign which does not meet one or more of the standards
detailed above in subsections 1 through 3, may be approved by the Planning
Director pursuant to the Type II land use application procedures set forth in
Chapter 16.89.  A discretionary monument sign application may be approved if
the applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the following criteria:
         a.   The overall design of the sign exhibits a sense of structure; and
         b.   Timeless materials, similar to stone, brick, or wood are used;
and
         c.   The proposed sign is in conformance with all other applicable
city ordinances concerning it’s location, construction, and design.
   D.   A-Frame signs.
      1.   A-frame signs shall be constructed of wood, plastic, or metal with a
matte/non-reflective finish.
      2.   A-frame signs shall not include any parts or attachments that extend
beyond the edge of the sign dimensions established in Section
16.42.025.C.
      3.   A-frame signs shall not incorporate reflective materials.
      4.   A-frame sign structure shall not incorporate any neon colors.
      5.   An A-frame sign which does not meet one or more of the standards
detailed above in subsections 1 through 4, may be approved by the Planning
Director pursuant to the Type II land use application procedures set forth in
Chapter 16.89.  A discretionary A-frame sign application may be approved if the
applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the following criteria:
         a.   The proposed materials, colors, and dimensions of the A-frame
sign do not pose a hazard or nuisance to persons; and
         b.   The proposed sign is in conformance with all other applicable
city ordinances concerning it’s location, construction, and design.
   E.   Blade/Overhang signs.
      1.   Blade/overhang sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the
building face.
      2.   The outer edge of a blade/overhang sign shall be set back a minimum
of 2 feet from a curb.
      3.   A minimum 8 foot clearance shall be provided between grade and the
bottom of a blade/overhang sign.  Blade/overhang signs which extend over the
public right-of-way are subject to the standards of 16.42.045.
   F.   Wall signs.  A wall sign shall not project more than 18 inches from the
wall to which it is attached (or 12 inches from a wall directly abutting an
alley).  Wall signs which extend over the public right-of-way are subject to
the standards of 16.42.045..
   G.   Bulletin boards and electronic message boards are only allowed as part
of a blade/overhang sign, marquee sign, monument sign, pole sign, or wall sign.
      1.   The rate of change for sign copy on a bulletin or electronic message
board from one message to another message shall be no more frequent than every
8 seconds.  Once changed, copy shall remain static until the next change.
      2.   Displays may travel horizontally or scroll vertically onto
electronic message boards, but must hold in a static position after completing
the travel or scroll.
      3.   Sign copy shall not appear to flash, undulate, pulse, or portray
explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking or chasing lights.  Copy
shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract,
bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise portray graphics or animation as it
moves onto, is displayed on, or leaves the electronic message board.
      4.   No electronic message board may be illuminated to a degree of
brightness that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility.
(Ord. 1111 section 7, 2003; Ord. 913 section 1[part], 1994; Ord. 830 section 13
[part] 1989; Ord. 802 4, 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.40(C), 1984; Ord 1299,
2008; Ord. 1339, 2010)
16.42.045   Permanent Signs Allowed in Right-of-Way.
   A.   Except as allowed by this section, no permanent signs requiring sign
permits shall be located within the public right-of-way.
   B.   Awning, canopy, marquee, blade/overhang and wall signs proposed in
compliance with this chapter may be permitted to extend over an existing or
future public sidewalk provided they comply with the criteria below:
      1.   The sign shall be placed so as to not to interfere with use of the
public property for walkway, roadway, existing or proposed utilities, and other
authorized uses.
      2.   The sign complies with all applicable city codes with regard to
structural safety, traffic, and fire safety requirements.
      3.   The sign will not cause an adverse impact on adjoining properties.
      4.   The sign will be maintained in good order.
      5.   No encroachment permit shall be required; however, in requesting a
sign permit for a sign which extends over an existing or future public
sidewalk, the applicant acknowledges that:
         a.   Permission to allow the sign to extend over the public sidewalk
shall be revocable by the city at any time the revocation would be in the
public interest and that no grant of any permit, expenditure of money in
reliance thereon or lapse of time shall give the permittee any right to the
continued existence of an encroachment or to any damages or claims against the
city arising from a revocation.
         b.   Upon revocation, the permittee or any successor permittee shall,
at the permittee’s own cost, remove the permitted sign within 30 days after
written notice has been provided by the city, unless a shorter period is
specified in the notice of revocation due to an emergency situation.
         c.   If the permittee does not remove the encroachment and return the
right-of-way easement or public property area to a condition satisfactory to
the Director, the city may do so and the costs of returning the right-of-way,
easement or public property to a satisfactory condition, shall be imposed as a
lien upon the property on the city lien docket.
         d.   The permittee, and owner of the benefited property if different
than the permittee, shall be liable to indemnify and defend any claim or legal
action brought against the city by reason of the existence of any approved
right-of-way, easement or public property encroachment.  (Ord. 1339, 2010)
16.42.050   Size, type, and location of signs permitted by zoning district and
use.
In addition to the design standards for signs in Section
16.42.040, Table 16.42.050 sets forth standards for type, size, and location of
permanent signs that are allowed in specific zoning districts.  The table is
arranged by section as follows:
   Table 1   Residential Zones(R-1, R-1.5, R-2, C-R)
   Table 2   Industrial Zones and Heavy Commercial Manufacturing Zone (M-1, M-
2, C-M)
   Table 3   Highway Commercial Zone (C-2) and Outer Highway Commercial Area in
the Downtown Canby Overlay Zone (DCO-OHC)
   Table 4   Downtown Commercial Zone (C-1) and Core Commercial Area in the
Downtown Canby Overlay Zone (DCO-CC)
   Table 5   Core Highway Frontage Sign Overlay Zone (CHFS)
   Table 6   Residential/Commercial Zone and Convenience Commercial Zone (C-R,
and Transitional Commercial Area in the Downtown Canby Overlay Zone (DCO-TC)
   Table 7   Canby Industrial Area Overlay Zone (I-O)
   A.   Where the standards in a base zoning district conflict with the
standards in an overlay district, the standards in the overlay district
prevail. 
   B.   Where the standards in the Canby Industrial Area Overlay (I-O) district
conflict with the standards in another overlay district, the standards in the
Canby Industrial Area Overlay (I-O) district prevail.
   C.   Where the standards in the Core Highway Frontage Sign Overlay (CHFS)
district conflict with the standards in another overlay district, the standards
in the Core Highway Frontage Sign Overlay (CHFS) district prevail.
   D.   Where an automobile service station is located on a lot, regardless of
zoning district, the sign standards set forth in 16.42.060 apply.
TABLE 16.42.050
 
Table 1.  Residential Zones and (R-1, R-1.5, R-2, C-R)
Monument Sign                                                                                                                                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6412.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  Property has been subdivided into more than 20 lots.
Size:  maximum 16 square feet per sign face.                                Maximum Height:  7 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  Maximum two signs; One sign may be located on either side
                                                                                                                                                           of a public street or private street entrance to the subdivided property.
B.  Use on site:  Multi-family development.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent to the primary street
Size:  maximum 16 square feet per sign face.                                Maximum Height:  7 feet.                                                     frontage, on either side of a vehicle accessway; AND one sign may be located
                                                                                                                                                           adjacent to a collector or arterial street frontage if it is not the primary
                                                                                                                                                           street frontage, on either side of a vehicle accessway.
C.  Use on site:  church, school, public/semi-public facility, or privately-owned community center.
Size:  maximum 40 square feet per sign face.                                Maximum Height:  7 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  Maximum one sign; No specific location requirement.
D.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  not allowed.                                                         Maximum Height:  n/a.                                                        Location/Number:  n/a.
Pole Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6414.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, public/semi-public facility, or privately-owned community center.
Size:  maximum 40 square feet per sign face.                                Maximum Height:  8 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  not allowed.                                                         Maximum Height:  n/a.                                                        Location/Number:  n/a.
Wall Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6416.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  maximum 8 percent of building elevation area, with a maximum sign    Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet
face of 60 square feet on a primary frontage or 30 square feet on a          wall, whichever is higher.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage.
secondary frontage.
B.  Use on site:  home occupation or permitted commercial use other than those listed above in subsection A.
Size:  maximum sign face of 2 square feet.                                  Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  Maximum one sign; No specific location requirement.
                                                                             wall, whichever is higher.
C.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  not allowed.                                                         Maximum Height:  n/a.                                                        Location/Number:  n/a.
Blade/Overhang Sign                                                                                                                                        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6418.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  home occupation or permitted commercial use.
Size:  maximum 2 square feet per sign face.                                 Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage.
                                                                             wall, whichever is higher.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  not allowed.                                                         Maximum Height:  n/a.                                                        Location/Number:  n/a.
Bulletin Board                                                                                                                                             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6420.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 75 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 50 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
Electronic Message Board                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6422.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  electronic message board may encompass up to 25 percent of sign face Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
area.                                                                                                                                                      16.42.040.C.2.
Awning Sign or Canopy Sign                                                                                                                                 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6424.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  not permitted for any use.
Marquee Sign                                                                                                                                               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6426.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  not permitted for any use.
Window Sign                                                                                                                                                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6428.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  maximum 15 percent of total window area.                             Maximum Height:  determined by height of window.                             Location/Number:  Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.
 
Table 2.  Industrial Zones and Heavy Commercial Manufacturing Zone (M-1, M-
2, C-M)
Monument Sign                                                                                                                                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6430.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  Church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  Minor business complex.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 100 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage; except on a site larger than 10 acres a total of two signs are
                                                                                                                                                           allowed.
C.  Use on site:  Major business complex.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 150 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage; except on a site larger than 10 acres a total of two signs are
                                                                                                                                                           allowed.
D.  Use on site:  all other uses on a site that is less than or equal to 5 acres in size.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage.
E.  Use on site:  all uses on a site greater than 5 acres.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 150 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage; except on a site larger than 10 acres a total of two signs are
                                                                                                                                                           allowed.
Pole Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6432.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B. Use on site:  Minor business complex.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street
Size:  maximum 100 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  20 feet.                                                    frontage one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage that is at least 500 feet in length.  Where more than one sign is
                                                                                                                                                           permitted on a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.
C.  Use on site:  Major business complex.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street
Size:  maximum 130 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  26 feet.                                                    frontage one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage that is at least 500 feet in length.  Where more than one sign is
                                                                                                                                                           permitted on a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.
D.  Use on site:  All other uses on a site that is less than or equal to 5 acres in size.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign; except one sign may be located adjacent each
                                                                                                                                                           collector or arterial street frontage.
E.  Use on site:  All uses on a site greater than 5 acres.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except one sign may be located adjacent each
Size:  maximum 130 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    collector or arterial street frontage; except if the use is a church, school,
                                                                                                                                                           or public facility one sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
Wall Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6434.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a primary
building frontage is 8 percent of the building elevation area of the primary
building frontage.  Except as allowed below, each sign is limited to a
maximum of 120 square feet.
 
The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a secondary        Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
building frontage is 6 percent of the building elevation area of the         wall, whichever is higher.                                                    file with the City at that location.
secondary building frontage.  Except as allowed below, each sign is limited
to a maximum of 60 square feet.
 
If the building elevation area of a primary or secondary building frontage
exceeds 5,000 square feet, the maximum sign face area of each sign allowed
on that frontage is 190 square feet.
Blade/Overhang Sign                                                                                                                                        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6436.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 48 square feet.     Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
                                                                             wall, whichever is higher.                                                    file with the City at that location.
Bulletin Board                                                                                                                                             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6438.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 75 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 50 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
Electronic Message Board                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6440.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  electronic message board may encompass up to 25 percent of sign face Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
area.                                                                                                                                                      16.42.040.C.2.
Awning Sign or Canopy Sign                                                                                                                                 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6442.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign per awning or canopy.  Sign shall not project
Size:  Signs on awnings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the main                                                                                  above the roof line.  Sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the
area of the awning or exceed 25 square feet in size, whichever is smaller.   Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line.                      building face.  Outer edge of sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from
                                                                                                                                                           a curb.  A minimum 8 foot clearance shall be provided between grade and
                                                                                                                                                           bottom of sign.
Marquee Sign                                                                                                                                               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6444.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  not permitted for any use.
Window Sign                                                                                                                                                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6446.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  maximum 15 percent of total window area.                             Maximum Height:  determined by height of window.                             Location/Number:  Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.
 
Table 3.  Highway Commercial Zone (C-2) and Outer Highway Commercial Area in
the Downtown Canby Overlay Zone (DCO OHC)
Monument Sign                                                                                                                                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6448.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  Church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  Minor business complex.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 100 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  12 feet.                                                    street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage.
C.  Use on site:  Major business complex.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 150 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  12 feet.                                                    street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage.
D.  Use on site:  all other uses.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage.
Pole Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6450.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  Minor business complex.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street
Size:  maximum 100 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  20 feet.                                                    frontage one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage that is at least 500 feet in length.  Where more than one sign is
                                                                                                                                                           permitted on a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.
C.  Use on site:  Major business complex.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street
Size:  maximum 130 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).             Maximum Height:  26 feet.                                                    frontage one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage that is at least 500 feet in length.  Where more than one sign is
                                                                                                                                                           permitted on a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.
D.  Use on site:  All other uses.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign; except one sign may be located adjacent each
                                                                                                                                                           collector or arterial street frontage.
Wall Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6452.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a primary
building frontage is 8 percent of the building elevation area of the primary
building frontage.  Except as allowed below, each sign is limited to a
maximum of 120 square feet.                                                                                                                                Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a secondary        Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet file with the City at that location except that one major tenant per location
building frontage is 6 percent of the building elevation area of the         wall, whichever is higher.                                                    may up to two signs.  For the purposes of the standard, a “major tenant”
secondary building frontage.  Except as allowed below, each sign is limited                                                                               shall have more than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
to a maximum of 60 square feet.
If the building elevation area of a primary or secondary building frontage
exceeds 5,000 square feet, the maximum sign face area of each sign allowed
on that frontage is 190 square feet.
Blade/Overhang Sign                                                                                                                                        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6454.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 48 square feet.     Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
                                                                             wall, whichever is higher.                                                    file with the City at that location.
Bulletin Board                                                                                                                                             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6456.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 75 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 50 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
Electronic Message Board                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6458.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  electronic message board may encompass up to 25 percent of sign face Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
area.                                                                                                                                                      16.42.040.C.2.
Awning Sign or Canopy Sign                                                                                                                                 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6460.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign per awning or canopy.  Sign shall not project
Size:  Signs on awnings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the main                                                                                  above the roof line.  Sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the
area of the awning, or exceed 25 square feet in size, whichever is smaller.  Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line.                      building face.  Outer edge of sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from
                                                                                                                                                           a curb.  A minimum 8 foot clearance shall be provided between grade and
                                                                                                                                                           bottom of sign.
Marquee Sign                                                                                                                                               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6462.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
                                                                             Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall,      Location/Number:  One sign per primary building frontage.  Outer edge of sign
Size:  The maximum sign face area for marquee signs is 120 square feet.     whichever is higher; however, the blade/overhanging portion of the sign may   shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from a curb.  A minimum 8 foot
                                                                             extend above the roof line or parapet wall.                                   clearance shall be provided between grade and bottom of sign.
Window Sign                                                                                                                                                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6464.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  maximum 15 percent of total window area.                             Maximum Height:  determined by height of window.                             Location/Number:  Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.
 
Table 4.  Downtown Commercial Zone (C-1) and Core Commercial Area in the
Downtown Canby Overlay Zone (DCOCC)
Monument Sign                                                                                                                                               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6466.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  Church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 40 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  Minor business complex.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 50 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  12 feet.                                                    street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                            frontage.
C.  Use on site:  Major business complex.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 65 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  12 feet.                                                    street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                            frontage.
D.  Use on site:  all other uses.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 40 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                            frontage.
Pole Sign                                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6468.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 40 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  12 feet.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  Minor business complex.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street frontage
Size:  maximum 50 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street frontage
                                                                                                                                                            that is at least 500 feet in length.  Where more than one sign is permitted on
                                                                                                                                                            a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.
C.  Use on site:  Major business complex.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street frontage
Size:  maximum 65 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street frontage
                                                                                                                                                            that is at least 500 feet in length.  Where more than one sign is permitted on
                                                                                                                                                            a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.
D.  Use on site:  All other uses.
Size:  maximum 40 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  12 feet.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign; except one sign may be located adjacent each
                                                                                                                                                            collector or arterial street frontage.
Wall Sign                                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6470.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a primary
building frontage is 8 percent of the building elevation area of the primary
building frontage.  Each sign is limited to a maximum of 60 square feet.                                                                                   Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
                                                                             Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet file with the City at that location except that one major tenant per location
The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a secondary         wall, whichever is higher.                                                    may have up to two signs.  For the purposes of this standard, a “major tenant”
building frontage is 6 percent of the building elevation area of the                                                                                        shall have more than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
secondary building frontage.  Each sign is limited to a maximum of 30 square
feet.
Blade/Overhang Sign                                                                                                                                         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6472.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 20 square feet.      Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
                                                                              wall, whichever is higher.                                                    file with the City at that location.
Bulletin Board                                                                                                                                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6474.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 75 percent of sign face area.      Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                            16.42.040.C.2.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 50 percent of sign face area.      Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                            16.42.040.C.2.
Electronic Message Board                                                                                                                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6476.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  electronic message board may encompass up to 25 percent of sign face  Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
area.                                                                                                                                                       16.42.040.C.2.
Awning Sign or Canopy Sign                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6478.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign per awning or canopy.  Sign shall not project above
Size:  Signs on awnings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the main areaMaximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall,      the roof line.  Sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the building face. 
of the awning, or exceed 25 square feet in size, whichever is smaller.        whichever is higher.                                                          Outer edge of sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from a curb.  A
                                                                                                                                                            minimum 8 ½ foot clearance shall be provided between grade and bottom of sign.
Marquee Sign                                                                                                                                                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6480.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
                                                                              Maximum Height:  shall not project more than 8 feet above the roof line or   Location/Number:  One sign per primary building frontage.  Outer edge of sign
Size:  The maximum sign face area for marquee signs is 120 square feet.      parapet wall, whichever is higher.  The blade/overhang portion of the sign   shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from a curb. 
                                                                              may extend above the roof line or parapet wall.
Window Sign                                                                                                                                                 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6482.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  maximum 15 percent of total window area.                              Maximum Height:  determined by height of window.                             Location/Number:  Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.
 
 
Table 5.  Core Highway Frontage Sign Overlay Zone (CHFS)
A.  The purpose of the Core Highway Frontage Sign Overlay is to have sign standards that are particularly applicable to properties in the Core Commercial sub-area of the Downtown Canby Overlay Zone that are located in close proximity
to Hwy 99 E.
B.  A Core Highway Frontage Sign Overlay Zone is established as illustrated by the striped pattern on the following map, and encompasses the following area:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/IMAGES/0-0-0-6484.jpg]
Monument Sign                                                                                                                                               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6486.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  Church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  Minor business complex.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 100 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  12 feet.                                                    street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                            frontage.
C.  Use on site:  Major business complex.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 130 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  12 feet.                                                    street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                            frontage.
D.  Use on site:  all other uses.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  9 feet.                                                     street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                            frontage.
Pole Sign                                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6488.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  Minor business complex.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street frontage
Size:  maximum 100 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  20 feet.                                                    one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street frontage
                                                                                                                                                            that is at least 500 feet in length.  Where more than one sign is permitted on
                                                                                                                                                            a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.
C.  Use on site:  Major business complex.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street frontage
Size:  maximum 130 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  26 feet.                                                    one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street frontage
                                                                                                                                                            that is at least 500 feet in length.  Where more than one sign is permitted on
                                                                                                                                                            a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.
D.  Use on site:  All other uses.
Size:  maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).               Maximum Height:  18 feet.                                                    Location/Number:  One sign; except one sign may be located adjacent each
                                                                                                                                                            collector or arterial street frontage.
Wall Sign                                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6490.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a primary
building frontage is 8 percent of the building elevation area of the primary
building frontage.  Each sign is limited to a maximum of 60 square feet.                                                                                   Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
                                                                             Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet file with the City at that location except that one major tenant per location
The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a secondary         wall, whichever is higher.                                                    may have up to two signs.  For the purposes of this standard, a “major tenant”
building frontage is 6 percent of the building elevation area of the                                                                                        shall have more than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
secondary building frontage.  Each sign is limited to a maximum of 30 square
feet.
Blade/Overhang Sign                                                                                                                                         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6492.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 20 square feet.      Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
                                                                              wall, whichever is higher.                                                    file with the City at that location.
Bulletin Board                                                                                                                                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6494.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 75 percent of sign face area.      Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                            16.42.040.C.2.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 50 percent of sign face area.      Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                            16.42.040.C.2.
Electronic Message Board                                                                                                                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6496.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  electronic message board may encompass up to 25 percent of sign face  Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
area.                                                                                                                                                       16.42.040.C.2.
Awning Sign or Canopy Sign                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6498.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
                                                                                                                                                            Location/Number:  One sign per awning or canopy.  Sign shall not project above
Size:  Signs on awnings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the main areaMaximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall,      the roof line.  Sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the building face. 
of the awning, or exceed 25 square feet in size, whichever is smaller.        whichever is higher.                                                          Outer edge of sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from a curb.  A
                                                                                                                                                            minimum 8 foot clearance shall be provided between grade and bottom of sign.
Marquee Sign                                                                                                                                                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6500.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
                                                                              Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall,      Location/Number:  One sign per primary building frontage.  Outer edge of sign
Size:  The maximum sign face area for marquee signs is 120 square feet.      whichever is higher.  The blade/overhang portion of the sign may extend aboveshall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from a curb.  A minimum 8 foot clearance
                                                                              the roof line or parapet wall.                                                shall be provided between grade and bottom of sign.
Window Sign                                                                                                                                                 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-6502.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  maximum 25 percent of total window area.                              Maximum Height:  determined by height of window.                             Location/Number:  Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.
 
Table 6.  Residential/Commercial Zone (C-R), and Transitional Commercial
Area in the Downtown Canby Overlay Zone (DCO TC)
Monument Sign                                                                                                                                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6504.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  Church, school, or public facility.
Size:  maximum 32 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  7 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site abutting a collector or arterial
Size:  maximum 32 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  7 feet.                                                     street one sign may be located adjacent each collector/arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage.
Pole Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6506.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  maximum 32 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  8 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign; except on a site with more than one street
Size:  maximum 32 square feet per sign face (up to two faces).              Maximum Height:  8 feet.                                                     frontage one sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street
                                                                                                                                                           frontage.
Wall Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6508.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  The maximum sign face area for each wall sign is 60 square feet on a
primary building frontage.                                                   Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage.
The maximum sign face area for each wall sign is 30 square feet on a primary wall, whichever is higher.
building frontage. 
B.  Use on site:  All other uses.
Size:  The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a primary
building frontage is 6 percent of the building elevation area of the primary                                                                               Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
building frontage.  Each sign is limited to a maximum of 16 square feet.    Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet file with the City at that location.  A wall sign shall not project more than
The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a secondary        wall, whichever is higher.                                                    18 inches from the wall to which it is attached (or 12 inches from the wall on
building frontage is 4 percent of the building elevation area of the                                                                                       a building frontage abutting an alley).
secondary building frontage.  Each sign is limited to a maximum of 8 square
feet.
Blade/Overhang Sign                                                                                                                                        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6510.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 6 square feet.      Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
                                                                             wall, whichever is higher.                                                    file with the City at that location.
Bulletin Board                                                                                                                                             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6512.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 75 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 50 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
Electronic Message Board                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6514.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  electronic message board may encompass up to 25 percent of sign face Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
area.                                                                                                                                                      16.42.040.C.2.
Awning Sign or Canopy Sign                                                                                                                                 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6516.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  commercial use, church, school, or public/semi-public facility.
                                                                                                                                                           Location/Number:  One sign per awning or canopy.  Sign shall not extend more
Size:  Signs on awnings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the main    Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall,      than 8 feet from the building face.  Outer edge of sign shall be set back a
area of the awning, or exceed 25 square feet in size, whichever is smaller.  whichever is higher.                                                          minimum of 2 feet from a curb.  A minimum 8 foot clearance shall be provided
                                                                                                                                                           between grade and bottom of sign.
B.  Use on site:  all other uses.
Size:  not allowed.                                                         Maximum Height:  n/a.                                                        Location/Number:  n/a.
Marquee Sign                                                                                                                                               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6518.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  not allowed.                                                         Maximum Height:  n/a.                                                        Location/Number:  n/a.
Window Sign                                                                                                                                                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6520.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  maximum 15 percent of total window area.                             Maximum Height:  determined by height of window.                             Location/Number:  Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.
 
Table 7.  Canby Industrial Area Overlay Zone (I-O)
Monument Sign                                                                                                                                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6522.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses in the M-1 zone or M-2 zone.
Size:  may not exceed 32 square feet per sign face, or 64 square feet total.Maximum Height:  6 feet.                                                     Location/Number:  One sign.
B.  Use on site:  all uses in the C-M zone.
Size:  may not exceed 150 square feet per sign face, or 300 square feet                                                                                   Location/Number:  One monument sign is allowed for a site up to 10 acres in
total.                                                                       Maximum Height:  30 feet.                                                    size.  Sites over 10 acres in size may be permitted a maximum of 2 signs,
                                                                                                                                                           provided that only one sign per street frontage is allowed.
Pole Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6524.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  not allowed.                                                         Maximum Height:  n/a.                                                        Location/Number:  n/a.
Wall Sign                                                                                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6526.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a primary
building frontage is 8 percent of the building elevation area of the primary                                                                               Location/Number:  Painted wall signs are prohibited.  Internally illuminated
building frontage.  Each sign is limited to a maximum of 300 square feet.                                                                                 box-style signs, also called can signs, are prohibited. 
                                                                            Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet  
The maximum sign face area of all wall signage allowed on a secondary        wall, whichever is higher.                                                    For other types of wall signs, one sign is permitted per building frontage for
building frontage is 6 percent of the building elevation area of the                                                                                       each business license on file with the City at that location.
secondary building frontage.  Each sign is limited to a maximum of 190
square feet.
Blade/Overhang Sign                                                                                                                                        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6528.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 48 square feet.     Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet Location/Number:  One sign per building frontage for each business license on
                                                                             wall, whichever is higher.                                                    file with the City at that location.
Bulletin Board                                                                                                                                             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6530.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  All uses.
Size:  bulletin board may encompass up to 50 percent of sign face area.     Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
                                                                                                                                                           16.42.040.C.2.
Electronic Message Board                                                                                                                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6532.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  electronic message board may encompass up to 25 percent of sign face Maximum Height:  determined by height of sign.                               Location/Number:  Only allowed as part of a permitted sign, as set forth in
area.                                                                                                                                                      16.42.040.C.2.
Awning Sign or Canopy Sign                                                                                                                                 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6534.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  Signs on awnings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the main
area of the awning, or exceed 25 square fee in size, whichever is smaller.                                                                                 Location/Number:  One sign per awning or canopy.  Sign shall not extend more
                                                                            Maximum Height:  shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall,      than 8 feet from the building face.  Outer edge of sign shall be set back a
The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building    whichever is higher.                                                          minimum of 2 feet from a curb.  A minimum 8 foot clearance shall be provided
frontage is 8 percent of the building elevation area of the secondary                                                                                      between grade and bottom of sign.
frontage, up to a maximum of 60 square feet.
Marquee Sign                                                                                                                                               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6536.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  not allowed.                                                         Maximum Height:  n/a.                                                        Location/Number:  n/a.
Window Sign                                                                                                                                                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
                                                                                                                                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-6538.jpg]
A.  Use on site:  all uses.
Size:  maximum 15 percent of total window area.                             Maximum Height:  determined by height of window.                             Location/Number:  Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.
(Ord 1299, 2008; Ord. 1339, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.42.060   Automobile service station sign standards.
The purpose of service station sign requirements is to control sign clutter for
service stations so the traveling public can clearly identify the service
station and the services and goods it offers.
   A.   No sign other than detailed in this Section shall be displayed on a lot
on which an automobile service station is located.  In the event that a
conflict exists between this Section and the sign standards set forth in other
sections of this Chapter, the standards in this section shall prevail.
      1.   Permitted signage includes one of the following combinations:
         a.   One pole sign or onemonument sign, plus one wall sign, plus
window signsand temporary signs; or
         b.   Two wall signs,plus window signs and temporary signs.
      2.   Pole sign standards:
         a.   Maximum area: 48 square feet total for a single-faced sign; 96
square feet total for a double-faced sign.
         b.   Maximum height: 18 feet.
         c.   A bulletin board or electronic message board may encompass up to
75 percent of the sign face area of a pole sign.
      3.   Wall sign standards:
         a.   Maximum area: 120 square feet per sign.
         b.   Maximum height: Sign shall not project above the roof line or
parapet wall, whichever is higher.
         c.   A bulletin board or electronic message board may encompass up to
25 percent of the sign face area of a wall sign.
         d.   The fascia of the gas station canopy is considered building
frontage and can be utilized to calculate size standards for wall signage.
      4.   Window sign standards:  Maximum of 25 percent of total window area.
      5.   Temporary sign standards: Except during a service station grand
opening, which may occur only once during a single ownership, and for a period
of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days, pennants, streamers, or lawn signs
shall not be permitted.  Other types of temporary signs are permitted as set
forth in Section
16.42.025.C. (Ord. 1299, 2008; Ord. 2019)
16.42.070   Measurements.
The requirements described in the following subsections are illustrated further
in Figures 1 through 8.
   A.   Area.
      1.   Sign area shall be measured within lines drawn between the outermost
dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the display area containing the
sign copy. 
      2.   When signs are not framed or on a base material, and are inscribed,
painted, printed, or otherwise placed upon, or attached to a structure, the
sign area is the smallest possible space enclosing the sign copy that can be
constructed with straight lines. 
      3.   Where a sign is of a three-dimensional, round, or irregular solid
shape, the largest cross-section shall be used in a flat projection for the
purpose of determining sign area.
      4.   Where signs are constructed in multiple separate pieces containing
sign copy, sign face area for each piece is determined by a perimeter drawn in
straight lines, as small as possible, around all pieces.  The sum of the area
of the separate pieces shall constitute the sign area.
   B.   Height.  The height of a sign above grade is measured from the average
level of the grade below the sign to the topmost point of the sign, including
support structure.
   C.   Clearance.  Clearance is measured from the average grade below the sign
to the lowermost point of the sign.
   D.   Spacing.  For the purposed of applying spacing requirements, distances
shall be measured parallel to the centerline of the adjacent street or
highway.  (Ord 1299, 2008)
Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6980.png]
Figure 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6982.png]
Figure 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6984.png]
Figure 4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6986.png]
Figure 5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6988.png]
Figure 6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6990.png]
Figure 7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6992.png]
Figure 8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6994.png]
(Ord. 913 section 1[part], 1994; Ord. 830 section 13[part], 1989; Ord. 802
section 5, 1987; Ord. 840 section 10.3.40(J), 1984; Ord. 1299, 2008)
16.42.140   Severability
Invalidity of a section of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections or parts of sections.  (Ord. 913 section 1[part], 1994; Ord
1237, 2007; Ord. 1299, 2008)
Chapter 16.43
OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS
Sections:
   
16.43.010   Purpose.
   
16.43.020   Definitions.
   
16.43.030   Applicability.
   
16.43.040   Lighting Zones.
   
16.43.050   Exempt Lighting.
   
16.43.060   Prohibited Light and Lighting.
   
16.43.070   Luminaire Lamp Lumens, Shielding, and Installation Requirements.
   
16.43.080   Height Limits.   
   
16.43.090   Lighting Controls.
   
16.43.100   Exceptions to Standards.
   
16.43.110   Lighting Plan Required.
16.43.010   Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for outdoor lighting that
will:
   A.   Regulate uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility,
security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce.
   B.   Minimize glare, particularly in and around public rights-of-way.
   C.   Minimize light trespass, so that each owner of property does not cause
unreasonable light spillover to other property.
   D.   Preserve the night sky for astronomy and enjoyment.
   E.   Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible.
16.43.020 Definitions
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the
following meaning:
   A.   Artificial Sky Glow.  The brightening of the night sky attributable to
man made sources of light.
   B.   Candela.  The unit of luminous intensity of a lighting source emitted
in a given direction.
   C.   Curfew.  A time each night after which certain electric illumination
must be turned off or reduced in intensity.
   D.   Glare.  Light that causes visual discomfort, annoyance or disability,
or a loss of visual performance.
   E.   Landscape Lighting.  Luminaires mounted in or at grade (not to exceed 3
feet above grade) and used solely for landscape rather than area lighting, or
fully shielded luminaires mounted in trees and used solely for landscape or
Facade lighting.
   F.   Light Trespass.  Light flowing across the property boundary.  See
Figure 16.43.1 for illustration.
   G.   Lumen.  The unit of luminous flux: a measure of the amount of light
emitted by a lamp.
   H.   Luminaire.  A complete lighting unit consisting of one or more electric
lamps, the lamp holder or holders, reflector, lens, diffuser, ballast, and/or
other  components and accessories.
   I.   Luminous Flux.  A measure of the total light output from a source, the
unit being the lumen.
   J.   Mounting Height.  The vertical distance between the lowest part of the
luminaire and the ground surface directly below the luminaire.  See Figure
16.43.2 for illustration.
   K.   Photometric Test Report.  A report by an independent testing laboratory
or one certified by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
describing the candela distribution, shielding type, luminance, and other
optical characteristics of a specific luminaire.
   L.   External Point of Service.  An outdoor service which a business
provides some service to a customer, such as drive up food service, a bank
transaction, or the like
   M.   Shielding.  A device or technique for controlling the distribution of
light. Four levels of shielding are defined as follows:
      1.   Fully Shielded.  A luminaire emitting no luminous flux above the
horizontal plane;
      2.   Shielded.  A luminaire emitting less than 2.0 percent of its
luminous flux above the horizontal plane;
      3.   Partly Shielded.  A luminaire emitting less than 10 percent of its
luminous flux above the horizontal plane;
      4.   Unshielded.  A luminaire that may emit its flux in any direction.
   N.   Spill Light.  Lighting from a lighting installation that falls outside
of the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.
   O.   Temporary Lighting.  Lighting installed with temporary wiring and
operated for less than 60 days in any calendar year.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6996.png]
Figure 16.43.1: Light Trespass
16.43.030   Applicability.
The outdoor lighting standards in this section apply to the following:
   A.   New uses, buildings, and major additions or modifications: 
      1.   For all proposed new land uses, developments, buildings, and
structures that require a building permit, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall
meet the requirements of this Code.
      2.   All building additions or modifications of fifty (50) percent or
greater in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, or parking
spaces, either with a single addition or cumulative additions, shall meet the
requirements of this Code for the entire property, including previously
installed and any new outdoor lighting.
   B.   Minor additions.  Additions or modifications of less than fifty (50)
percent to existing uses, in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor
area, or parking spaces, shall meet the requirements of this Code with regard
to shielding and lamp type for all new lighting.
16.43.040   Lighting Zones.
   A.   Zoning districts designated for residential uses (R-1, R-1.5 and R-2)
are designated Lighting Zone One (LZ 1). All other zoning districts are
designated Lighting Zone Two (LZ 2).
   B.   The designated Lighting Zone of a parcel or project shall determine the
limitations for lighting as specified in this ordinance.
Table 16.43.040 Lighting Zone descriptions
 
Zone Ambient Illumination Representative Locations
                          Rural areas, low-density urban neighbor-hoods and
LZ 1 Low                  districts, residential historic dist-ricts. This zone
                          is intended to be the default for residential areas.
                          High-density urban neighborhoods, shopping and
LZ 2 Medium               commercial districts, industrial parks and districts.
                          This zone is intended to be the default condition for
                          commercial and in-dustrial districts in urban areas.
 
16.43.050   Exempt Lighting.
The following luminaires and lighting systems are exempt from the requirements
of this Section.
   A.   Externally illuminated signs in conformance with provisions in section
16.42.040 of this code.
   B.   Internal lighting for signs in conformance with provisions in section
16.42.040 of this code.
   C.   Temporary lighting for theatrical, television, and performance events.
   D.   Lighting in swimming pools and other water features governed by Article
680 of the National Electrical Code.
   E.   Code-required exit signs.
   F.   Code-required lighting for stairs and ramps.
   G.   Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration,
U.S. Coast Guard, or other federal, state, or county agency.
   H.   Interior lighting.
   I.   Temporary lights for emergency public or private utility maintenance or
public safety.
   J.   Lighting fixtures existing prior to this ordinance not exceeding 520
lumens.
16.43.060   Prohibited Light and Lighting.
   A.   All outdoor light sources, except street lights, shall be shielded or
installed so that there is no direct line of sight between the light source or
its reflection at a point 3 feet or higher above the ground at the property
line of the source. Light that does not meet this requirement constitutes light
trespass. Streetlights shall be fully shielded. However, the applicant is
permitted to have some unshielded lighting if lumens are within the limits of
Table 16.43.070 below. 
   B.   The following lighting systems are prohibited from being installed or
used except by special use permit:.
      1.   Aerial Lasers.
      2.   “Searchlight” style lights.
      3.   Other very intense lighting, defined as having a light source
exceeding 5200 lumens.
16.43.070   Luminaire Lamp Lumens, Shielding, and Installation Requirements.
   A.   All outdoor lighting shall comply with the limits to lamp wattage and
the shielding requirements in Table 16.43.070 per the applicable Lighting Zone.
These limits are the upper limits. Good lighting design will usually result in
lower limits.
   B.   The city may accept a photometric test report, lighting plan,
demonstration or sample, or other satisfactory confirmation that the luminaire
meets the requirements of the shielding classification.
   C.   Such shielded fixtures must be constructed and installed in such a
manner that all light emitted by the fixture complies with the specification
given. This includes all the light emitted by the fixture, either directly from
the lamp or by a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction
from any part of the fixture. Any structural part of the fixture providing this
shielding must be permanently affixed.
   D.   All canopy lighting must be fully shielded. However, indirect upward
light is permitted under an opaque canopy provided that no lamp or vertical
element of a lens or diffuser is visible from beyond the canopy and such that
no direct upward light is emitted beyond the opaque canopy.
   E.   Landscape features shall be used to block vehicle headlight trespass
while vehicles are at an external point of service (i.e. drive-thru aisle).
   F.   All facade lighting must be restricted to the facade surface. The
margins of the facade shall not be illuminated. Light trespass is prohibited.
Table 16.43.070 – Luminaire Maximum Lumens and Required Shielding
 
                                                            Unshielded
                                                            (Shielding is
Lighting Zone Fully Shielded Shielded       Partly Shielded highly encouraged.
                                                            Light trespass is
                                                            prohibited.)
                                                            Low voltage
LZ 1          2600 lumens or 800 lumens or  None Permitted  landscape lighting
              less           less                           and temporary
                                                            holiday lighting.
                                                            Landscape and
                                                            facade lighting
LZ 2          7800 lumens or 1600 lumens or 800 lumens or   1600 lumens or
              less           less           less            less; ornamental
                                                            lights of 800
                                                            lumens or less.
 
16.43.080   Height Limits.
Pole and surface-mounted luminaires under this section must conform with
Section
16.43.070.
   A.   Lighting mounted onto poles or any structures intended primarily for
mounting of lighting shall not exceed a mounting height of 40% of the
horizontal distance of the light pole from the property line, nor a maximum
height according to Table 16.43.080, whichever is lower.  The following
exceptions apply:
      1.   Lighting for residential sports courts and pools shall not exceed 15
feet above court or pool deck surface.
      2.   Lights specifically for driveways, and then only at the intersection
of the road providing access to the site, may be mounted at any distance
relative to the property line, but may not exceed the mounting height listed in
Table 16.43.080.
      3.   Mounting heights greater than 40% of the horizontal distance to the
property line but no greater than permitted by Table 16.43.080 may be used
provided that the luminaire is side-shielded toward the property line.
      4.   Landscape lighting installed in a tree. See the Definitions section.
      5.   Street and bicycle path lights.
   B.   Lighting mounted onto buildings or other structures shall not exceed a
mounting height greater than 4 feet higher than the tallest part of the
building or structure at the place where the lighting is installed, nor higher
than 40% of the horizontal distance of the light from the property line,
whichever is less. The following exceptions apply:
      1.   Lighting attached to single family residences shall not exceed the
height of the eave. Lighting for driveways shall conform to Table 16.43.080.
      2.   Lighting for facades may be mounted at any height equal to or less
than the total height of the structure being illuminated regardless of
horizontal distance to property line.
      3.   For buildings less than 40 feet to the property line, including
canopies or overhangs onto the sidewalk or public right of way, luminaires may
be mounted to the vertical facade or the underside of canopies at 16 feet or
less.
      4.   The top exterior deck of parking garages should be treated as normal
pole mounted lighting rather than as lights mounted to buildings. The lights on
the outside edges of such a deck must be side shielded to the property line.
Table 16.43.080 – Maximum Lighting Mounting Height in Feet
 
              Lighting for Driveways, Lighting for Walkways,
Lighting Zone Parking and Transit     Plazas and other       All Other Lighting
                                      Pedestrian Areas
LZ 1          35.0                    18.0                   8.0
LZ 2          37.5                    18.0                   15.0
 
Figure 16.43.2: Mounting Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6998.png]
16.43.090   Lighting Controls
The city strongly recommends the use of timers and/or motion detectors on
outdoor lighting, and that motion detectors be set to minimize unnecessary
activation.  For example, motion detectors for entryway or driveway lights
should not activate for off-site pedestrians or cars.
16.43.100   Exceptions to Standards.
   A.   Exceptions to the lighting standards in this section may be approved by
the Planning Director. Lighting systems not complying with the technical
requirements of this ordinance but consistent with the intent of the ordinance
may be approved for the following:
      1.   Sport fields.
      2.   Construction lighting.
      3.   Industrial lighting for hazardous areas where the heat of the
lighting fixture may cause a dangerous situation.
      4.   National and State Flag lighting with spotlights greater than 450
lumens.
   B.   To obtain such approval of an exception, applicants shall demonstrate
that the proposed lighting installation:
      1.   Has received every reasonable effort to mitigate obtrusive light and
artificial sky glow, supported by a signed statement from a registered engineer
or by a lighting certified professional describing the mitigation measures.
      2.   The Planning Director shall review each such application. Approval
may be granted if, upon review, the Planning Director believes that the
proposed lighting will not create unwarranted glare, sky glow, or light
trespass.
16.43.110   Lighting Plan Required
A lighting plan shall be submitted with the development or building permit
application and shall include:
   A.   A site plan showing the location of all buildings and building heights,
parking, and pedestrian areas.
   B.   The location and height (above grade) of all proposed and existing
luminaires on the subject property.
   C.   Luminaire details including type and lumens of each lamp, shielding and
cutoff information, and a copy of the manufacturer’s specification sheet for
each luminaire.
   D.   Control descriptions including type of control (time, motion sensor,
etc.), the luminaire to be controlled by each control type, and the control
schedule when applicable.
   E.   Any additional information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the
standards in this section.  (Ord.1338, 2010)
Chapter 16.44
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARKS AND
RV AND MANUFACTURED HOMES USES OUTSIDE OF PARKS
Sections:
   
16.44.010   Regulations generally.
   
16.44.020   Plot plans.
   
16.44.030   Standards and criteria.
   
16.44.040   Parking space for mobile home or travel trailer.
   
16.44.050   Special conditions imposed by Commission.
   
16.44.060   RV and Manufactured (Mobile) Home Uses Outside of Parks
   
16.44.065   Compliance.
   
16.44.070   Time limits.
   
16.44.080   Parking in right-of-way.
   
16.44.090   Approval of permit.
   
16.44.100   Temporary permits hardship situations.
   
16.44.110   Temporary permits caretakers or watchmen.
   
16.44.120   Application for Special Permits (16.44.090-16.44.110)
16.44.010   Regulations generally.
The following regulations shall be applied to manufactured and mobile home
parks or trailer parks, temporary permits for the location of trailers, mobile
homes or motor homes, and other regulations applying to such units.  These
regulations shall guide the staff in the process of conducting site plan
reviews, and shall guide the Planning Commission in the process of considering
conditional use permits.  (Ord. 890 section 39, 1993; Ord. 802 section 2, 1987;
Ord. 740 section 10.3.45[part], 1984)
16.44.020   Plot plans.
Applicants shall submit plot plans in the appropriate number and general form
as is required for either a site plan review or conditional use permit, as
applicable, which shall include the following:
   A.   Locations, number and general design of pads, or stalls where units are
to be located;
   B.   Locations and designs of streets, private drives and parking areas;
   C.   Locations and basic designs of any structures which are to be
permanently situated on the property and an indication of the use of such
buildings;
   D.   Locations and design of exterior storage areas, with an indication of
whether vehicles are to be stored;
   E.   Locations, with calculations of area, of each of the recreation open
spaces or landscaped areas.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.45(A), 1984)
16.44.030   Standards and criteria.
   In reviewing applications for manufactured and mobile home parks or trailer
parks, the following standards and criteria shall apply:
   A.   Maximum density shall be as follows:
      1.   R-1 zone: a maximum of seven units/acre is permitted;
      2.   R-1.5 zone: a maximum of ten units/acre is permitted;
      3.   R-2 zone and other zones listing mobile home or trailer parks as
conditional or permitted uses: a minimum density of twelve units/acre is
required.
   B.   Density figures may be increased by not more than two units per acre
for trailer parks providing spaces for overnight camping facilities.
   C.   The setback requirements of the zone shall be applied to the locations
of mobile homes or trailers, except that in no case shall such units be placed
less than fifteen feet from any interior lot line nor less than twenty-five
feet from any public street.
   D.   The access requirements of Chapter 16.46 shall be utilized to determine
the permitted number of units.
   E.   Paved pedestrian paths or walkways shall be provided along at least one
side of each private road and between each unit and any outbuilding provided to
serve that unit.  Such paths are to be a minimum of three feet in width and
designed to prevent drainage water from passing over such walkways.
   F.   A minimum of fourteen feet of separation shall be maintained between
individual units, as well as between units and permanent buildings.
   G.   A concrete patio area or wood deck of at least one hundred fifty square
feet, and no more than five hundred square feet, shall be provided for each
unit.
   H.   Recreation and open space areas shall be provided and specified on the
plan, and suitable equipment for such purposes shall be specified.  Such areas
shall be protected from streets, drives, and parking areas.  A minimum of one
hundred and fifty (150) square feet of recreation and open space areas for each
mobile home space shall be provided in one or more locations within the mobile
home park.  The minimum size of each such recreation and open space shall be
three thousand seven hundred and fifty (3,750) square feet, except, however,
that those requirements may be reduced by as much as fifty (50) percent if the
Planning Commission finds that such reduction is justified because of indoor
recreation facilities which are provided.
   I.   A minimum of fifteen percent of the total development shall be
landscaped, including a strip at least fifteen feet wide along all interior lot
lines.
   J.   A sight-blocking fence which is not less than four, nor more than six,
feet in height shall be provided along the perimeter of the development, except
where reduced fence height is required for vision clearance along street
frontage.  The requirement for a fence may be modified by the Planning
Commission based on clear findings that the modification will be sufficient to
carry out the objectives of this section.  (Ord. 890 section 40, 1993; Ord. 740
section 10.3.45(B), 1984; Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.44.040   Parking space for mobile home or travel trailer.
   No mobile home or travel trailer will be allowed to remain in a mobile home
or trailer park unless a parking space or previously approved storage area has
been provided for that purpose. Mobile homes or travel trailers which are
parked in storage areas shall not be occupied.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.45(C),
1984)
16.44.050   Special conditions imposed by Commission.
When reviewing a conditional use permit application for the development or
expansion of a mobile home park or trailer park, the commission may impose
special conditions of approval for the perimeter of the park to assure that its
outward appearance does not conflict with the surrounding uses or activities. 
The commission shall not, however, interpret the requirements of Chapter 16.50
as allowing the denial of a mobile home park development because of the nature
of surrounding residential development.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.45[part], 1984)
16.44.060   RV and Manufactured (Mobile) Home Uses Outside of Parks.
16.44.065   Compliance.
Manufactured (Mobile) homes, motor homes or travel trailers, other than in
approved mobile home parks or subdivisions, shall not be inhabited or used
except as provided in sections 16.44.070 through 16.44.110, or as may otherwise
be specified in this title.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.50[part], 1984; Ord. 1514,
2019)
16.44.070   Time limits.
   No camper, trailer, motor home, or manufactured (mobile) home may be used or
inhabited on a lot, or an adjacent lot, for more than seven consecutive days or
a total of fourteen days, within a sixty day period unless such placement, use
or habitation conforms with the requirements of this title. If the recreational
vehicle or manufactured structure is occupied in violation of these provisions,
the violation shall be resolved in accordance with this title and in compliance
with any other applicable ORS. The property owner shall make a reasonable
effort to resolve the violation in conjunction with the City’s enforcement
action. (Ord. 890 section 41, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.50 (A), 1984; Ord.
1514, 2019)
16.44.080   Parking in right-of-way.
Parking or placement of such vehicles or structures within any public right-of-
way is subject to the enforcement provisions of city ordinances governing
nuisances and traffic violations. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.50(B), 1984)
16.44.090   Approval of permit.
   A.   The Planning Director may, after receiving a properly filed application
and report from the Fire Marshal, approve a permit to allow the use of a travel
trailer, mobile home, or motor home, for a period not to exceed six months.
   B.   Approval of such permits shall be based upon findings that this use
will have no significant adverse impacts on the value or appropriate
development of nearby properties.
   C.   Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be revoked
by the City Council on twenty-four hours' notice upon finding that the use is a
menace to public health or is resulting in a public nuisance.  (Ord. 740
section 10.3.50(C), 1984; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.44.100   Temporary permits – medical hardship situations.
The Planning Director may also issue temporary permits for the use and
occupancy of travel trailers or motor homes in special medical hardship
situations, subject to the following:
   A.   Duration of the permit shall be specified by the Planning Director and
may include a provision which requires renewal at predetermined intervals.
   B.   The nature of the hardship must be a physical or mental infirmity of a
resident of either the principal dwelling unit or the temporary unit, and shall
be certified as such in writing by a medical doctor or court of competent
jurisdiction.
   C.   Prior to final issuance of the permit, the applicant shall sign an
affidavit agreeing to remove or cease using the travel trailer or motor home
upon the death or relocation of the infirm person.
   D.   Applications for temporary medical hardship permits under this section
shall be processed using the Type II procedure with an Administrative Review
Application. Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter 16.89.
   E.   A decision on an application for a temporary medical hardship permit
shall be based upon the following standards and criteria:
      1.   No significant adverse impacts on the value or appropriate
development of nearby properties will result.
      2.   The subject property contains sufficient vacant area to allow for
the placement of the temporary unit without overcrowding the lot or the
vicinity overall and will result in a reasonable amount of open space in the
area.
      3.   The temporary unit will be connected to all required utilities in a
manner which meets Code requirements.
      4.   The placement of the unit will meet the setback requirements of the
zone.
      5.   The hardship situation is legitimate and clearly necessitates the
issuance of a temporary permit as an alternative to having all of the affected
persons share a single dwelling unit on the property.
   F.   The City may establish requirements as a condition of approving such an
application which are necessary to assure compliance with the intent of this
chapter and to minimize adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.  (Ord.
740 section 10.3.50(D), 1984; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.44.110   Temporary permits - Caretakers or watchmen.
The City Council may issue temporary permits for the use and occupancy of
mobile homes, travel trailers, or motor homes for the purpose of housing
caretakers or watchmen subject to the following:
   A.   Duration of the permit shall be specified by the council and may
include a provision which requires renewal at predetermined intervals.
   B.   Such temporary permits may only be issued for industrial areas, large
commercial tracts, public ownership, or for short terms at construction sites.
   C.   Prior to final issuance of the permit, the applicant shall sign an
affidavit agreeing to remove the mobile home, travel trailer, or motor home
upon the expiration of the permit.
   D.   A decision on a permit authorized subject to this section shall be
based upon the following standards and criteria:
      1.   No significant adverse impacts on the value or appropriate
development of nearby properties will result;
      2.   The subject property contains sufficient vacant area to allow for
the placement of the temporary unit without overcrowding the lot or the
vicinity overall and will result in a reasonable amount of open space in the
area;
      3.   The temporary unit will be connected to all required utilities in a
manner which meets code requirements;
      4.   The placement of the unit will meet the setback requirements of the
zone.
   E.   The City Council may establish requirements as a condition of approving
such an application which are necessary to assure compliance with the intent of
this chapter and to minimize adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.3.50(E), 1984)
16.44.120   Application for Special Permits (16.44.090-16.44.110)
An application for a special permit under sections 16.44.090 - 16.44.110 shall
be made on forms provided by the Planning Director.  The application shall be
accompanied by all required information and fees.  A pre-application meeting
and/or neighborhood meeting may be required by the Planning Director. (Ord.
1237, 2007)
Chapter 16.46
ACCESS LIMITATIONS ON PROJECT DENSITY
Sections:
   
16.46.010   Number of units in residential development.
   
16.46.020   Ingress and egress.
   
16.46.030   Joint and cross access.
   
16.46.040   Access connection.
   
16.46.050   Nonconforming access features.
   
16.46.060   Amount of access points.
   
16.46.070   Exception standard.
   
16.46.080   State highway standards.
   
16.46.090   Shared access onto state highway.
16.46.010   Number of units in residential development.
A major factor in determining the appropriate density of residential
development, particularly in higher density areas, is vehicular access.  In
order to assure that sufficient access is provided for emergency response as
well as the convenience of residents, the following special limitations shall
be placed on the allowable number of units in a residential development:
   A.   Single-family residential access, public and private roads:
      1.   Roads shall be a minimum of 28 feet in width with parking restricted
to one side only, or a minimum of 34 feet in width with no parking restriction.
      2.   The number of units permitted are as follows:
         One access:            30 units
         Two accesses:      132 units
         Three accesses:    207 units
   For more than three accesses, use the following formula: # of units
permitted = (60x (1 + (.05 x # of access points))) x (# of access points)
   B.   Single ownership developments (condominiums, townhouses, manufactured
homes, multi-family developments, etc.).
      1.   Two lane access roads/drives shall be a minimum width of 20 feet
with no parking permitted, or 28 feet with parking restricted to one side only,
or 34 feet with no parking restrictions.  Three lane access roads/drives shall
be a minimum width of 32 feet with no parking permitted, or 40 feet with
parking restricted to one side.
      2.   The number of units permitted are as follows:
         Two lane access road/drive      Three lane access road/drive
         One access:         30  units   One access:           30 units
         Two accesses:      165 units   Two accesses:      220 units
         Three accesses:      258 units   Three accesses:      345 units
   For more than three accesses on a two lane access road/drive, use the
following formula: 
   # of units permitted = (75 x (1 + (.05 x # of access points))) x (# of
access points) (round down to the nearest whole number)
   For more than three accesses on a three lane access road/drive, use the
following formula:
   # of units permitted = (100 x (1 + (.05 x # of access points))) x(# of
access points)
   C.   The Planning Commission may allow increases beyond the maximum number
of units listed in subsections A and B.  Such increases shall be based upon
findings that no unwarranted problems for the public street system or emergency
service provision will result.
   D.   All turnaround systems shall meet or exceed the requirements of the
parking provisions of Chapter 16.10.
   E.   All on-site private roads and drives shall be designed and constructed
to provide safe intersections and travel surfaces which will not result in
hazards for motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.
   F.   N. Maple Street, north of NE 23rd Avenue, and S. Elm Street, south of
SW 13th Avenue, shall be exempt from the residential unit restrictions for
single access roads, provided that legally binding alternative emergency
vehicle access is available.  Road width requirements for these roads shall
remain in effect.
   G.   Public roads accessing any development shall be a minimum of two travel
lanes (twenty-four (24) feet of paved width) to the nearest improved collector
or arterial street, provided that any required improvement to provide
additional pavement width to access a development meets both of the following
conditions:
      1.   An essential nexus is proven, whereby the required improvement is
directly related to the proposed development; and
      2.   Rough proportionality is proven, whereby the cost of the required
improvement is roughly proportional to the impact that the development will
have on the infrastructure.  Specific findings are required for each of the
conditions listed above. If either of the two conditions are not met, the
infrastructure is considered to be inadequate, and conditioning approval of a
development on the widening of the access to the development is considered to
be inappropriate. (Ord. 955 section 22, 1996; Ord. 1019 section 21, 1999; Ord.
1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.46.020   Ingress and egress.
Ingress and egress to any lot or parcel, the creation of which has been
approved by the Planning Commission, shall be taken along that portion fronting
on a public street unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. 
   A.   Vision Clearance:
      Vision clearance distance shall be ten feet from a street to an alley or
a street to a driveway and thirty feet from a street to any other street.
   B.   Where an existing alley is 20 feet or less in width, the setback
abutting the alley shall increase to provide a minimum of 24 feet for
maneuvering and backing movements from, garages, carports, or parking areas.
(Ord. 740 section 10.3.62, 1984; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.46.030   Access connection.
   A.   Spacing of accesses on City streets. The number and spacing of accesses
on City streets shall be as specified in Table 16.46.030. Proposed developments
or land use actions that do not comply with these standards will be required to
obtain an access spacing exception and address the joint and cross access
requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord. 1076, 2001; Ord.
1237, 2007)
TABLE 16.46.30
Access Management Guidelines for City Streets*
 
                Maximum      Minimum      Minimum spacing** Minimum Spacing**
Street Facility spacing** of spacing** of of roadway to     driveway to
                roadways     roadways     driveway***       driveway***
Arterial        1,000 feet   660 feet     330 feet          330 feet or
                                                            combine
Collector       600 feet     250 feet     100 feet          100 feet or
                                                            combine
Neighborhood/   600 feet     150 feet     50 feet****       10 feet
Local
 
*   Exceptions may be made in the downtown commercial district, if approved by
the City Engineering or Public Works Department, where alleys and historic
street grids do not conform to access spacing standards.
**   Measured centerline on both sides of the street
***   Private access to arterial roadways shall only be granted through a
requested variance of access spacing policies when access to a lower
classification facility is not feasible (which shall include an access
management plan evaluation).
****   Not applicable for single-family residential driveways; refer to section
16.10.070(B)(10) for single-family residential access standards
Note:    Spacing shall be measured between access points on both sides of the
street.  (Ord. 1340, 2011)
16.46.035    Restricted access.
The City may allow an access to a City street that does not meet the spacing
requirements of Table 16.46.030 if the proposed access is restricted (prevents
certain turning movements).  The City may require an applicant to provide an
engineered traffic study, access management plan, or other information as
needed to demonstrate that the roadway will operate within the acceptable
standards with the restricted access in place.  (Ord. 1237, 2007).  Access to
OR 99E shall be regulated by ODOT through OAR 734.51. (Ord. 1340, 2011)
16.46.040   Joint and cross access.
Any developments requiring site plan review that do not meet access spacing
requirements are subject to these requirements. In these cases, the following
information shall be shown on the site plan.
   A.   Adjacent commercial or office properties classified as major traffic
generators (e.g. shopping plazas, office parks), shall provide a cross access
drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites.
   B.   A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be
established wherever feasible and shall incorporate the following:
      1.   A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the
entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation
consistent with the access management classification system and standards;
      2.   A design speed of 10 mph and a minimum width of 20 feet to
accommodate two-way travel aisles designated to accommodate automobiles,
service vehicles, and loading vehicles;
      3.   Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that
the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service
drive;
      4.   A unified access and circulation system plan for coordinated or
shared parking areas is encouraged.
   C.   Shared parking areas may be permitted a reduction in required parking
spaces if peak demands do not occur at the same time periods.
   D.   Pursuant to this section, property owners shall:
      1.   Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from
other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service
drive;
      2.   Record an easement with the deed that remaining access rights along
the roadway will be dedicated to the city and pre-existing driveways will be
closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveway;
      3.   Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining
maintenance responsibilities of property owners.
   E.   The City may reduce required separation distance of access points where
they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met:
      1.   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided in
accordance with this section.
      2.   The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system
in accordance with this section.
      3.   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the city,
recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the joint use
driveway.
   F.   The Planning Department may modify or waive the requirements of this
section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make a
development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.
(Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.46.050   Nonconforming access features.
Legal access connections in place as of April 19, 2000 that do not conform with
the standards herein are considered nonconforming features and shall be brought
into compliance with applicable standards under the following conditions:
   A.   When new access connection permits are requested; or
   B.   Change in use or enlargements or improvements that will significantly
increase trip generation. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.46.060   Amount of access points.
In the interest of promoting unified access and circulation systems, the number
of access points permitted shall be the minimum number necessary to provide
reasonable access to these properties, not the maximum available for that
frontage. All necessary easements, agreements, and stipulations shall be met.
This shall also apply to phased development plans. The owner and all lessees
within the affected area are responsible for compliance with the requirements
of this ordinance and both shall be cited for any violation. (Ord 1043 section
3, 2000)
16.46.070   Exception standards.
   A.   An exception may be allowed from the access spacing standards if the
applicant can provide proof of unique or special conditions that make strict
application of the provisions impractical. Applicants shall include proof that:
      1.   Indirect or restricted access cannot be obtained;
      2.   No engineering or construction solutions can be reasonably applied
to mitigate the condition; and
      3.   No alternative access is available from a street with a lower
functional classification than the primary roadway.
   B.   Access Management Plan Required.  An applicant requesting an access
exception may be required to submit an access management plan.  The access
management plan shall explain the need for the modification and demonstrate
that the modification maintains the classified function and integrity of the
facility.  An access management plan shall be prepared and certified by a
traffic or civil engineer registered in the State of Oregon.  An access
management plan shall at minimum contain the following:
      1.   The minimum study area shall include the length of the site’s
frontage plus the distance of the applicable access spacing standard, measured
from each property line or access point(s), whichever is greater.  For example,
a property with 500 feet of frontage on an arterial (required 660 foot access
spacing standard) shall have a minimum study area which is 1,820 feet in
length.
      2.   The potential safety and operational problems associated with the
proposed access point.  The access management plan shall review both existing
and future access for all properties within the study area as defined above.
      3.   A comparison of all alternatives examined.  At a minimum, the access
management plan shall evaluate the proposed modification to the access spacing
standard and the impacts of a plan utilizing the City standard for access
spacing.  Specifically, the access management plan shall identify any impacts
on the operations and/or safety of the various alternatives.
      4.   A list of improvements and recommendations necessary to implement
the proposed access modification, specifically addressing all safety and
operational concerns identified.
      5.   References to standards or publications used to prepare the access
management plan.
   C.   The granting of the exception shall be in harmony with the purpose and
intent of these regulations and shall not be considered until every feasible
option for meeting access standards is explored.
   D.   No exception shall be granted where such hardship is self-created.
   E.   Reasons for denying access spacing exception applications include, but
are not limited to, traffic safety concerns, expected or planned traffic
increases due to development or road construction, and emergency service
provision issues.  (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1340, 2011)
16.46.080    State highway standards.
   A.   Refer to the Motor Vehicle Chapter of the Transportation System Plan.
ODOT regulates access to OR 99E.  ODOT shall review and process applications
for approaches to OR 99E consistent with Oregon Highway Plan standards and OAR
734.51 procedures.  An ODOT permit to operate and maintain a State Highway
Approach must be approved prior to site occupancy.
16.46.090   Shared access onto state highway.
   A.   Subdivisions with frontage on the state highway system shall be
designed into shared access points to and from the highway. Normally, a maximum
of two accesses shall be allowed regardless of the number of lots or businesses
served. If access off of a secondary street is possible, then access should not
be allowed onto the state highway. If access off of a secondary street becomes
available, then conversion to that access is encouraged, along with closing the
state highway access.
   B.   New direct accesses to individual one and two family dwellings shall be
prohibited on all state highways, unless doing so would deny reasonable access
to an existing legal lot of record. (Ord 1043 section 3, 2000)
Chapter 16.48
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Sections:
   
16.48.010   Required prior to plan check.
   
16.48.020   Information required.
   
16.48.030   Plot plans - review by planner.
   
16.48.040   Plot plans - notation of corrections.
   
16.48.050   Standards and criteria for site plan review.
   
16.48.060   Standards and criteria on appeal.
   
16.48.070   Procedure for additions to existing buildings.
16.48.010   Required prior to plan check.
Prior to undergoing a plan check for construction, all proposed commercial,
industrial and residential development projects shall undergo a site plan
review to be conducted by the staff.  This review is intended to focus on Code
compliance and the mitigation of potential health and safety hazards rather
than on architectural or aesthetic design features.  Additional to the
requirements imposed as a result of a site plan review the staff may also make
certain recommendations which are not binding upon the applicant but which are
intended to improve the overall quality or appearance of the development.  A
site plan review shall also be conducted by staff for any residential structure
including, but not limited to, manufactured homes, whether new or previously
occupied, which are proposed to be moved onto a site.  This review is intended
to focus on Code compliance and mitigation of safety hazards as well as to
insure near like-new or historically restored condition of building exterior. 
(Ord 858 section 1, 1991; Ord. 740 section 10.3.70[part], 1984; Ord. 1514,
2019)
16.48.020   Information required.
Application procedures for site plan review shall be as described in Chapter
16.89.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.70(A), 1984; Ord. 981 section 3, 1997; Ord. 1043
section 3, 2000; Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.48.030   Plot plans - review by planner.
The City Planner and other appropriate staff persons shall review the plans and
may make field inspections of the site to determine whether the proposed
development conforms with applicable city ordinances.  (Ord. 740 section
10.3.70(B), 1984)
16.48.040   Plot plans - notation of corrections.
   A.   Necessary corrections, additions or deletions to the plans shall be
noted on them, with one copy of the corrected plan on file and another returned
to the applicant.
   B.   If the corrections, additions or deletions are relatively minor, the
building permit may be issued upon completion of the normal building permit
process.
   C.   In the case of major modifications to the design, however, the City
Planner or Building Official may require that the plot plan be redrawn and
resubmitted for review prior to issuance of the building permit.  (Ord. 740
section 10.3.70(C), 1984)
16.48.050   Standards and criteria for site plan review.
The staff shall utilize the following standards and criteria in conducting a
site plan review:
   A.   Compliance of the proposal with all applicable city ordinance
requirements;
   B.   A determination that the proposal will result in no unusually hazardous
conditions for motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians or other users of the site;
   C.   A determination that exterior lighting will not result in a glare on
neighboring properties or a hazard to motorists;
   D.   A finding that any previously established conditions of approval (for a
variance, conditional use permit, etc.) have been met.
   E.   For residential structures moved onto the site including, but not
limited to, manufactured homes, a determination shall be made by staff that a
near like-new or historically restored condition of building exterior shall
exist prior to occupancy.  This determination shall include an evaluation of
color, materials and appearance of siding, roofing and appurtenances, as
determined by evidence of recent painting, new construction, or replacement or
repair of weathered, damaged or deteriorated materials or surfaces.  (Ord. 858
section 2, 1991; Ord. 740 section 10.3.70(D), 1984)
16.48.060   Standards and criteria on appeal.
On appeal of a staff decision regarding a site plan review, the commission
shall utilize the same standards and criteria as are required of the staff. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.3.70(E), 1984)
16.48.070   Procedure for additions to existing buildings.
On additions to existing buildings the site plan review shall be conducted only
on those portions of the project affected by the additions, except where
potential hazards may result from the design, in which case the review may be
expanded to include any portions of the total development where such hazardous
conditions may exist.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.70(F), 1984)
Chapter 16.49
SITE AND DESIGN REVIEW
Sections:
   
16.49.010   Findings and objectives.
   
16.49.020   Establishment of the Site and Design Review Board.
   
16.49.025   Establishment of a site and design review committee.
   
16.49.030   Site and design review plan approval requirements.
   
16.49.035   Application for Site and Design Review.
   
16.49.040   Criteria and standards.
   
16.49.050   Conditions placed on site and design review approvals.
   
16.49.060   Time limit on approvals.
   
16.49.065   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
   
16.49.070   Authority and intent.
   
16.49.080   General provisions for landscaping.
   
16.49.090   Specifications for tree and plant materials.
   
16.49.100   Landscaping installation and maintenance.
   
16.49.110   Landscape area credit for preservation of existing trees and tree
groves.
   
16.49.120   Parking lot landscaping standards.
   
16.49.130   Revegetation in unlandscaped areas.
   
16.49.140   Minor revisions to approved landscaped plans.
   
16.49.150   Parking lots or paving projects.
16.49.010   Findings and objectives.
   A.   The City Council finds that excessive uniformity, dissimilarity,
inappropriateness, or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of
structures and signs, and the lack of proper attention to site development and
landscaping, in the business, commercial, industrial and certain residential
areas of the city hinders the harmonious development of the city; impairs the
desirability of residence, investment or occupation in the city; limits the
opportunity to attain the optimum use and value of land and improvements;
adversely affects the stability and value of property; produces degeneration of
property in such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the
peace, health and welfare of the city; and destroys a proper relationship
between the taxable value of property and the cost of municipal services
thereof.
   B.   The City Council declares that the purpose and objectives of site
development requirements and the design review procedures are to:
      1.   Encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning
and development, including the architecture, landscaping and graphic design of
said development.
      2.   Discourage monotonous, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious
development.
      3.   Promote the city's natural beauty and visual character and charm by
insuring that structures, signs and other improvements are properly related to
their sites, and to surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the
aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain and landscaping, and that proper
attention is given to exterior appearances of structures, signs and other
improvements.
      4.   Protect and enhance the city's appeal to tourists and visitors and
thus support and stimulate business and industry and promote the desirability
of investment and occupancy in business, commercial and industrial properties.
      5.   Stabilize and improve property values and present blighted areas and
thus increase tax revenue.
      6.   Achieve the beneficial influence of pleasant environments for living
and working on behavioral patterns and thus decrease the cost of governmental
services.
      7.   Foster civic pride and community spirit so as to improve the quality
and quantity of citizen participation in local government and in community
growth, change and improvement.
      8.   Sustain the comfort, health, tranquility and contentment of
residents and attract new residents by reason of the city's favorable
environment and thus promote and protect the peace, health, and welfare of the
city.
      9.   Determine the appropriate yard setbacks, building heights, minimum
lot sizes and sign sizes, when authorized to do so by city ordinance.
      10.   Encourage the use of Low Impact Development (LID) techniques to
manage stormwater through the use of natural features, protect native
vegetation, preserve and create open space, and minimize impervious surfaces. 
(Ord.. 848, Part I, section 1, 1991, Ord.. 1338; 2010)
   C.   Alternatives for how the Design Review Board or a Design Review
Committee is organized give the City the flexibility to use several options,
including a Design Review Board that consists of Planning Commission members
only, or a Board with a broader representation that can be expanded when
appropriate.  Provisions also allow for creation of a Design Review Committee
which would be strictly advisory in nature. (Ord. 1296, 2008)
16.49.020   Establishment of the Site and Design Review Board.
   A.   The City may establish a Site and Design Review Board whose members,
terms of office and manner of transacting business shall be as prescribed in
the following subsections:
      1.   The Board shall be responsible for reviewing and commenting upon the
following applications which may be directed to it through the development
process: those portions of proposed site and design review plans which pertain
to architectural features, applications concerning historic structures and sign
applications under the following circumstances:
         a.   Where the applicant has elected not to go through an
administrative (Type II) review process;
         b.   Where the proposal does not meet the City’s administrative (Type
II) architectural design standards;
         c.   Where administrative (Type II) design review standards do not
exist for the project; or
         d.   Where an administrative (Type II) design review decision has been
appealed.
   If no Site and Design Review Board is established, the Planning Commission
is responsible for reviewing all applicable land use applications and is
responsible for the above duties of the Site and Design Review Board.
      2.   Other duties.  The City Council may, by Ord.er, direct the Board to
review and comment on other matters which the Council determines are or may be
within the Board’s areas of expertise.
      3.   Qualifications of members.  The Board shall consist of at least four
and up to seven members of the Canby City Planning Commission, and one member
from the City Council pro-tem (temporary) non-voting; and up to four additional
individuals who represent interests or expertise related to development,
architectural design, business or other viewpoints related to the design and
development process.  These provisions allow the Board to consist of Planning
Commission members only, if desired.
      4.   Appointment and term.  Members of the Planning Commission shall be
appointed as required by section 16.06.030.  Non-Planning Commission members
shall be appointed by the City Council.
      5.   Vacancies and removal.  Vacancies on the Design Review Board or
removal of Design Review Board members shall be governed by section 16.06.030.
      6.   Chairman.  The duly appointed chairman of the Planning Commission
shall also serve as chairman for site and design review applications in
accordance with Chapter 16.06 if the Planning Commission Chairperson serves on
the Design Review Board.  If the Planning Commission Chairperson does not serve
on the Board, a Design Review Board Chairperson will be selected by a majority
of Design Review Board members. 
      7.   Voting.  A quorum for the transaction of business shall be a simple
majority of Design Review Board members.  The chairperson shall be counted to
determine a quorum and shall have the same voting powers as other members of
the Board.  Each member shall have one vote.  A majority vote of the members
shall be required for all Board actions. 
      8.   Meetings and records.  The Board shall hold regular meetings as
required.  Site and design review applications will be reviewed as a regular
agenda item.
      9.   Rules.  The Board may adopt and amend rules to govern the conduct of
its business, consistent with the provisions of this Code.  (Ord. 1296, 2008)
16.49.025   Establishment of a site and design review committee.
   A.   The City Council may appoint a design review committee to provide
additional guidance related to design review applications.
      1.   The committee shall be responsible for reviewing and commenting upon
the following applications which may be directed to it through the development
review process: those portions of proposed site and design review plans which
pertain to architectural features, and applications concerning historic
structures under the following circumstances:
         a.   Where the applicant has elected not to go through an
administrative (Type II) review process;
         b.   Where the proposal does not meet the City’s administrative (Type
II) architectural design standards;
         c.   Where administrative (Type II) design review standards do not
exist for the project; or
         d.   Where an administrative (Type II) design review decision has been
appealed.
      2.   Nature of committee’s review.  The committee's review and
recommendations are strictly advisory to Planning Department staff and the
City’s Design Review Board.
      3.   Qualifications of members.  The Committee shall consist of at least
five and up to seven members, including individuals who represent interests or
expertise related to development, architectural design, business or other
viewpoints related to the design and development process.
      4.   Appointment and term.  Members of the Design Review Committee shall
be appointed by the City Council, considering recommendations of the Planning
Director.
      5.   Vacancies and removal.  Vacancies on the Design Review Committee and
removal of Design Review Committee members shall be approved by the City
Council.
      6.   Meetings and records.  The committee shall hold regular meetings,
which shall conform with all legal requirements of the Oregon public meetings
law.  Site and design review applications will be reviewed as a regular agenda
item.
      7.   Rules.  The committee may adopt and amend rules to govern the
conduct of its business, consistent with the provisions of this Code and Oregon
public meetings law.  (Ord. 1296, 2008)
16.49.030   Site and design review plan approval required.
   A.   The following projects require site and design review approval, except
as exempted in B below:
      1.   All new buildings.
      2.   All new mobile home parks.
      3.   Major building remodeling above 60% of value.
      4.   Addition of more than 5,000 square feet of additional gross floor
area in a one year period.
      5.   Construction activity which causes a decrease in pervious area in
excess of 2,500 square feet in a one year period.
   None of the above shall occur, and no building permit for such activity
shall be issued, and no sign permit shall be issued until the site and design
review plan, as required by this Ordinance, has been reviewed and approved by
the Board and their designees for conformity with applicable criteria.
   B.   The following are exempt from site and design review (but still may
require a site plan review and/or building permit):
      1.   Signs that are not a part of a reviewable development project. 
Signs that are a part of a reviewable development project, and that are
proposed more than two (2) years beyond the final occupancy of the reviewed
development.
      2.   Alterations or remodeling that do not change the exterior of the
building.
      3.   Temporary public structures which will be removed within two (2)
years of placement.
      4.   Commercial and industrial accessory structures under 500 square
feet.
      5.   Temporary commercial tent/canopy structures, which meet the Uniform
building or Fire Code, and which will be removed within thirty (30) days of
placement.
      6.   Temporary Vendor activity permitted pursuant to Section
16.08.140.
      7.   Parking lot or paving projects. If no buildings or structures are
involved, paving or parking lot development in excess of 2,500 square feet of
impervious surface is exempted from a Type III site and design review. However,
parking lot and paving projects in excess of 2,500 square feet of impervious
surface require Type I site plan review.  All new paved areas and parking lots
in excess of 2,500 square feet must meet the requirements of Section
16.49.150.
      8.   Single family or two-family dwellings and their accessory
structures, and any alterations or remodeling thereof.
      9.   Minor public facilities.
      10.   Approved Public Art Murals as defined in CMC Chapter 2.80.020.
   C.   Construction, site development and landscaping shall be carried out in
substantial accord with the approved site and design review plan. Review of the
proposed site and design review plan and any changes thereto shall be conducted
in accordance with site and design review procedures.
   D.   No fence/wall shall be constructed throughout a project that is/was
subject to site and design review approval where the effect or purpose is to
wall said project off from the rest of the community unless reviewed and
approved by the Planning Commission.  (Ord.. 1315, 2009; Ord.. 1237, 2007;
Ord.. 1080, 2001; Ord.. 1019 section 2, 1999; Ord.. 981 sections 52&53, 1997;
Ord.. 955 section 23, 1996; Ord.. 890 section 43, 1993; Ord.. 848, Part III,
section 1, 1991; Ord.. 1341, 2011)
16.49.035   Application for Site and Design Review
   A.   For site and design review projects in the Downtown Canby Overlay Zone
(DCO), applicants may choose one of the following two processes:
      1.   Type II – If the applicant meets all applicable site and design
review standards set forth in Chapters 16.41(Downtown Canby Overlay Zone) and
16.49; the applicant shall submit a Type II application for approval pursuant
to the approval criteria set forth in 16.49.040.A; or
      2.   Type III – If the applicant proposes the use of alternative methods
or materials to meet the intent of the site and design review standards set
forth in Chapter16.41.070, the applicant shall submit a Type III application
for approval pursuant to the approval criteria set forth in 16.49.040.B.  The
applicant must still meet all applicable requirements of Chapter 16.49.
   B.   All other projects subject to site and design review approval pursuant
to Section
16.49.030 are subject to the Type III procedural requirements set forth in
Chapter 16.89.  The applicant shall submit a Type III application for approval
pursuant to the approval criteria set forth in 16.49.040.  (Ord.1296, 2008)
16.49.40   Criteria and standards.
   A.   In review of a Type II Site and Design Review Application described in
Section
16.49.035.A.1, the Planning Director shall, in exercising his powers, duties or
functions, determine whether there is compliance with the DCO site and design
review standards.
   B.   In review of a Type III Site and Design Review Application, the Board
shall, in exercising or performing its powers, duties or functions, determine
whether there is compliance with the following:
      1.   The proposed site development, including the site plan,
architecture, landscaping and graphic design, is in conformance with the
standards of this and other applicable city ordinances insofar as the location,
height and appearance of the proposed development are involved; and
      2.   The proposed design of the development is compatible with the design
of other developments in the same general vicinity; and
      3.   The location, design, size, color and materials of the exterior of
all structures and signs are compatible with the proposed development and
appropriate to the design character of other structures in the same vicinity.
      4.   The proposed development incorporates the use of LID best management
practices whenever feasible based on site and soil conditions.  LID best
management practices include, but are not limited to, minimizing impervious
surfaces, designing on-site LID stormwater management facilities, and retaining
native vegetation.
      5.   The Board shall, in making its determination of compliance with this
Ordinances, shall use the matrix in Table 16.49.040 to determine compatibility
unless this matrix is superseded by another matrix applicable to a specific
zone or zones under this title.  An application is considered to be compatible
with the standards of Table 16.49.040 if the following conditions are met:
         a.   The development accumulates a minimum of 60 percent of the total
possible number of points from the list of design criteria in Table 16.49.040;
and
         b.   At least 10 percent of the points used to comply with (a) above
must be from the list of LID Elements in Table 16.49.040.
      6.   Street lights installation may be required on any public street or
roadway as part of the Design Review Application.
   D.   In review of a Type III Site and Design Review Application, the Board
shall, in exercising or performing its powers, duties or functions, determine
whether there is compliance with the INTENT of the design review standards set
forth in this ordinance.
   E.   The Board shall, in making its determination of compliance with the
above requirements, be guided by the objectives and standards set forth in this
ordinance. It must be demonstrated that all required public facilities and
services are available, or will become available through the development, to
adequately meet the needs of the proposed development.  If the site and design
review plan includes utility facilities or public utility facility, then the
City Planner shall determine whether those aspects of the proposed plan comply
with applicable standards.
   F.   The Board shall, in making its determination of compliance with the
requirements set forth, consider the effect of its action on the availability
and cost of needed housing. The Board shall not use the requirements of this
section to exclude needed housing types. However, consideration of these
factors shall not prevent the Board from imposing conditions of approval
necessary to meet the requirements of this section.  The costs of such
conditions shall not unduly increase the cost of housing beyond the minimum
necessary to achieve the purposes of this ordinance.
   G.   As part of the site and design review, the property owner may apply for
approval to cut trees in addition to those allowed in Chapter 12.32, the city
Tree ordinance. The granting or denial of said application will be based on the
criteria in Chapter 12.32. The cutting of trees does not in and of itself
constitute change in the appearance of the property which would necessitate
application for site and design review. (Ord. 848, Part III, section 2, 1991;
Ord. 955 section 24 & 25, 1996; Ord.1237, 2007, Ord.1296, 2008; Ord. 1338,
2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
Table 16.49.040 Site Design Review Menu
As part of Site and Design Review, the following menu shall be used as part of
the review. In Ord.er to “pass” this table 60% of total possible points shall
be earned,
10% of the total possible points must be from LID elements
 
Design Criteria    Possible Points
Parking            0                 1                  2                   3 4
Screening of
parking and/or
loading facilities Not screened      Partially screened Fully screened      - -
from public right-
of-way
Parking lot        No                Yes                -                   - -
lighting provided
Parking location
(behind building   Front             Side               Behind              - -
is best)
Number of parking
spaces provided (% >120%             101-120%           100%                - -
of minimum
required)
Screening of
Storage Areas and  0                 1                  2                   3 4
Utility Boxes
Trash storage is
screened from view
by solid wood      No                Yes                -                   - -
fence, masonry
wall or
landscaping.
Trash storage is
located away from  0 - 10 feet from  11 - 25 feet from  >25 feet from       - -
adjacent property  adjacent property adjacent property  adjacent property
lines.
Utility equipment,
including rooftop
equipment, is      Not screened      Partially screened Fully screened      - -
screened from
view.
Access             0                 1                  2                   3 4
Distance of access
to nearest         ≤70 feet        71 - 100 feet      >100 feet           - -
intersection.
Pedestrian
walkways from                                           Walkways connecting
public street/     One entrance      -                  all public streets/ - -
sidewalks to       connected.                           sidewalks to
building                                                building entrances.
entrances.
Pedestrian                                              Walkways connecting
walkways from      No walkways       Walkway next to    all parking areas     .
parking lot to                       building only      to building
building entrance.                                      entrances
 
 
Design        Possible Points
Criteria
Tree          0           1                2              3      4
Retention
Percentage of
trees         <10%        10-50%           51-75%         >75%   -
retained
Replacement
of trees      <50%        ≥50%           -              -      -
removed
Signs         0           1                2              3      4
Dimensional
size of sign  >75%        50-75%           <50%           -      -
(% of maximum
permitted)
Similarity of
sign color to Not similar Somewhat similar Similar        -      -
building
color
Pole sign     Yes         No               -              -      -
used
Building      0           1                2              3      4
Appearance
Style                     Somewhat similar (1 or 2 points
(similar to   Not similar possible depending on level of  -      -
surroundings)             similarity)
Color
(subdued and              Similar or
similar to    Neither     subdued          Both           -      -
surroundings
is better)
Material
(concrete,    Either 1 or 2 points may assigned at the discretion of the Site
wood and      and Design Review Board
brick are
best)
Size of
building      >20,000     ≤20,000 square -              -      -
(smaller is   square feet feet
better)
Provision of
public art
(i.e. murals,
statues,      No          -                -              -      Yes
fountains,
decorative
bike racks,
etc.)
Landscaping   0           1                2              3      4
Number of                 At least one
non-required  -           tree per 500     -              -      -
trees                     square feet of
provided                  landscaping.
Amount of
grass (less
grass is
better) (% of >50%        25-50%           <25%           -      -
total
landscaped
area)
Low Impact
Development   0           1                2              3      4
(LID)
Use of
pervious
paving        <10%        -                10-50%         51-75% >75%
materials (%
of total
paved area)
Provision of                               Open space            Park (public
park or open  None        -                (Generally not -      or privately
space area                                 for public            owned for
                                           use)                  public use)
 
 
Design        Possible Points
Criteria
Use of
drought
tolerant      <25% drought              25-50%       51-75%   >75% drought
species in    tolerant     -            drought      drought  tolerant
landscaping                             tolerant     tolerant
(% of total
plants)
Provision of
additional
interior
parking lot   100%         101-110%     111-120%     >120%    -
landscaping
(% of minimum
required)
Provision of
an eco-roof
or rooftop    <10%         -            -            10-50%   >50%
garden (% of
total roof
area)
Parking
integrated
within
building
footprint
(below-grade, <10%         -            -            10-50%   >50%
structured
parking, or
tuck-under
parking) (%
of total on-
site parking)
Disconnecting
downspouts                 Some         All
from city     None         downspouts   downspouts   -        -
stormwater                 disconnected disconnected
facilities
Shared
parking with
adjacent uses
or public
parking       None         <50%         ≥50%       -        -
structure (%
of total
required
parking
spaces)
Provision of
rain gardens/
bioretention
areas for
stormwater    None         -            10-50%       51-75%   >75%
runoff (% of
total
landscaped
area)
              Total Possible Points = 71, 60%=42.6 points, 10%=7.1 points
(Ord. 1296, 2008; Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.49.050   Conditions placed on site and design review approvals.
   A.   A site and design review approval may include restrictions and
conditions. These restrictions and conditions shall be reasonably conceived to:
      1.   Protect the public from the potentially deleterious effects of the
proposal; and/or
      2.   Fulfill the need for services created, increased or in part
attributable to the proposal; and/or
      3.   Further the implementation of the requirements of the Canby
Municipal Code.
   B.   The following types of conditions may be contemplated, and the listing
below is intended to be illustrative only and not to be construed as a
limitation of the authority granted by this section.
      1.   Development Schedule.  A reasonable time schedule may be placed on
construction activities associated with the proposed development, or any
portion thereof.
      2.   Dedications, Reservation.  Dedication or reservation of land, or fee
in lieu thereof for park, open space purposes, rights-of-way, bicycle or
pedestrian paths, green way, riverbank or easements; the conveyance of title or
easements to a homeowners' association.
      3.   Construction and Maintenance Guarantees.  Security from the property
owners in such an amount that will assure compliance with approval granted.
      4.   Plan Modification.  Changes in the design or intensity of the
proposed development, or in proposed construction methods or practices,
necessary to assure compliance with this Ordinance.
      5.   Off-Site Improvements.  Improvements in public facilities, including
public utilities, not located on the project site where necessary to assure
adequate capacity and where service demand will be created or increased by the
proposed development. The costs of such improvements may be paid for in full
while allowing for recovery of costs from users on other development sites, or
they may be pro-rated to the proposed development in proportion to the service
demand projected to be created on increases by the project.  If determined
appropriate by the city based on specific site conditions, off-site roadway
improvements may be required to accommodate bicycle and pedestrian travel
consistent with the TSP and applicable sections of this code.
      6.   Other Approvals.  Evaluation, inspections or approval by other
agencies, jurisdictions, public utilities or qualified consultants may be
required for all or any part of the proposed development.
      7.   Access Limitation.  The number, location and design of street
accesses to a proposed development may be limited or specified where necessary
to maintain the capacity of streets to carry traffic safely, provided that
sufficient access to the development is maintained.
      8.   Screening. The Planning Commission may require additional screening
with landscaping, decorative fencing, decorative walls, or other means in
Ord.er to screen outdoor storage areas, rooftop/ground mechanical equipment,
garbage/recycling areas, or other visual clutter. (Ord.. 890 section 44, 1993;
Ord.. 848, Part III, section 3, 1991; 1340, 2011)
16.49.055
(Ord.. 1019 section 4, 1999; del. by Ord.. 1111, 2003)
16.49.060     Time limit on approval.
Site and Design Review Board approvals shall be void after twelve (12) months
unless:
A building permit has been issued and substantial construction pursuant thereto
has taken place, as defined by the state Uniform Building Code; or
The Planning Department finds that there have been no changes in any
Ordinances, standards, regulations or other conditions affecting the previously
approved project so as to warrant its resubmittal. (Ord. 848, Part III, section
4, 1091)
16.49.065   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
Developments coming under design review shall meet the following standards:
   A.   The internal walkway system shall be extended to the boundaries of the
property to adjoining properties developed or zoned for commercial, public, or
multi-family uses. The walkway shall connect to an existing walkway system on
adjoining property or be located so as to provide for development of a logical
connection in the future when the adjoining property is developed or
redeveloped.
   B.   On-site facilities shall be provided to accommodate safe and convenient
pedestrian and bicycle access within new subdivisions, multi-family
developments, planned development, shopping centers, and commercial districts,
and connecting to adjacent residential areas and neighborhood activity centers.
Residential developments shall include streets with sidewalks and accessways.
   C.   For new office parks and commercial development:
      1.   At least one sidewalk connection between the proposed development
and each abutting commercial or office property shall be provided. One
connection shall also be provided to each neighborhood.
      2.   Walkways shall be provided to the street for every 300 feet of
developed frontage.
      3.   Walkways shall be direct with minimal driveway crossings.
      4.   Walkways shall be linked to the internal circulation of the
building.
      5.   Walkways shall be at least five feet wide and shall be raised, or
have different paving materials when crossing driveways or other vehicle
maneuvering areas.
   D.   Use of permeable surfacing materials for walkways is encouraged
whenever site and soil conditions make it feasible.  Permeable surfacing
includes, but is not limited to, paving blocks, turf blocks, and porous
asphalt.  All permeable surfacing shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained in accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards. 
   E.   Developments that abut the Molalla Forest Road multi-use path shall
provide a pedestrian/bicycle access to the path.  The city may determine the
development to be exempt from this standard if there is an existing or planned
access to the path within 300 feet of the development.  (Ord. 1043 section 3,
2000; Ord. 1339, 2010; Ord. 1340, 2011; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.49.070   Landscaping provisions, Authority and intent.
The purpose of this section is to establish standards for landscaping within
the City of Canby in Ord.er to enhance the environmental and aesthetic quality
of the city:
   A.   By encouraging the retention and protection of existing trees and
requiring the planting of trees in new developments;
   B.   By using trees and other landscaping materials to temper the effects of
the sun, wind, noise and air pollution;
   C.   By using trees and other landscaping materials to define spaces and
uses of the specific areas;
   D.   Through the use of trees and other landscaping materials as a unifying
element within the urban environment; and
16.49.080   General provisions for landscaping.
   A.   The standards set forth in this section are minimum standards for
landscaping.
   B.   The purpose of these landscaping standards is to provide uniform
standards for the development and maintenance of the landscaping of private
property and public rights-of-way.  The purpose of landscaping is to improve
the livability of residential neighborhoods, enhance the customer attraction of
commercial areas, increase property values, improve the compatibility of
adjacent uses, provide visual separation and physical buffers between
incompatible adjacent land uses, provide visual relief from the expanse of
parking lots, screen undesirable views, contribute to the image and appeal of
the overall community, and mitigate air and noise pollution.
   These standards are also intended to facilitate Low Impact Development (LID)
techniques through the retention of existing native vegetation and mature,
healthy trees, to the extent feasible.  Additional LID related goals of this
chapter are to:  reduce erosion and storm water runoff; preserve and promote
urban wildlife habitats; reduce the amount of carbon dioxide in the air; shade
and reduce the temperature of adjacent waterways; and enhance the streetscapes
along the city’s public rights-of-way with an emphasis on trees and LID
stormwater facilities.
   C.   The minimum area requirement for landscaping for developments coming
under design review shall be the percentage of the total land area to be
developed as follows. Parking lot landscaping area is included in calculating
the following landscape areas:
      1.   Fifteen (15) percent for all industrial and commercial zones (except
the Downtown-Commercial zone, but including the Commercial-Residential zone).
      2.   Seven and one-half (7.5) percent for the Downtown-Commercial zone.
      3.   Thirty (30) percent for all residential zones.
   D.   LID stormwater management facilities, such as rain gardens and
bioretention areas, may be counted toward the minimum landscaping requirement
when they are located on private property.  LID facilities in the public right-
of-way cannot be counted toward the minimum landscaping requirement.  The
integration of LID stormwater management facilities within required landscaping
must be approved by the city and shall comply with the design and construction
standards set forth in the Canby Public Works Design Standards.
   E.   Trees and other plant materials to be retained shall be identified on
the landscape plan. The Site and Design Review Board encourages the retention,
to the extent practicable, of existing healthy trees and vegetation.
   F.   During the construction process:
      1.   The owner or the owner's agent shall provide above and below ground
protection for existing trees and plant materials identified to remain.
      2.   Trees and plant materials identified for preservation shall be
protected by chain link fencing placed around the tree, at the drip line.
      3.   If it is necessary to fence within the drip line, such fencing shall
be specified by a qualified arborist, nurseryman or landscape architect.
      4.   Neither top soil storage nor construction material storage shall be
located within the drip line of trees designated to be preserved.
      5.   Where site conditions make necessary grading, building, paving,
trenching, boring, digging, or other similar encroachment upon a preserved
tree's drip line area, such grading, paving, trenching, boring, digging or
similar encroachment shall only be permitted under the direction of a qualified
arborist, nurseryman or landscape architect. Such direction must assure that
the health needs of trees within the preserved area can be met.
      6.   Tree root ends shall not remain exposed.
   G.   Landscaping under preserved trees shall be compatible with the
retention and health of said trees.
   H.   When it is necessary for a preserved tree to be moved in accordance
with the Tree Ordinance, the landscaped area surrounding said tree or trees
shall be maintained and replanted with trees which relate to the present
landscape plan, or if there is no landscaping plan, then trees which are
complimentary with existing, nearby landscape materials.
   I.   Any required landscaped area shall be designed, constructed, installed
and maintained so that within three (3) years, the ground shall be covered by
living grass or other plant material. (The foliage crown of trees shall not be
used to meet this requirement.) A maximum of five percent of the landscaped
area may be covered with bark chips, mulch, or other similar materials. A
maximum of five percent of the landscaped area may be covered with rock,
stones, walkways, or other similar material acceptable to the Board. Required
sidewalks shall not be used to meet the landscaping requirements. 
   J.   All trees and plant materials shall be healthy, disease-free, damage-
free, well-branched stock, characteristic of the species.  The use of tree and
plant species native to the Pacific Northwest is encouraged.  Any new street
tree planted must be included on the city’s list of approved tree species.
   K.   Landscaping methods should be guided by the provisions of the most
recent edition of the Sunset Western Garden Book or similar publication.
   L.   The following guidelines are suggested to insure the longevity and
continued vigor of plant materials:
      1.   Select and site permanent landscape materials in such a manner as to
produce a hardy and drought-resistant landscaped area.
      2.   Consider soil type and depth, spacing, exposure to sun and wind,
slope and contours of the site, building walls and overhangs, and compatibility
with existing native vegetation preserved on the site or in the vicinity.
   M.   All plant growth in landscaped areas of developments shall be
controlled by pruning, trimming or otherwise, so that:
      1.   It will not interfere with designated pedestrian or vehicular
access; and
      2.   It will not constitute a traffic hazard because of reduced
visibility.
      3.   It will not hinder solar access considerations.
   N.   After completion of site grading, topsoil is to be restored to exposed
cut and fill areas to provide a suitable base for seeding and planting.
   O.   All planting areas shall be graded to provide positive drainage.
   P.   Neither soil, water, plant materials nor mulching materials shall be
allowed to wash across roadways or walkways. (Ord.. 890 section 49, 1993; Ord..
854 section 1,1991; Ord.. 848, Part IV, section 2, 1990; Ord.. 955 section 26,
1996; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord.. 1338, 2010)
16.49.090   Specifications for tree and plant materials.
   A.   Deciduous Trees.  Deciduous shade and ornamental trees shall be a
minimum of two inch (2”) caliper, measured six inches (6”) above ground, balled
and burlapped. Bareroot trees will be acceptable to plant during their dormant
season. Trees shall be well branched and characteristically shaped specimen.
   B.   Coniferous Trees.  Coniferous trees shall be a minimum five feet (5’)
in height above ground, balled and burlapped. Trees shall be well branched and
characteristically shaped specimen.
   C.   Evergreen and Deciduous Shrubs.  Evergreen and deciduous shrubs shall
be at least one (1) to five (5) gallon size. Shrubs shall be characteristically
branched.  Side of shrub with best foliage shall be oriented to public view.
   D.   Ground covers.  Ground covers shall be fully rooted and shall be well
branched or leafed.
   E.   Lawns.  Lawns shall consist of grasses, including sod, or seeds of
acceptable mix within the local landscape industry. Lawns shall be 100 percent
coverage and weed free. (Ord.. 890 section 46, 1993; Ord.. 848, Part IV,
section 3, 1990)
16.49.100   Landscaping installation and maintenance.
   A.   Except as allowed by subsection (2), all landscaping and exterior
improvements required as part of the site and design review approval shall be
completed prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
   B.   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to the
complete installation of all required landscaping and exterior improvements if
security equal to 110 percent of the cost of the landscaping and exterior
improvements, as determined by the Site and Design Review Board or City
Planner, is filed with the city, assuring such installation within a time
specified by the Board, but not to exceed six (6) months after occupancy. The
applicant shall provide the cost estimates of landscaping materials and
installation to the satisfaction of the Site and Design Review Board, City
Planner, or city forester, prior to approval of the security. Security may
consist of a faithful performance bond payable to the City of Canby, cash,
certified check, time certificate of deposit, or assignment of a savings
account; and the form shall meet with the approval of the City Attorney. If the
installation of the landscaping or other exterior improvements is not completed
within the period specified by the Board or City Planner, the security may be
used by the city to complete the installation. Upon completion of the
installation, any portion of the remaining security deposited with the city
shall be returned. The final landscape and exterior improvement inspection
shall be made prior to any security being returned. Any portion of the plan not
installed, not installed properly, or not properly maintained shall cause the
inspection to be postponed until the project is completed, or shall cause the
security to be used by the city.
   C.   All landscaping approved through the site and design review process
shall be continually maintained, including necessary watering, weeding, pruning
and replacement, in a manner substantially similar to that originally approved
by the Site and Design Review Board, unless later altered with Board approval.
(Ord.. 890 section 47, 1993; Ord.. 848, Part IV, section 4, 1990)
16.49.110   Landscape area credit for preservation of existing trees and tree
groves.
   A.   Policy.  It being the policy of the City of Canby to preserve healthy,
mature trees wherever possible within its city limits, a system of landscape
area credits is hereby established as an incentive for property owners and
developers to preserve existing healthy, mature trees and to include them in
the landscape plan for a proposed development.
   B.   Purpose.  The primary goal of the landscape credit is to prevent
haphazard removal and destruction of trees and tree groves, in Ord.er to
preserve the ecological health, aesthetic character, and quality of life in
Canby.  Tree retention provides substantial benefits, including but not limited
to erosion prevention, reduction in storm-water runoff, improved water and air
quality, energy conservation, carbon sequestration, reductions in the
development impacts on the stormwater drainage system, and better transition
between adjacent land uses.
   C.   Landscape Credit.
      1.   Program for Landscape Credit.  One hundred percent (100%) of the
area preserved under any mature, healthy tree or grove of trees retained in the
landscape (as approved by the Site and Design Review Board) may be counted
directly toward the percentage of landscaping required for a development.
      2.   Limit to Landscape Area Credit. 
         a.   Landscape credit for preserved trees or tree groves shall not
eliminate or reduce the landscaping requirements pertaining to parking lots,
buffering, and screening.
         b.   Landscape credits for individual trees shall not comprise more
than 40 percent of the total landscape requirement.  For example, in districts
requiring 15 percent landscaping, preserved tree area shall not count toward
more than 9 percent of the requirement).
         C.   Landscape credits for preserved tree groves shall not comprise
more than 60 percent of the total landscape requirement.  A grove is defined as
a stand of three or more healthy, mature trees located close together to
provide some overlap in canopy coverage.
      3.   Trees Near a Property Line:
         a.   When the drip line of a tree extends beyond the owner's property
line, credit can be granted for that portion of the drip line within the
property line if that area exceeds 75 percent of the total drip line area.
Trees so close to the property line that their drip line area is less than 75
percent of the total, can only be given credit if a qualified arborist,
nurseryman or landscape architect can assure the survival of the tree and its
long term health if root damage is sustained by future development on the
adjacent property.
         b.   Where trees have been preserved near a property line, such that
the drip line of the tree spreads onto adjacent property, credit can be
obtained by the adjacent property owner for protection of the drip line area
that extends onto that adjacent property.
   D.   Trees and tree groves to be preserved and counted toward the landscape
credit shall be identified on the landscape plan.  (Ord. 890 section 48, 1993;
Ord. 848, Part IV, section 5, 1990; Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.49.120   Parking lot landscaping standards.
   A.   General Provisions.  In addition to the objectives stated in section 2
of this Ordinance, goals of parking lot standards are to create shaded areas in
parking lots to reduce glare, enhance the visual environment, and encourage the
use of LID practices. The design of the parking area shall be the
responsibility of the developer and should consider visibility of signage,
traffic circulation, comfortable pedestrian access, and aesthetics. Trees shall
not be cited as a reason for applying for or granting a variance on placement
of signs.
   B.   Application.  Parking lot landscaping standards shall apply to any
surface passenger vehicle parking area of ten (10) spaces or more, or to any
paved vehicular use area 3,500 square feet or larger on the same tax lot or on
contiguous tax lots under common ownership. Any paved vehicular area which is
used specifically as a utility storage lot or a truck loading area shall be
exempt from landscaping requirements within a parking lot.
   C.   Landscaping Within a Parking Lot. 
      1.   Area within a parking lot shall include the paved parking and
maneuvering area, as well as any area within ten (10) feet of any exterior face
of curb surrounding the paved parking and maneuvering area.
      2.   Each interior landscaped area shall be a minimum of six (6) feet
wide, unless the area is added to the required perimeter landscaping. 
      3.   The use of LID best management practices in parking lots is
encouraged whenever site and soil conditions make it feasible.  Such practices
include, but are not limited to, permeable surfacing materials, and integrating
LID stormwater management facilities into the required landscaping areas.
   D.   Computing Minimum Area Required to be Landscaped Within a Parking Lot. 
Minimum area required to be landscaped within a parking lot shall be as
follows:
      1.   Fifteen (15) percent for all residential, industrial, and commercial
zones
      2.   Five (5) percent for the Downtown-Commercial Zone for any off-street
parking spaces provided.
      3.   Ten (10) percent for the Core Commercial (CC) sub-area of the
Downtown Canby Overlay Zone for any off-street parking spaces provided. 
   E.   All parking areas with more than 16 spaces shall include landscape
islands to break up the parking area into rows of not more than 8 contiguous
parking spaces.
      1.   Landscape islands shall have a minimum area of 48 square feet and a
minimum width of six (6) feet.
      2.   Landscape islands shall contain at least one tree that meets the
standards in section (F) below.
      3.   Landscape islands may be counted toward the minimum parking lot
landscaping requirements. 
   F.   Criteria for Trees in Parking Lots.  Deciduous, evergreen and/or shade
trees shall meet the following criteria:
      1.   Reach a mature height of approximately forty (40) feet.  Trees must
be approximately two-inch (2”) caliper at the time of planting.
      2.   Cast moderate to dense shade in summer.
      3.   Be long lived, i.e., live to be over approximately sixty (60) years.
      4.   Do well in an urban environment:
         a.   Be pollution tolerant; and
         b.   Be tolerant of direct and reflected heat.
      5.   Require little maintenance:
         a.   Be mechanically strong;
         b.   Be insect and disease resistant; and
         c.   Require little pruning.
      6.   Be resistant to drought conditions.
      7.   Be barren of fruit production.
   G.   Perimeter of Parking and Loading Areas:
      1.   Screening of parking and loading areas is required. Within three (3)
years of planting, screening shall be of such height and density as to shield
vehicle headlights from head-on visibility.
      2.   In addition, one (1) deciduous, evergreen and/or shade tree shall be
planted every forty (40) feet, minimum, along the required setback of the
vehicular use area.
   H.   Irrigation System or Available Water Supply Required.  Landscaped areas
shall be provided with automatic irrigation systems or a readily available
water supply with at least one (1) outlet located within approximately 150 feet
of all plant materials to be maintained. (Ord.. 890 section 49, 1993; Ord..
848, Part IV, section 6, 1990, Ord. 1296, 2008; Ord.. 1338, 2010)
16.49.130   Revegetation in unlandscaped areas.
The purpose of this section is to ensure erosion protection for those areas
which are not included within the landscape percentage requirements so that
eventually native plants will re-establish themselves, and so that trees will
not be lost due to uncontrolled erosion.
   A.   Replanting.  Where natural vegetation has been removed or damaged
through grading in areas not affected by the landscaping requirement and that
are not to be occupied by structures or other improvements, such areas shall be
replanted with materials approved by the Site and Design Review Board.
   B.   Plant materials shall be watered at intervals sufficient to assure
survival and growth for a minimum of two (2) growing seasons. (Ord. 848, Part
IV, section 7, 1990)
16.49.140   Minor revisions to approved landscaped plans.
Minor revisions (less than 10 percent of the landscaped area) to the approved
landscaped plans shall be reviewed and approved by the City Planner. The City
Planner shall report any minor revisions to the Site and Design Review Board at
the next available Board meeting. (Ord.. 890 section 50, 1993)
16.49.150   Parking lots or paving projects.
All new paving or parking lot projects which create over 2,500 square feet of
impervious surface and any new paving added to existing paving areas which
creates a total of more than 2,500 square feet of impervious surface must meet
City storm drainage requirements, parking lot landscaping standards and the
drainage and access standards of the Oregon Department of Transportation (if
applicable). Applicants for such paving projects must submit an application to
the Planning Department. Application procedures shall be as described in
Chapter 16.89. (Ord.. 1019 section 3, 1999; Ord.. 1080, 2001)
Chapter 16.50
CONDITIONAL USES
Sections:
   
16.50.010   Authorization to grant or deny conditional uses.
   
16.50.020   Application for conditional uses.
   
16.50.030   Public hearing required.
   
16.50.040   Placing conditions on a permit.
   
16.50.050   Notification of action.
   
16.50.060   Standards governing conditional uses.
   
16.50.070   Revocation of conditional use permits.
16.50.010   Authorization to grant or deny conditional uses.
A conditional use listed in this title shall be permitted, altered, or denied
in accordance with the standards and procedures of this chapter. In the case of
a use existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
title as a conditional use, a change in the use, or reduction in lot area, or
an alteration of the structure, shall require the prior issuance of a
conditional use permit. In judging whether or not a conditional use permit
shall be approved or denied, the Planning Commission shall weigh the proposal's
positive and negative features that would result from authorizing the
particular development at the location proposed and to approve such use, shall
find that the following criteria are either met, can be met by observance of
conditions, or are not applicable.
   A.   The proposal will be consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive
Plan and the requirements of this title and other applicable policies of the
city;
   B.   The characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use
considering size, shape, design, location, topography, existence of
improvements and natural features;
   C.   All required public facilities and services exist to adequately meet
the needs of the proposed development;
   D.   The proposed use will not alter the character of the surrounding areas
in a manner which substantially limits, or precludes the use of surrounding
properties for the uses listed as permitted in the zone. (Ord. 740 section
10.3.75 (A), 1984)
16.50.020   Application for conditional uses.
Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter 16.89. (Ord. 899
section 1, 1993; Ord. 740  10.3.75(B), 1984; Ord. 981 section 5, 1997; Ord.
1019 section 15, 1999; Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.50.030   Public hearing required.
Each properly filed application for a conditional use permit shall be
considered by the Planning Commission following a public hearing advertised and
conducted in the manner prescribed in Division VIII. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.75
(C), 1984)
16.50.040   Placing conditions on a permit.
In permitting a new conditional use or the alteration of an existing
conditional use, the Planning Commission may impose conditions which it finds
necessary to avoid a detrimental impact and to otherwise protect the best
interests of the surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions
may include the following:
   A.   Limiting the manner in which the use is conducted, including
restricting the time an activity may take place, and restraints to minimize
such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor;
   B.   Establishing a special yard, other open space or lot area or
dimensions;
   C.   Limiting the height, size or location of a building or other structure;
   D.   Designating the size, number, location, and nature of vehicle access
points;
   E.   Improving the street and/or expanding the rights-of-way;
   F.   Designating the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other
improvement of a parking area or truck loading area;
   G.   Limiting or otherwise designating the number, size, location, height
and lighting signs;
   H.   Limiting the location and intensity of outdoor lighting and requiring
its shielding;
   I.   Requiring diking, screening, landscaping or other facility to protect
adjacent or nearby property and designating standards for its installation and
maintenance;
   J.   Designating the size, height, location and materials for a fence;
   K.   Protecting and preserving existing trees, vegetation, water, resources,
wildlife habitat or other significant natural or open space areas;
   L.   Limiting the number, location, and design of street accesses and
requiring shared access when appropriate;    
   M.   Other conditions to assure that the development complies with standards
and criteria listed in section 16.50.010. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.75 (D), 1984;
Ord. 1019 section 6, 1999)
16.50.050   Notification of action.
The City Planner shall notify the applicant in writing of the action of the
Planning Commission within five days after the decision has been rendered.
(Ord. 740 section 10.3.75(E), 1984)
16.50.060   Standards governing conditional uses.
A conditional use shall ordinarily comply with the standards of the zone for
uses permitted outright, except as specifically modified by the Planning
Commission in granting the conditional use permit, or as otherwise provided as
follows:
   A.   Building Height. The height limitations of any zone may be exceeded by
a conditional use to a maximum height of seventy-five feet; provided that each
yard is increased over the yard requirement by the addition of five feet for
every five feet or fraction thereof of additional height over the maximum
height allowed in the zone.
   B.   Utility Substation or Pumping Station. The minimum lot size of the zone
in which a public utility is to be located may be waived by the Planning
Commission only on finding that the waiver will not result in unacceptable
levels of noise or other detrimental effect on adjacent property. No equipment
storage shall be permitted on the site of such small lots.
   C.   Signs. Signs may be permitted for a conditional use, in keeping with
the nature of the use. The Planning Commission may require the applicant to
submit details of proposed signs to allow for consideration with the use permit
for the structure or use. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.75(F), 1984; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.50.070   Revocation of conditional use permits.
   A.   Automatic Revocation. All conditional use permits shall be
automatically revoked if not exercised within one year from the date of
approval, or such additional time as is specified by the granting body at the
time of approval. Conditional use permits shall not be deemed exercised until
the use of the property permitted by the conditional use permit has actually
commenced or, in the event that such use involves the construction of a
building, that all required permits for said building have been obtained.
   B.   Revocation for Noncompliance. Any conditional use permit may be revoked
by the City Council for noncompliance with conditions set forth in the original
approval, after first holding a public hearing and giving written notice of
such hearing to the grantee.
   C.   Extension of approval.  A one-time extension will be allowed if applied
for no later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the original
approval.  A request for extension must:
      1.   Not change the original application.
      2.   Explain specifically why an extension is needed.
      3.   Be approved by the Planning Commission as a new business item.
      4.   If approved, those with standing on the original application shall
be notified of the extension by mail. Those so noticed may obtain a public
hearing on the extension by filing a request in writing within ten (10) days of
the notice date. The public hearing shall follow the notice requirements and
procedure for conditional use permits. The cost of notification and any
required public hearing must be borne by the applicant.
An extension shall not be granted for more than one (1) year.  (Ord. 740
section 10.8.20(C), 1984; Ord. 955 section 31, 1996; Ord 1237, 2007)
Chapter 16.52
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Sections:
   
16.52.010   Continuation of nonconforming use or structure.
   
16.52.020   Nonconforming structure.
   
16.52.025   Nonconforming sign.
   
16.52.030   Discontinuance of a nonconforming use.
   
16.52.035   Alteration or expansion of dwelling units in C-1 zone.
   
16.52.040   Expansion of nonconforming structure or change of use - application
required.
   
16.52.050   Authorization to grant or deny expansion of nonconforming structure
or change of nonconforming use.
   
16.52.060   Destruction of a nonconforming use or structure.
   
16.52.070   Completion of building. 
16.52.010   Continuation of nonconforming use or structure.
Subject to the provisions of this section, a nonconforming structure or use may
be continued but shall not be altered, changed, or extended except as provided
herein.  Other than those expansions specifically permitted by section
16.52.035, the expansion of nonconforming uses shall not be permitted.  (Ord.
805 section 3 [part], 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.80 (A), 1984 Ord. 1019
section 10, 1999)
16.52.020   Nonconforming structure.
A structure conforming as to use but nonconforming as to height, setback, or
coverage may be altered or extended as follows: 
   A.   If the new or reconstructed area meets all development standards and
code requirements, a nonconforming structure application is not required.
   B.   The Planning Commission may allow existing nonconforming structures to
be reconstructed over existing legally approved building footprints.  Approval
of a nonconforming structure application under this Chapter is required.
   C.   The Planning Commission may allow additions to structures that are
nonconforming as to height or setbacks if the new building area is no more out
of conformance than the existing structure.  For example, an addition to a home
with a reduced side yard setback may be allowed if the addition has the same
reduced side year setback or is less out of conformance.  Approval of a
nonconforming structure application under this Chapter is required.  This
Chapter may not be used to allow additions further out of conformance as to
building height or setbacks than existing structures.
   D.   The Planning Commission may allow additions to structures that are
nonconforming as to coverage requirements.  Approval of a nonconforming
structure application under this Chapter is required.  (Ord. 805 section 3
[part], 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.80(B), 1984; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.52.025   Nonconforming sign.
   A.   A nonconforming sign lawfully existed prior to the adoption of
applicable zoning requirements with which it does not comply.  Except, however,
signs shall not be considered to be nonconforming where the sign, by reason of
its size, location, construction, or lack of maintenance creates a public
hazard or nuisance.  In the case of such public hazard or nuisance, the city
may begin immediate abatement procedures, as provided in this chapter and other
city ordinances.
   B.   Relocation, replacement, structural alteration or expansion of a
nonconforming sign is subject to the same limitations, application procedures,
and requirements set forth in this Chapter for other nonconforming structures. 
Except approval of a nonconforming structure application is not required for
the following:
      1.   Normal repair and maintenance, where the cost to repair the sign
does not exceed 60 percent of the replacement cost of the sign using new
materials, as determined by the Building Official.
      2.   Change of sign copy.
      3.   Structural alteration when the alteration is necessary for
structural safety, as determined by the Building Official.
      4.   A nonconforming sign may be reconstructed if it is required to be
temporarily removed to accommodate construction or repair of public utilities
or public works, and the sign reconstruction is completed within 90 days after
the completion of the public utilities or public works construction activity. 
(Ord. 913 section 1[part], 1994; Ord. 830 section 13[part], 1989; Ord. 1299,
2008)
16.52.030   Discontinuance of a nonconforming use.
   A.   If a nonconforming use involving a structure is discontinued from use
for a period of one year, further use of the property shall be as a conforming
use.
   B.   If a nonconforming use not involving a structure is discontinued for a
period of six months, further use of the property shall be for a conforming
use. (Ord. 805 section 3 [part], 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.80(C), 1984)
16.52.035   Alteration or expansion of dwelling units in C-1 zone.
The alteration or expansion of dwelling units in the C-1 zone shall be
permitted, subject to the specific development standards requirements of that
zone. A nonconforming use application is not required.  (Ord. 805 section 3
[part], 1987; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.52.040   Expansion of nonconforming structure or change of use – application
required.
Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter 16.89. (Ord. 805
section 3 [part], 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.80(D), 1984; Ord. 981 section 6,
1997; Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.52.050   Authorization to grant or deny expansion of nonconforming structure
or change of nonconforming use. Authorization does not include expansion of
existing nonconforming uses.
An expansion of a nonconforming structure or a change from one nonconforming
use to another shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied in
accordance with the standards and procedures of this section. In judging
whether or not such applications shall be approved or denied, staff and the
Planning Commission shall weigh the proposal's positive and negative features
and the public convenience or necessity to be served against any adverse
condition that would result from authorizing the particular development at the
location proposed and, to approve such expansion or change shall find that the
following criteria are either met, can be met by observation of conditions, or
are not applicable:
   A.   The proposal will be consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive
Plan and the requirements of the Land Development and Planning Ordinance, other
than those specific zoning standards to which the use or structure is
nonconforming.
   B.   The characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use
considering size, shape, design, location, topography, existence of
improvements and natural features.
   C.   All required public facilities and services exist to adequately meet
the needs of the proposed development.
   D.   The proposed use will not alter the character of the surrounding area
in a manner which substantially limits, or precludes the use of surrounding
properties for the uses listed as permitted in the zone.
   E.   In considering whether to approve a change in use, the city shall
compare the following characteristics of the historical use of the property
with that proposed by the applicant in order to assure that the change will not
constitute an expansion or intensification of the nonconforming use:
      1.   Traffic, including both volume and type (car, truck, foot, etc.);
      2.   Noise;
      3.   Days and hours of operation;
      4.   Physical appearance;
      5.   Other environmental considerations (dust, vibration, glare, etc.);
      6.   Type and size of equipment used.
(Ord. 805 section 3 [part], 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.80 (E), 1984; Ord.
1080, 2001; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.52.060   Destruction of a nonconforming use or structure.
If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is
destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding eighty percent of the cost of
replacement of the structure using new materials, as determined by the Building
Official, the property owner may apply to the Planning Commission to restore
the nonconforming use or structure. In judging whether or not the restoration
of a nonconforming use shall be approved or denied, the Planning Commission
shall weigh the proposal's positive and negative features and the public
convenience or necessity to be served against adverse conditions that would
result from authorizing the particular restoration at the location proposed. In
order to approve such restorations, the Planning Commission shall find that the
criteria as set forth in section 16.52.050 are met, can be met by observance of
conditions, or are not applicable. (Ord. 805 section 3 [part], 1987; Ord. 740
section 10.3.80(F), 1984)
16.52.070   Completion of building.
Nothing contained in this title shall require any change in the plans,
alteration, construction or designated use of a building upon which
construction work has lawfully commenced prior to the adoption of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, except that if the designated use will be
nonconforming it shall, for the purpose of section 16.52.030, be a discontinued
use if not in operation within one year of the date of issuance of the building
permit. (Ord. 805 section 3 [part), 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.80(G), 1984)
Chapter 16.53
VARIANCES
Sections:
   
16.53.010   Minor Variances.
   
16.53.015   Minor Sign Variance.
   
16.53.020   Major Variances.
   
16.53.030   Revocation of Variances.
16.53.010   Minor Variances.
   A. The following variances shall be reviewed using a Type II procedure (see
Chapter 16.89), using the approval criteria in subsection B, below.
Applications shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Department.
      1.   Setbacks: up to a ten percent (10%) reduction to the setbacks
required in the zone.
   B.   A minor variance may be granted if the applicant demonstrates
compliance with all of the following criteria, if applicable:
      1.   The variance is required due to the lot configuration or other
physical conditions of the site;
      2.   The variance is proposed in order to preserve trees or will not
result in the removal of significant natural resources, including trees;
      3.   The variance will not reduce allowable lot size, violate landscaping
requirements, or result in a violation of other chapters or sections of this
ordinance; and
      4.   The variance will not be materially detrimental to other property
within the same vicinity.(Ord. 1080, 2000)
16.53.015   Minor Sign Variance.
   A.   Authorization.  The City Planner may authorize a Minor Variance from
the requirements of this title for signage where variation from the strict
application of the regulations of this title is warranted by reason of
exceptional circumstances and specified conditions.  In granting a Minor Sign
Variance, the City Planner may attach conditions which he finds necessary to
protect the welfare of the City and otherwise achieve the purposes of this
title.
   B.   Procedure.  The following Minor Sign Variance requests shall be
reviewed using a Type II procedure as set forth for minor variances in Chapter
16.89.  Application shall be made on forms provided by the Planning
Department.  Following review, a Minor Sign Variance request shall be approved,
approved with conditions, or denied, based upon findings of conformance with
the criteria set forth in subsection C.
      1.   Up to a 10 percent variance from a single numeric standard
regulating the location, height, or size of a sign.
      2.   Variance from more than one numeric standard regulating the
location, height, or size of a sign, where the sum of all the variance
percentages does not exceed ten.
   C.   Standards and Criteria.  A Minor Sign Variance may be granted if the
applicant demonstrates all of the following criteria are met:
      1.   The variance is required due to the lot configuration or other
physical conditions of the site;
      2.   The variance is proposed in order to preserve trees, or will not
result in the removal of significant natural resources, including trees;
      3.    The variance will not reduce allowable lot size, violate
landscaping requirements, or result in a violation of other chapters or
sections of this ordinance; and
      4.   The variance will no be materially detrimental to other property
within the same vicinity.
   D.   Major Variance.  A request for a variance in excess of the limitations
set forth in 16.53.015.B shall be reviewed using a Type III procedure as set
forth for major variances in this Chapter and in Chapter 16.89. (Ord. 1299,
2008; Ord. 1339 2010)
16.53.020   Major Variances.
These provisions are intended to prescribe procedures which allow variations
from the strict application of the regulations of this title, by reason of
exceptional circumstances and other specified conditions:
   A.   Authorization.  The commission may authorize variances from the
requirements of this title, other than Division VII, where it can be shown
that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of
property, the literal interpretation of the regulations would cause an undue or
unnecessary hardship, except that no variance shall be granted to allow the use
of property for purposes not authorized within the district in which the
proposed use would be located. In granting a variance, the commission may
attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the
surrounding property or neighborhood and to otherwise achieve the purpose of
this title.
   B.   Standards and Criteria.  A variance may be granted only upon
determination that all of the following conditions are present:
      1.   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property
which do not apply generally to other properties in the city and within the
same zone. These exceptional or extraordinary circumstances result from tract
size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the owners of the
property have no control. Actions of previous owners do not constitute other
exceptional or extraordinary circumstances; and
      2.   The variance is necessary to assure that the applicant maintains
substantially the same property rights as are possessed by the owners of other
property in the city and within the same zone; and
      3.   Granting of this variance will not be materially detrimental to the
intent or purposes of the city's Comprehensive Plan or the Land Development and
Planning Ordinance; and
      4.   Granting of this variance will not be materially detrimental to
other property within the same vicinity; and
      5.   The variance requested is the minimum variance which will alleviate
the hardship; and
      6.   The exceptional or unique conditions of the property which
necessitate the issuance of a variance were not caused by the applicant, or the
applicant's employees or relatives.
   C.   Variance to Requirements of Hazard Overlay (H) Zone.  Variances may be
issued for non-residential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a
lesser degree of flood proofing than water-tight or dry-flood proofing, where
it can be determined that such action will have a low damage potential,
complies with all other variance criteria, and otherwise meets the requirements
of the Hazard Overlay Zone. (Ord.805 section 4, 1987; Ord. 804 section 4(A),
1987; Ord. 740 section 10.8.50, 1984; Ord. 981 section 14, 1997; Renum. and
mod. by Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.53.030   Revocation of variances.
   A.   Automatic Revocation. All variances shall be automatically revoked if
not exercised within one year from the date of approval, or such additional
time as is specified by the granting body at the time of approval. Variances
shall not be deemed exercised until the use of the property permitted by the
variance has actually commenced or, in the event that such use involves
construction, that all required permits for said construction have been
obtained.
   B.   Revocation for Noncompliance. Any major variance may be revoked by the
City Council for noncompliance with conditions set forth in the original
approval, after first holding a public hearing and giving written notice of
such hearing to the grantee.
   C.   Extension of approval.  A one-time extension will be allowed if applied
for no later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the original
approval.  A request for extension must:
      1.   Not change the original application.
      2.   Explain specifically why an extension is needed.
      3.   A minor variance or minor sign variance extension shall be approved
by the City Planner.  A major variance extension shall be approved by the
Planning Commission as a new business item.
      4.   If approved, those with standing on the original application shall
be notified of the extension by mail. Those so noticed may obtain a public
hearing on the extension by filing a request in writing within ten (10) days of
the notice date. The public hearing shall follow the notice requirements and
procedure for major variances. The cost of notification and any required public
hearing must be borne by the applicant.
      5.   An extension shall not be granted for more than one (1) year.  (Ord.
740 section 10.8.20(C), 1984; Ord. 955 section 31, 1996; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord.
1299, 2008)
Chapter 16.54
AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP
Sections:
   
16.54.010   Authorization to initiate amendments.
   
16.54.020   Application and fee.
   
16.54.030   Public hearing on amendment.
   
16.54.040   Standards and criteria.
   
16.54.060   Improvement conditions.
   
16.54.070   Record of amendments.
16.54.010   Authorization to initiate amendments.
An amendment to the zoning map may be initiated by the City Council, by the
Planning Commission, or by application of the property owner or his authorized
agent.  The Planning Commission shall, within forty days after closing the
hearing, recommend to the City Council, approval, disapproval or modification
of the proposed amendment.  (Ord. 740 section 10.3.45 (A), 1984)
16.54.020   Application and fee.
Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter 16.89. (Ord. 740
section 10.3.85(B), 1984; Ord. 981 section 7, 1997; Ord. 1019 section 13, 1999;
Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.54.030   Public hearing on amendment.
Before taking final action on a proposed amendment, the Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing on the amendment following the requirements for
advertising and conduct of hearing prescribed in Division VIII.  (Ord. 740
section 10.3.85(C), 1984)
16.54.040   Standards and criteria.
In judging whether or not the zoning map should be amended or changed, the
Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following criteria:
   A.   The Comprehensive Plan of the city, giving special attention to Policy
6 of the land use element and implementation measures therefore, and the plans
and policies of the county, state and local districts in order to preserve
functions and local aspects of land conservation and development;
   B.   Whether all required public facilities and services exist or will be
provided concurrent with development to adequately meet the needs of any use or
development which would be permitted by the new zoning designation.  (Ord. 749
section 1(B), 1984; Ord.740 section 10.3.85(D), 1984; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.54.050
(Ord. 740 section 10.3.85(E), 1984
15.54.060   Improvement conditions.
   A.   In acting on an application for a zone change, the Planning Commission
may recommend and the City Council may impose conditions to be met by the
proponents of the change before the proposed change takes effect.  Such
conditions shall be limited to improvements or physical changes to the property
which are directly related to the health, safety or general welfare of those in
the area.  Further, such conditions shall be limited to improvements which
clearly relate to and benefit the area of the proposed zone change.  Allowable
conditions of approval may include, but are not necessarily limited to:
      1.   Street and sidewalk construction or improvements;
      2.   Extension of water, sewer, or other forms of utility lines;
      3.   Installation of fire hydrants.
   B.   The city will not use the imposition of improvement conditions as a
means of preventing planned development, and will consider the potential impact
of the costs or required improvements on needed housing.  The Planning
Commission and City Council will assure that the required improvements will not
reduce housing densities below those anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 749 section 1(C), 1984: Ord. 740 section 10.3.85 (F). 1984)
16.54.070   Record of amendments.
The City Planner shall maintain a record of amendments to the zoning map in a
form convenient for use of the public.  (Ord. 749 section 10.85 (G), 1984)
Division IV. - LAND DIVISION REGULATION
Chapter 16.56
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
16.56.010   Purpose.
   
16.56.020   Scope of regulations.
   
16.56.030   Conformance.
   
16.56.040   Delegation of authority.
   
16.56.050   Application required.
   
16.56.060   Applicability of regulations.
16.56.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this division is to define subdivision, partitions and
related terms; to establish minimum requirements and standards necessary for
efficient, safe, and attractive land division and development consistent with
the physical characteristics of the city; to prescribe form, content, and
procedures to be followed in the development and approval of land divisions and
related maps and plats and to designate those authorized to give such approval;
and to provide penalties and notice of violations. Authorization and minimum
standards for this division are provided for by Oregon Revised Statutes
Chapters 92 and 227.
   B.   Land division is the most important factor in establishing the physical
character of a growing community. If improperly designed and executed, it
wastes the intrinsic value of the land and can become a costly burden to the
community. It is hoped that these regulations and procedures will encourage the
well-planned division of land while preventing land division with high future
costs to those who will occupy the land, their neighbors, and the city as a
whole.  It is further the purpose of this division:
      1.   To ensure that the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare be given due consideration in the division and development of land;
      2.   To help implement the Comprehensive Plan and elements thereof;
      3.     To provide a means to emphasize environmental protection and
preservation of the historical and natural assets of the city by encouraging
orderly development relating to location, number, design and distribution of
lots and parcels;
      4.   To minimize, by proper design and development, the danger to life
and property caused by hazards of fire, flood, soil erosion and land slippage;
      5.   To provide lots, parcels, and development sites of a sufficient
shape, size, and character for the purpose for which they will be used;
      6.   To provide the establishment of adequate water supply, sewage
disposal, surface water drainage and other utilities and facilities as needed
for the public health, safety and convenience;
      7.   To ensure adequate provisions for transportation, including roads,
bicycle ways and pedestrian ways which take into consideration anticipated
usage, safety factors, and impact on the neighboring area;
      8.   To ensure that the costs of developing roads, utilities and public
areas serving new developments will be substantially absorbed by the benefited
persons as opposed to the citizens of the city at large.
      9.   To provide adequate light, air, open space and recreational areas,
and to encourage better techniques and innovations in the arrangement of
building sites and/or lots and parcels. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.10(A), 1984)
16.56.020   Scope of regulations.
Subdivision plats and minor and major partition maps shall be reviewed by the
commission in accordance with these regulations. A person desiring to divide
land in any manner which is governed by these regulations shall submit
tentative plans and final documents for approval as provided in these rules and
the state law.  (Ord. 740 section 10.4.10(B), 1984)
16.56.030   Conformance.
   A.   Comprehensive Plan. A subdivision or partition shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan. A determination of such conformity shall be based upon
consideration of all applicable portions of the Comprehensive Plan and shall
not be based solely upon a review of the land use map.
   B.   Land Development and Planning Ordinance. A land division shall be
subject to all applicable requirements of other sections of this title. Where
an applicant seeks the approval of any division which requires a change in
zoning, the applicant may be required to complete the rezoning process prior to
submittal of an application for property division.
   C.   Health, Safety, and Sanitation. A subdivision or partition shall
conform to all applicable state, county and city regulations regarding health,
safety and sanitation.  The county will not issue any permits for on-site
sewage disposal systems for any lot or parcel created in violation of these
regulations, nor for the remainder of the parent parcel from which lots or
parcels have been illegally created, unless and until such violation has been
rectified and all legal requirements met.
   D.   Building. Structures and buildings in any property division shall
conform with applicable codes and regulations regarding building. The City
Building Official shall not allow the issuance of a building permit on any lot
or parcel created, subdivided or partitioned in violation of these
requirements. No building permit shall be issued for the remainder of the
parent parcel, from which any lots or parcels have been created in violation of
this title, unless and until such violation has been rectified and all legal
requirements met.
   E.   Streets and Roads. A property division shall conform to all applicable
city ordinances or policies pertaining to streets, roads, or access. (Ord. 740
section 10.4.10(C), 1984)
16.56.040   Delegation of authority.
The commission is delegated all lawful powers and functions given the City
Council under Oregon Revised Statues Chapter 92 with respect to consideration,
requirements and approvals of all tentative maps and plats for subdivisions and
partitions other than the authority to accept land for dedication to the
public. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.10(D), 1984)
16.56.050   Application required.
The following land use actions shall require the filing of an appropriate
application and completion of the proper procedures established therefore in
this division:
   A.   Minor partitions;
   B.   Major partitions;
   C.   Subdivisions (including planned unit developments which are also
governed by the requirements of Division V);
   D.   Lot line adjustments. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.10 (B), 1984)
16.56.060   Applicability of regulations.
The regulations of this division apply to all portions of the city as it now
exists or may hereafter be altered. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.10(F), 1984)
Chapter 16.58
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
Sections:
   
16.58.010   Designated.
   
16.58.020   Application.
   
16.58.030   Review by Planner and Engineer.
   
16.58.040   Approval procedure – City Planner responsibility.
   
16.58.050   Approval procedure – Commission responsibility.
   
16.58.060   City liability - compliance.
16.58.010   Designated.
The relocations of one or more property lines between lots or parcels where no
additional lots or parcels will result constitutes a lot line adjustment rather
than a partition or subdivision. The procedure to be followed in such cases is
as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.20 [part], 1984)
16.58.020   Application.
Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter 16.89. (Ord. 740
section 10.4.20(A), 1984; Ord. 981 section 8, 1997; Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.58.030   Review by Planner and Engineer.
The City Planner and City Engineer shall review the proposed lot line
adjustment and shall determine whether the following criteria have been met:
   A.   Each of the remaining parcels and any structures located thereon shall
be in full compliance with all regulations of this title, including the setback
requirements of Division III. Except, however, that lot line adjustments are
permitted on nonconforming lots and lots with nonconforming structures provided
that the nonconforming lots and structures will be no less in conformity as a
result of the lot line adjustment.
   B.   No new lots or parcels will be created as a result of the lot line
adjustment without receiving approval as a partition or subdivision.
   C.   If the City Planner or city engineer deems it necessary to assure the
accuracy of recorded information, a survey may be required of the applicant. 
Such a survey will be at the applicant's cost.
   D.   Lot line adjustments shall not be permitted where the result will be
the creation of additional building sites in known hazardous locations or where
the appropriate development or extension of public facilities will be impaired
as a result. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.20(B), 1984)
16.58.040   Approval procedure – City Planner responsibility.
The City Planner is authorized to approve lot line adjustments in compliance
with the requirements of section 16.58.030. In any case where the City Planner
determines that the requirements of section 16.58.030 cannot or may not be met,
the application shall be scheduled for the consideration of the commission,
with a recommendation from staff. In any case where the City Planner determines
that a lot line adjustment will significantly alter the design and appropriate
development of a subdivision or partition which has previously been approved by
the city or other nearby property, the City Planner shall schedule the
application for consideration by the commission. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.20(C),
1984)
16.58.050   Approval procedure – Commission responsibility.
The commission shall review the information submitted and shall make a decision
approving, modifying or denying the proposal so as to assure compliance with
the requirements of the Land Development and Planning Ordinance. The applicant
shall be notified in writing of the decision of the commission and the reasons
therefore. One copy of the proposed plan shall be returned to the applicant
labeled  “approved,”  “denied,”  or  “modified.”  An additional copy shall be
kept on file for future reference. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.20(D), 1984)
16.58.060   City liability - compliance.
In acting on an application for lot line adjustment, the city assumes no
liability for the applicant's actions. Applicants for lot line adjustments
shall bear full responsibility for compliance with all applicable state and
local regulations and for the following:
   A.   Any public or private easements to be altered as a result of the lot
line adjustment shall require the prior approval of the agency or individual
having right to such easements.
   B.   The county assessor shall be notified that the lot line adjustment is
not to result in the creation of an additional tax lot. If a separate tax lot
is created as a result, the city shall indicate that it is not considered to be
a separately saleable or developable building site and may record a statement
to that effect with the county recorder.
   C.   Approval of all lienholders having an interest in properties affected
by a lot line adjustment shall be obtained.
   D.   Approval of the Lot Line adjustment shall be null and void if the new
deed descriptions for the properties involved is not recorded with Clackamas
County within one (1) year of the final approval.
   E.   The Planning Director may approve a single one-year extension to the
original one-year period. Applicants must file a request for such extension in
writing, stating the reasons the request is needed. The Planning Director shall
review such requests and may issue the extension after reviewing any changes
that may have been made to the text of this title and any other pertinent
factors, including public comment on the original application.  (Ord. 740
section 10.4.20(E), 1984; Ord. 955 section 27, 1996; Ord. 1080, 2001)
Chapter 16.60
PARTITIONS
Sections:
   
16.60.010   Filing procedures
   
16.60.020   Standards and criteria
   
16.60.030   Partitions
   
16.60.040   Flag lots
   
16.60.050   Planning Director action
   
16.60.060   Final procedures and recordation
   
16.60.070   Public hearing required for appeal process
16.60.010   Filing procedures.
Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter 16.89. (Ord. 740
section 10.4.30(A), 1984; Ord. 981 section 9, 1997; Ord. 1019 section 17, 1999;
Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.60.020   Standards and criteria.
The same improvements shall be installed to serve each building site of a
partition as is required of a subdivision, and the same basic design standards
shall apply.  If the improvements are not constructed or installed prior to the
filing of the signed partition plat with the county, they shall be guaranteed
in a manner approved by the City Attorney.  However, if the Planning Director
finds that the nature of development in the vicinity of the partition makes
installation of some improvements unreasonable, the Planning Director shall
accept those improvements.  In lieu of accepting an improvement, the Planning
Director may recommend that the improvement be installed in the area under
special assessment financing or other facility extension policies of the city.
(Ord. 890 section 51, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.4.30(B) [part], 1984; Ord.
1514, 2019)
16.60.030   Partitions.
Partition means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels
within the calendar year. An Application for a partition shall be evaluated
based upon the following standards and criteria:
   A.   Conformance with the text and applicable maps of the Comprehensive
Plan;
   B.   Conformance with all other applicable requirements of the Land
Development and Planning Ordinance;
   C.   The overall design and arrangement of parcels shall be functional and
shall adequately provide building sites, utility easements, and access
facilities deemed necessary for the development of the subject property without
unduly hindering the use or development of adjacent properties;
   D.   No partitioning shall be allowed where the sole means of access is by
private road, unless it is found that adequate assurance has been provided for
year-round maintenance sufficient to allow for unhindered use by emergency
vehicles, and unless it is found that the construction of a street to city
standards is not necessary to insure safe and efficient access to the parcels;
   E.   It must be demonstrated that all required public facilities and
services are available, or will become available through the development, to
adequately meet the needs of the proposed land division.  (Ord. 890 section 52,
1993; Ord. 740 section 10.4.30(B)(2), 1984; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.60.040   Flag Lots
Flag Lots or Panhandle-shaped Lots. The commission may allow the creation of
flag lots provided that the following standards are met:
   A.   Not more than one flag lot shall be created to the rear of any
conventional lot and having frontage on the same street unless it is found that
access will be adequate and that multiple flag lots are the only reasonable
method to allow for development of the site. Every flag lot shall have access
to a public street.
   B.   The access strip is to be a minimum of twenty feet in width and shall
be paved for its full width from its connection with the public street to the
main body of the lot. Except, however, that the width requirement may be
reduced to twelve feet, for accessing a single flag lot, where the total length
of the access strip does not exceed one hundred feet. Access strips not less
than ten feet in width may be permitted where two such drives abut and are
provided with reciprocal easements for use. For drives accessing more than two
flag lots, the access strip shall be a minimum of twenty feet with reciprocal
access and maintenance agreements for all lots.
   C.   For residential flag lots, a minimum building setback of five feet from
the access strip shall be maintained where such buildings exist prior to the
creation of the flag lot.
   D.   Design and locations of buildings on flag lots shall be such that
normal traffic will have sufficient area to turn around, rather than
necessitating backing motions down the access strip. The commission may
establish special setback requirements at the time of approving the creation of
flag lots.   
   E.   Flag lots shall not be permitted when the result would be to increase
the number of properties requiring direct and individual access connections to
the State Highway System or other arterials.
   F.   The area of a panhandle shaped or flag lot shall be considered to be
the rear or buildable portion of the lot and shall not include the driveway or
access strip.
   G.   For the purposes of defining setbacks, flag lots shall have three side
yards and one yard of 20 feet on the garage side of the dwelling. (Ord. 1514,
2019) 
16.60.050   Planning Directoraction
   A.   Tentative maps shall be submitted to the Planning Director for review
and determination that the proposal will be compatible with the Comprehensive
Plan and the requirements of the Land Development and Planning Ordinance.  The
Planning Director may require such dedication of land easements and may specify
such conditions or modifications to the tentative map as are deemed necessary
to carry out the Comprehensive Plan.  In no event, however, shall the Planning
Director require greater dedications or conditions than would be required if
the parcel were subdivided. For residentially zoned land, the Planning Director
shall require, for newly created lots adjacent to existing residential
development, that homes built on such lots be designated on the plat or
included in the deed restrictions as “Infill Homes” as defined by 16.04.255 and
therefore subject to any or all of the requirements of 16.21.050 Infill Homes. 
The Planning Director may modify the minimum lot coverage and/or maximum height
standard if the applicant can demonstrate that 50% or more of adjacent lots
exceed these standards.
   B.   Upon action by the Planning Director the applicant shall be notified in
writing of the decision reached and the steps which must be taken before the
parcels can be transferred or utilized for separate development.
   C.   One copy of the tentative map, clearly marked approved, denied or
modified shall be retained in an appropriate file and one copy of same returned
to the applicant.  (Ord. 740 section 10.4.30(C), 1984; Ord. 1107, 2002; Ord.
1514, 2019)
16.60.060   Final procedures and recordation
   A.   Following the action of the city in approving or conditionally
approving a tentative map for a partition, the applicant shall be responsible
for the completion of all required improvements, or the posting of adequate
assurances in lieu thereof, to the satisfaction of the city engineer prior to
the transfer of title of any of the parcels involved.
   B.   Recordation of an accurate survey map, prepared by a registered
engineer or licensed surveyor, must be completed within two years of the
approval of the tentative map.  One copy of the recorded survey map shall be
filed with the City Planner for appropriate record keeping.
   C.   The applicant shall bear full responsibility for compliance with
applicable state and city regulations regarding the recordation of documents
and subsequent transfer of ownership.
   D.   The Planning Director may approve a single one-year extension to the
original two year period. Applicants must file a request for such extension in
writing, stating the reasons the request is needed. The Planning Director shall
review such requests and may issue the extension after reviewing any changes
that may have been made to the text of this title and any other pertinent
factors, including public comment on the original application.  (Ord. 740
section 10.4.30(D), 1984; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.60.070   Public hearing required for appeal process
Each properly that filed application for an appeal of a Planning Director’s
partition application decision shall be considered by the Planning Commission
following a public hearing advertised and conducted in the manner prescribed in
Division VIII. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.75 (C), 1984; Ord. 1514, 2019)
Chapter 16.62
SUBDIVISIONS - APPLICATIONS
Sections:
   
16.62.010   Filing procedures.
   
16.62.020   Standards and criteria.
16.62.010   Filing procedures.
   A.   Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter 16.89.  (Ord.
899 section 3, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(A), 1984; Ord. 981 section 10,
1997; Ord. 1019 section 16, 1999; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1237, 2007)
16.62.020   Standards and criteria.
Applications for a subdivision shall be evaluated based upon the following
standards and criteria:
   A.   Conformance with other applicable requirements of the Land Development
and Planning Ordinance;
   B.   The overall design and arrangement of lots shall be functional and
shall adequately provide building sites, utility easements, and access
facilities deemed necessary for the development of the subject property without
unduly hindering the use or development of adjacent properties;
   C.   Subdivision design and layout shall incorporate Low Impact Development
techniques where possible to achieve the following:
      1.   Manage stormwater through a land development strategy that
emphasizes conservation and use of onsite natural features integrated with
engineered stormwater controls to more closely mimic predevelopment hydrologic
conditions.
      2.   Encourage creative and coordinated site planning, the conservation
of natural conditions and features, the use of appropriate new technologies and
techniques, and the efficient layout of open space, streets, utility networks
and other publi8c improvements.
      3.   Minimize impervious surfaces.
      4.   Encourage the creation or preservation of native vegetation and
permanent open space.
      5.   Clustering of residential dwellings where appropriate to achieve (1-
4) above.  The arrangement of clustered dwellings shall be designed to avoid
linear development patterns.
   D.   It must be demonstrated that all required public facilities and
services are available, or will become available through the development, to
adequately meet the needs of the proposed land division. 
   E.   The layout of subdivision streets, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways
supports the objectives of the Safe Routes to Schools Program by providing safe
and efficient walking and bicycling routes within the subdivision and between
the subdivision and all schools within a one-mile radius.  During review of a
subdivision application, city staff will coordinate with the appropriate school
district representative to ensure safe routes to schools are incorporated into
the subdivision design to the greatest extent possible.  (Ord. 890 section 53,
1993; Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(B), 1984; Ord. 1338, 2010)
   F.   A Traffic Impact Study (TIS) may be required in accordance with Section
16.08.150. (Ord. 1340, 2011)
Chapter 16.64
SUBDIVISIONS – DESIGN STANDARDS
Sections:
   
16.64.010   Streets.
   
16.64.015   Access.
   
16.64.020   Blocks.
   
16.64.030   Easements.
   
16.64.040   Lots.
   
16.64.050   Public open spaces.
   
16.64.060   Grading of building sites.
   
16.64.070   Improvements.
   
16.64.080   Low Impact Development Incentives
16.64.010   Streets.
   A.   Generally.  The location, width and grade of streets shall be
considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land
to be served by the streets.  The street system shall assure an adequate
traffic circulation pattern with intersection angles, grades, tangents, and
curves appropriate for the traffic to be carried.  Where location is not shown
in a development plan, the arrangement of streets shall either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas; or
      2.   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other
conditions make continuance of conformance to existing street patterns
impractical;
      3.   Minimum right-of-way and roadway width shall follow the requirements
of the Canby Public Works Design Standards;
      4.   Consider opportunities to incrementally extend and connect local
streets to provide for safe and convenient bike and pedestrian circulation.
   B.   Permeable Surfaces.  Permeable surfacing alternatives and on-site
stormwater management facilities, are encouraged for street improvements. 
Permeable surfacing and LID stormwater management facilities shall be
constructed in accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards and the
manufacturer’s recommendations.  Permeable surfacing includes, but is no
limited to:  paving blocks, turf block, pervious concrete, porous asphalt, and
other similar approved materials.  Alternative surfacing methods may be
approved for public and private roads, road shoulders, pedestrian ways,
driveways, and easement service roads unless site constraints make use of such
materials detrimental to water quality.  Use of permeable surfacing methods
shall meet the imposed load requirements for fire apparatus, and shall be
subject to review and approval by the Canby Public Works Department.
   C.   Reserve Strips.  Reserve strips or street plugs controlling the access
to streets will not be approved unless such strips are necessary for the
protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights, or both,
and in no case unless the control and disposal of the land composing such
strips is placed within the jurisdiction of the city, under conditions approved
by the commission.
   D.   Alignment. All streets other than minor streets or cul-de-sacs, shall,
as far as possible, be in alignment with the existing streets by continuations
of the center lines thereof.  Jogs creating "T" intersections shall have
centerline offsets of not less than one hundred fifty feet, unless it is found
that community benefits of such an alignment outweigh its disadvantages.
   E.   Future Extension of Streets.  Where a subdivision adjoins unplatted
acreage, streets which in the opinion of the commission should be continued in
the event of the subdivision of the acreage, will be required to be provided
through to the boundary lines of the tract.  Reserve strips, street plugs and
temporary turnaround areas may be required to preserve the objectives of street
extensions.  Reserve strips and street plugs shall be deeded to the city prior
to final plat approval.  The Planning Commission may require that the costs of
title insurance and recordation fees, if any, for such areas be borne by the
subdivider.  If, in the opinion of the city engineer, a traffic pedestrian, or
safety hazard temporarily exists by the construction of a dead-end street, he
may direct that a barricade of adequate design be installed at the developer's
expense as one of the required improvement items for the subdivision.
   F.   Intersection Angles.  Streets shall intersect one another at an angle
as near to a right angle as possible, and no intersections of streets at angles
of less than thirty degrees will be approved unless necessitated by topographic
conditions.  When intersections of other than ninety degrees are unavoidable,
the right-of-way lines along the acute angle shall have a minimum corner radius
of twelve feet.  All right-of-way lines at intersections with arterial streets
shall have a corner radius of not less than twelve feet.
   G.   Existing Streets. Whenever existing streets, adjacent to or within a
tract, are of inadequate width, dedication of additional right-of-way shall be
provided at the time of subdivision.
   H.   Half Streets. Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be
approved where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision, when
in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and when the
commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other
half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Whenever a half street is
adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be
platted within such tract. Reserve strips, street plugs, special signs and
barricades may be required to preserve the objectives of half streets.
   I.   Cul-de-sacs.  A cul-de-sac shall only be allowed when environmental or
topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with
other standards in this code preclude street extension and through
circulation.  When cul-de-sacs are provided, all of the following shall be met:
      1.   The cul-de-sac shall not exceed a length of 400 feet.  Length of the
cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline of the roadway from the near
side of the intersecting street to the farthest point of the cul-de-sac;
      2.   The cul-de-sac shall be designed in accordance with the Canby Public
Works Design Standards.
      3.   The cul-de-sac may have a vegetated center island that will serve to
treat stormwater runoff generated by the cul-de-sac.  Specifications for cul-
de-sac design are located in the Public Works Design Standards.
      4.   The cul-de-sac shall provide a pedestrian connection between it and
adjacent streets, access ways, parks, or other right-of-way.  Such pedestrian
ways shall conform to Section
16.64.030(C).
   J.   Marginal Access Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, the commission may require marginal
access streets, through lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained in
a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, or such other treatment
as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
   K.   Alleys.
      1.   Alleys shall be provided to commercial and industrial districts,
unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading
facilities are made as approved by the commission.
      2.   Alleys shall be provided within residential subdivisions when
streets are designed to meet the narrow “green” street standards in the Canby
Public Works Design Standards.  Visitor parking areas may be required by the
city to mitigate the lack of on-street parking.
      3.   When alleys are provided as part of a new residential subdivision,
streets shall be designed in accordance with the narrow “green” street
standards in the Canby Public Works Design Standards.  Visitor parking areas
may be required by the city to mitigate the lack of on-street parking.
      4.   Alley intersection corners shall have a minimum radius of ten feet.
   L.   Street Names. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the name of existing streets except for extensions of existing
streets. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in
the city and the surrounding area and shall be subject to the approval of the
commission.
   M.   Planting Easements.  The Planning Commission may require additional
easements for planting street trees or shrubs.
   N.   Grades and Curbs. Grades shall not exceed seven percent on arterials,
ten percent on collector streets, or fifteen percent on any other street. In
flat areas allowance shall be made for finished street grades having a minimum
slope of .5 percent. Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than three
hundred feet on major arterials, two hundred feet on secondary arterials, or
one hundred feet on other streets, unless specifically approved by the City,
and shall be to an even ten feet.
   O.   Streets Adjacent to Highway 99-E or Railroad Right-of-Way. Wherever the
proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or
Highway 99-E, provisions may be required for a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the land between the streets and the railroad or Highway 99-
E. The distances shall be determined with due consideration of cross streets at
a minimum distance required for approach grades to a future grade separation
and to provide sufficient depth to allow screen planting along the railroad
right-of-way.
   P.   Private streets created within a new subdivision or partition shall be
designated as a separate “tract” on the submitted plat map. (Ord. 740 section
10.4.40(C)(1), 1984; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338,
2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.64.015   Access
   A.   Any application that involves access to the State Highway System shall
be reviewed by the Oregon Department of Transportation for conformance with
state access management standards (See appendix G of the Transportation System
Plan).
   B.   All proposed roads shall follow the natural topography and preserve
natural features of the site as much as possible.  Alignments shall be planned
to minimize grading.
   C.   Access shall be properly placed in relation to sight distance, driveway
spacing, and other related considerations, including opportunities for joint
and cross access.
   D.   The road system shall provide adequate access to buildings for
residents, visitors, deliveries, emergency vehicles, and garbage collection.
   E.   Streets shall have sidewalks on both sides. Pedestrian linkages should
also be provided to the peripheral street system.
   F.   Access shall be consistent with the access management standards adopted
in the Transportation System Plan. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)
16.64.020   Blocks.
   A.   Generally. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be designed
with due regard to providing adequate building sites suitable to the special
needs of the type of use contemplated, needs for access, circulation, control
and safety of street traffic and limitations and opportunities of topography.
   B.   Sizes. Block length shall be limited to 300 feet in the C-1 zone, 400
feet in residential zones, 600 feet in all other zones, except for 1,000 feet
on arterials. Exceptions to this prescribed block standard shall be permitted
where topography, barriers such as railroads or arterial roads, or
environmental constraints prevent street extension.  The block depth shall be
sufficient to provide two lot depths appropriate to the sizes required by
Division III.  (Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(2), 1984; Ord. 1043 section 3,
2000; Ord. 1076, 2001; Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.64.030   Easements.
   A.   Utility Lines. Easements for electric lines or other public utilities
are required, subject to the recommendations of the utility providing agency.
Utility easements twelve feet in width shall be required along all street lot
lines unless specifically waived. The commission may also require utility
easements along side or rear lot lines when required for utility provision. The
construction of buildings or other improvements on such easements shall not be
permitted unless specifically allowed by the affected utility providing agency.
   B.   Watercourses. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose of
assuring adequate flood control. Streets parallel to watercourses may be
required.
   C.   Pedestrian Ways. In any block over six hundred feet in length, a
pedestrian way or combination pedestrian way and utility easement shall be
provided through the middle of the block. If unusual conditions require blocks
longer than one thousand two hundred feet, two pedestrian ways may be required.
When essential for public convenience, such ways may be required to connect to
cul-de-sacs, or between streets and other public or semipublic lands or through
green way systems. Sidewalks to city standards may be required in easements
where insufficient right-of-way exists for the full street surface and the
sidewalk.  All pedestrian ways shall address the following standards to provide
for the safety of users:
      1.   Length should be kept to a minimum and normally not in excess of two
hundred feet;
      2.   Width should be maximized and shall not be below ten feet. For
pathways over one hundred feet long, pathway width shall increase above the
minimum by one foot for every twenty feet of length;
      3.   A minimum of three foot-candles illumination shall be provided.
Lighting shall minimize glare on adjacent uses consistent with the outdoor
lighting provisions in section 16.43 of this code;
      4.   Landscaping, grade differences, and other obstructions should not
hinder visibility into the pedestrian way from adjacent streets and
properties.  Fencing along public pedestrian ways shall conform wih the
standards in Section
16.08.110;
      5.   Surrounding land uses should be designed to provide surveillance
opportunities from those uses into the pedestrian way, such as with the
placement of windows; 
      6.   Exits shall be designed to maximize safety of users and traffic on
adjacent streets; and
      7.   Use of permeable surfacing materials for pedestrian ways and
sidewalks is encouraged whenever site and soil conditions make permeable
surfacing feasible.  Permeable surfacing includes, but is not limited to: 
paving blocks, turf block, pervious concrete, and porous asphalt.  All
permeable surfacing shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards and the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Maintenance of permeable surfacing materials located on
private property are the responsibility of the property owner.
   D.   Developments that abut the Molalla Forest Road multi-use path shall
provide a pedestrian/bicycle access to the path.  The city may determine the
development to be exempt from this standard if there is an existing or planned
access to the path within 300 feet of the development.
   E.   Solar Easements. Subdividers shall be encouraged to establish solar
easements and utilize appropriate solar design in their development proposals.
Solar easements shall be shown on the final plat and in the deed restrictions
of the subdivision. The Planning Commission may require the recordation of
special easements or other documents intended to protect solar access. (Ord.
740 section 10.4.40(C)(3), 1984; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord 1237, 2007;
Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1340, 2011)
16.64.040   Lots.
   A.   Size and Shape.  The lot size, width, shape and orientation shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development
and use contemplated. To provide for proper site design and prevent the
creation of irregularly shaped parcels, the depth of any lot or parcel shall
not exceed three times its width (or four times its width in rural areas)
unless there is a topographical or environmental constraint or an existing man-
made feature such as a railroad line.
   B.   Minimum Lot Sizes:
      1.   Lot sizes shall conform with requirements of Division III unless the
applicant chooses to use an alternative lot layout per subsection (3) below to
accommodate interconnected and continuous open space and or other natural
resources.  In this case, the average minimum lot size may be reduced by 5,000
square feet after subtracting access tracts.  Overall development densities
shall comply with the underlying maximum density allowed by the zone.
      2.   In areas that cannot be connected to sewer trunk lines, minimum lot
sizes shall be greater than the minimum herein specified if necessary because
of adverse soil structure for sewage disposal by septic systems. Such lot sizes
shall conform to the requirements of Clackamas County for sewage disposal
unless provisions are made for sanitary sewers.
      3.   Alternative lot layout.  Applicants may deviate from standard lot
setbacks and dimensions to accommodate dedicated interconnected open space or
other natural areas.  Clustered housing, lot-size averaging, and a mixture of
approaches where building lots can be grouped into a smaller portion of the
total development, reserving the remainder for open space or other natural
areas.  Alternative development layouts shall not exceed the underlying maximum
density allowed by the zone.
      4.   When using the alternative lot layout option, the following must be
met:
         a.   The arrangement of the alternative lot layout shall be designed
to avoid development forms commonly known as linear, straight-line or highway
strip patterns.
         b.   To the maximum extent possible, open space and natural areas,
where used, shall be continuous, interconnected, and concentrated in large
usable areas.
         c.   Where possible, open space shall be connected to adjacent off-
site open space areas.
         d.   Open space and natural areas shall be maintained permanently by
the property owner or the property owner’s association.
   C.   Lot Frontage. All lots shall meet the requirements specified in
Division III for frontage on a public street, except that the Planning
Commission may allow the creation of flag lots, cul-de-sac lots and other such
unique designs upon findings that access and building areas are adequate. Lots
that front on more than one major street shall be required to locate motor
vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification.
   D.   Double Frontage. Double frontage or through lots should be avoided
except where essential to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
   E.   Lot Side Lines. The side lines of lots shall run at right angles to the
street upon which the lots face, or on curved streets they shall be radial to
the curve, unless there is some recognizable advantage to a different design.
   F.   Resubdivision. In subdividing tracts into large lots which at some
future time are likely to be resubdivided, the location of lot lines and other
details of the layout shall be such that resubdivision may readily take place
without violating the requirements of these regulations and without interfering
with the orderly development of streets.  Restriction of building locations in
relationship to future street rights-of-way shall be made a matter of record if
the commission considers it necessary.
   G.   Building Lines. If special building setback lines are to be established
in the subdivision plat, they shall be shown on the subdivision plat or
included in the deed restrictions. This includes lots where common wall
construction is to be permitted between two single-family dwellings.
   H.   Potentially Hazardous Lots or Parcels. The commission shall utilize its
prerogative to modify or deny a tentative plat or partition map where it is
found that a proposed lot or parcel is potentially hazardous due to flooding or
soil instability.
   I.   Flag Lots or Panhandle-shaped Lots. The commission may allow the
creation of flag lots provided that the following standards are met:
      1.   Not more than one flag lot shall be created to the rear of any
conventional lot and having frontage on the same street unless it is found that
access will be adequate and that multiple flag lots are the only reasonable
method to allow for development of the site. Every flag lot shall have access
to a public street.
      2.   The access strip is to be a minimum of twenty feet in width and
shall be paved for its full width from its connection with the public street to
the main body of the lot. Except, however, that the width requirement may be
reduced to twelve feet, for accessing a single flag lot, where the total length
of the access strip does not exceed one hundred feet. Access strips not less
than ten feet in width may be permitted where two such drives abut and are
provided with reciprocal easements for use. For drives accessing more than two
flag lots, the access strip shall be a minimum of twenty feet with reciprocal
access and maintenance agreements for all lots.
      3.   For residential flag lots, a minimum building setback of five feet
from the access strip shall be maintained where such buildings exist prior to
the creation of the flag lot.
      4.   Design and locations of buildings on flag lots shall be such that
normal traffic will have sufficient area to turn around, rather than
necessitating backing motions down the access strip. The commission may
establish special setback requirements at the time of approving the creation of
flag lots.   
      5.   Flag lots shall not be permitted when the result would be to
increase the number of properties requiring direct and individual access
connections to the State Highway System or other arterials.
      6.   The area of a panhandle shaped or flag lot shall be considered to be
the rear or buildable portion of the lot and shall not include the driveway or
access strip.
      7.   For the purposes of defining setbacks, flag lots shall have three
side yards and one yard of 20 feet generally on the garage access side of the
dwelling. 
   J.   Designation of Lots as ‘Infill Home’ Sites. The Planning Commission may
require that homes built on one or more lots adjacent to existing development
be subject to any or all of the requirements of 16.21.050 - Infill Homes. 
Furthermore, for subdivisions where the parent parcel(s) is less than two acres
in size, the Planning Commission may require that all homes built on lots in
the subdivision be subject to any or all of the requirements of 16.21.050. 
These requirements are to be shown on the subdivision plat or included in the
deed restrictions. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(F) and 10.4.40(C)(4), 1984; Ord.
890 section 54, 1993; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord. 1107, 2002; Ord. 1111
section 6, 2003; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.64.050   Parks and recreation.
   Subdivisions shall meet the requirements for park, open space and recreation
as specified in Division VI.   
16.64.060   Grading of building sites.
   The commission may impose bonding requirements, similar to those described
in section 16.64.070, for the purpose of ensuring that grading work will create
no public hazard nor endanger public facilities where either steep slopes or
unstable soil conditions are known to exist. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(6),
1984)
16.64.070   Improvements.
   A.   Improvement Procedures. In addition to other requirements, improvements
installed by a land divider either as a requirement of these regulations, or at
his own option, shall conform to the requirements of these regulations and
improvement standards and specifications followed by the city, and shall be
installed in accordance with the following procedure:
      1.   Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans have been
checked for adequacy and approved by the city. To the extent necessary for
evaluation of the proposal, the plans may be required before approval of the
tentative plat of a subdivision or partition. No work shall commence until the
developer has signed the necessary certificates and paid the subdivision
development fees specified elsewhere in this division.
      2.   Improvement work shall not commence until after the city is
notified, and if work is discontinued for any reason it shall not be resumed
until after the city is notified.
      3.   Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the
satisfaction of the City. The city may require changes in typical sections and
details in the public interest if unusual conditions arise during construction
which warrant the change.
      4.   Underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in
streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets. Stubs for
service connections for underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be
placed to a length obviating the necessity for disturbing the street
improvements when service connections are made.
      5.   “As Built” construction plan revisions shall be filed with the city
engineer within sixty days of the completion of any improvements.
   B.   The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the
subdivider unless specifically exempted by the Planning Commission:
      1.   Streets, including drainage and street trees;
      2.   Complete sanitary sewer system;
      3.   Water distribution lines and fire hydrants;
      4.   Sidewalks and any special pedestrian ways;
      5.   Street name and traffic-control signs;
      6.   Streetlights;
      7.   Lot, street and perimeter monumentation;
      8.   Underground power lines and related facilities;
      9.   Underground telephone lines, CATV lines, natural gas lines, and
related facilities;
      10.   Where dedicated or undedicated open space is proposed or provided,
it shall be the subdivider’s responsibility to provide standard public
improvements to and through that open space.
      11.   If fencing is being proposed as part of subdivision development,
the subdivider shall be responsible for installing fencing along public streets
and pedestrian ways.  Fencing shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards in Section 16.08.10
   C.   Streets.
      1.   All streets, including alleys, within the subdivision and streets
adjoining, but only partially within the subdivision shall be improved.
      2.   All public and private streets shall be constructed to city
standards for permanent street and alley construction. LID alternatives, such
as permeable surfacing and integrated stormwater management facilities, are
required where site and soil conditions make it a feasible alternative.  Upon
completion of the street improvement, monuments shall be reestablished and
protected in monument boxes at every street intersection and all points of
curvature and points of tangency of street centerlines as required by Oregon
Revised Statutes Chapter 92.
      3.   Street Trees.  Street trees shall be provided consistent with the
provisions of Chapter 12.32.
      4.   Prior to city approval of the final subdivision plat, all perimeter
and back lot line monumentation shall be installed and the installation of the
front lot monumentation (along and within street rights-of-way) shall be
guaranteed.  Any monuments destroyed during improvement installation shall be
replaced at the developer's expense.
      5.   If any lot abuts a street right-of-way that does not conform to the
design specifications of this ordinance, the owner may be required to dedicate
up to one-half of the total right-of-way width required by this ordinance.
      6.   The proposed use shall not impose an undue burden on the
transportation system. The City may require the applicant to provide adequate
information, such as a traffic impact study, to demonstrate the level of impact
to the surrounding street system. The developer shall be required to mitigate
impacts attributable to the project.
      7.   The determination of impact or effect and the scope of the impact
study should be coordinated with the provider of the affected transportation
facility.
      8.   Dedication of land for streets, transit facilities, sidewalks,
bikeways, paths, or access ways shall be required where the existing
transportation system will be impacted by or is inadequate to handle the
additional burden caused by the proposed use.
      9.   Improvements such as paving, curbing, installation or contribution
to traffic signals, construction of sidewalks, bikeways, access ways, paths, or
streets that serve the proposed use where the existing transportation system
may be burdened by the proposed use.
   D.   Surface Drainage and Storm Sewer System.
      1.   Drainage facilities shall be provided within the subdivision and to
connect the subdivision to drainage ways or storm sewers outside the
subdivision, if necessary, as determined by the City.
      2.   Stormwater Management through Low Impact Development (LID). Low
impact development is a stormwater management approach aimed at emulating
predevelopment hydrologic conditions using a combination of site design and
stormwater integrated management practices.  This approach focuses on
minimizing impervious surfaces, promoting rainfall evaporation and uptake by
plants, and maximizing stormwater infiltration.  Specific LID strategies and
integrated management practices include:
         a.   Protection and restoration of native vegetation and soils,
         b.   Minimizing impervious surface area through use of pervious
materials (e.g. pavers and pervious concrete).
         c.   Vegetated roofs,
         d.   Rainfall reuse,
         e.   Stormwater dispersion and bioretention (recharge).
      3.   All new subdivisions in Canby are required to treat stormwater on
site.  Stormwater management using LID practices is requiredwhere feasible,
pursuant to requirements of this chapter and other applicable sections of this
code.  LID facilities shall be constructed in accordance with Canby Public
Works Design Standards.
      4.   A conceptual stormwater management report must be submitted with the
subdivision application.  The report must demonstrate how and where stormwater
will be managed on site at the subdivision.  Where LID practices are not used,
the applicant must demonstrate why LID is not feasible.  The report will be
reviewed by the Canby Public Works Department and shall be consistent with the
Public Works Design Standards.  Generally, the stormwater management plan must
include the following:
         a.   A description of existing conditions including a map;
         b.   A description of the proposed stormwater system including a map;
         c.   An estimate of existing storm water run off;
         d.   An estimate of proposed storm water run off;
         e.   The detention/retention requirements; and
         f.   The discharge location, treatment method and sizing, and if
discharging to the ground, the expected infiltration rates based upon soils
mapping data.
      5.   Responsibility for maintenance of LID facilities shall be as
follows:
         a.   The Canby Public Works Department shall be responsible for
maintaining all LID facilities located within the public right-of-way, and for
providing for the safety of the public as related to LID facilities,
         b.   Private property owners shall be responsible for maintaining all
LID facilities on their property.  The city reserves the right to inspect such
facilities at any time.  Upon written notice by the city to the owner that the
facility has been compromised to the point where the design capacity is no
longer available or the facility is not functioning as designed and approved,
the owner shall correct the problem.  If the owner fails to respond to the
written notice within 15 days, the city may undertake the work and bill all
time and material to the owner.
         c.   For LID facilities that are not located in the public right-of-
way and serve multiple private residential properties, a public easement for
the LID facility shall be established and the Canby Public Works Department
shall be responsible for maintenance of the facility.  All property owners
served by the facility shall pay a stormwater maintenance fee to the city to
cover the cost of maintenance of the facility.
   E.   Sanitary Sewers.  Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve the
subdivision and to connect the subdivision to existing mains. In the event it
is impractical to connect the subdivision to the city sewer system, the
commission may authorize the use of septic tanks if lot areas are adequate,
considering the physical characteristics of the area. The commission may
require the subdivider to install and seal sewer lines to allow for future
connection to the city system.
   F.   Water System.  Water lines and fire hydrants serving the subdivision
and connecting the subdivision to city mains shall be installed to the
satisfaction of the supervisor of the water department and the Fire Marshal.
   G.   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of a public
street and in any special pedestrian way within the subdivision, except that in
the case of identified arterials, or industrial districts, the commission may
approve a subdivision without sidewalks if alternative pedestrian routes are
available. Sidewalk construction may be postponed until the actual construction
of buildings on the lots, provided that adequate assurance is given that such
sidewalks will be installed.  Where LID practices are implemented in
subdivision street design, alternative sidewalk design may be permitted with
the approval from the city.  Alternative sidewalk design resulting from LID
best management practices may include, but not limited to:  flat curbs, LID
bioretention areas incorporated in conjunction with required landscaping, and
alternative sidewalk widths.  LID best management practices shall be designed
in accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards.
   H.   Bicycle Routes.  If appropriate to the extension of a system of bicycle
routes, existing or planned, the commission may require the installation of
bicycle lanes within streets or the construction of separate bicycle paths.
   I.   Street Name Signs.  Street name signs shall be installed at all
intersections according to city standards or deposit made with the city of an
amount equal to the cost of installation.
   J.   Street Lighting System.  Streetlights shall be required to the
satisfaction of the manager of the Canby Utility Board.
   K.   Other Improvements.
      1.   Curb cuts and driveway installation are not required of the
subdivider but, if installed, shall be according to city standards.
      2.   Street tree planting is required of the subdivider and shall be
according to city requirements.
      3.   The developer shall make necessary arrangements with utility
companies or other persons or corporations affected, for the installation of
underground lines and facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including
but not limited to communication, street lighting and cable television, shall
be placed underground, unless overhead installation has been specifically
approved by the commission because of unique circumstances at the site.
      4.   Developments along existing rail lines may be required to provide
barrier fences or walls if necessary ensure safety for development occupants. 
City may also require noise mitigation such as sound walls, or triple-pane
windows in order to reduce the health impacts of train noises.  Noise
mitigation requirements shall be based on measured db levels when trains are in
the vicinity and specific building construction features.
   L.   Improvements in Areas of Flood or Slope Hazard.
      1.   Any public utility or facility associated with a subdivision or
partition within an area subject to flooding shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to minimize or mitigate flood damage and shall not result in
raising the water elevation in a designated floodway beyond the limits
prescribed by the Federal Flood Insurance Program.
      2.   A new or replacement water supply system shall be designed, located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system.
      3.   A new or replacement sanitary sewage system shall be designed,
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the system.
      4.   An on-site septic tank system or other individual waste disposal
shall be located to avoid impairment or contamination during flooding.
      5.   Any public utility or facility, including streets, associated with a
subdivision or partition within an area which is subject to flooding or slope
instability shall be designed, located and constructed so as to amply protect
such public utility or facility from damage due to such natural hazards.
Adverse impacts upon fish, wildlife, and open space resources shall also be
considered in the design and construction of such facilities. The commission
and council shall consider the potential repair or maintenance costs to be
borne by the public when reviewing the proposed design, location, and
construction of such public utilities or facilities.
   M.   Survey Accuracy and Requirements.  In addition to meeting the
requirements as set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes relative to required lot,
street and perimeter monumentation, the following shall be required:
      1.   An accuracy ratio of subdivision plat boundary line closure of one
in ten thousand (.0001) feet as found in the field.
      2.   Two primary perimeter monuments (one of which can be the initial
point) having the same physical characteristics as the initial point. The
monuments are to be on a common line visible, if possible, one to the other at
time of approval and preferably at angle points in the perimeter. They shall be
points as far apart as practicable. A survey monument witness sign of a design
acceptable to the city engineer shall be placed within eighteen inches of both
monuments. The position for the initial point and other primary perimeter
monuments shall be selected with due consideration to possible damage during
construction and desirability of witness sign location.
      3.   Street centerline monumentation shall consist of a two-inch diameter
brass cap set in a concrete base within and separate from a standard monument
box with cover (standard city details applicable) at locations specified by the
city engineer (generally at intersections with centerline of arterial or
collector streets and within streets proposed to be greatly extended into
adjacent future subdivisions). All other street centerline points
(intersections, points of tangent intersections, cul-de-sac center lines, cul-
de-sac off-set points) shall be monumented with a five-eighths-inch diameter
steel rod thirty inches long with an approved metal cap driven over the rod and
set visible just below the finish surface of the street. If any points of
tangent intersection fall outside of a paved section street, the above
monumentation will be required at point of curvature and point of tangency of
the curve. All centerline monuments are to be accurately placed after street
construction is complete.
   N.   Agreement for Improvements.  Before commission approval of a
subdivision plat or partition map, the land divider shall either install
required improvements and repair existing streets and other public facilities
damaged in the development of the property, or execute and file with the city
engineer, an agreement specifying the period within which required improvements
and repairs shall be completed and provided that, if the work is not completed
within the period specified, the city may complete the work and recover the
full cost and expense, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees
necessary to collect the amounts from the land divider. The agreement shall
also provide for reimbursement to the city for the cost of inspection by the
city which shall not exceed ten percent of the improvements to be installed.
   O.   PerformanceBond.
      1.   The land divider shall file with the agreement, to assure his full
and faithful performance thereof, one of the following:
         a.   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact
business in the state in a form approved by the City Attorney;
         b.   A personal bond cosigned by at least one additional person,
together with evidence of financial responsibility and resources of those
signing the bond, sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of ability to
proceed in accordance with the agreement;
         c.   Cash.
      2.   Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum
approved by the city engineer as sufficient to cover the cost of the
improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental
expenses, and to cover the cost of the city inspection.
      3.   If the land divider fails to carry out provisions of the agreement
and the city has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure,
the city shall call on the bond or cash deposit for reimbursement. If the cost
of expense incurred by the city exceeds the amount of the bond or cash deposit,
the land divider shall be liable to the city for the difference.
   P.   Guarantee.  All improvements installed by the subdivider shall be
guaranteed as to workmanship and materials for a period of one year following
written notice of acceptance by the city to the developer. This guarantee can
be warrantied under the same options listed in Section O above.
   Q.   Large Scale or Solar Efficient Development.  The standards and
requirements of this division may be modified by the commission in the case of
a plan and program for a complete community, a neighborhood unit, a solar
efficient design, a large scale shopping center, or large industrial
development, which in the judgment of the commission provides adequate public
spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service
needs of the developed tract and its relation to adjacent areas, and which also
provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to
and achievement of the intents and purposes of the Comprehensive Plan. (See
Division V for information regarding a planned unit development.)
   R.   No fence/wall shall be constructed throughout a subdivision where the
effect or purpose is to wall said project off from the rest of the community
unless reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 740 section
10.4.40(C)(7), 1984; Ord. 899 section 4, 1993 Ord. 955 sections 28 & 29, 1996;
Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1340, 2011;
Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.64.080   Low Impact Development Incentives
The purpose of this section is to encourage the use of certain low impact
development (LID) practices in subdivision development beyond the minimum
requirements of this code.  The provisions in this section are voluntary and
are not required of new subdivisions.  These provisions are applicable only
when an applicant elects to utilize the incentives provided in this section. 
Only one incentive is permitted at a time.  For example, an applicant cannot
utilize a height bonus and density bonus in the same subdivision application.
   A.   Building height bonus.  A building height bonus will be allowed for
subdivision proposals that include one of the following:
      1.   Additional park land beyond what is required in Chapter 16.120.
      2.   The use of pervious surfacing materials such as pavers or pervious
concrete.
      3.   Provision of a rain garden that provides on-site stormwater
management for all or part of the subdivision.
      4.   Mitigation of tree removal by replanting.
   B.   Standards for building height bonus (see Figure 16.64.1 for
illustration).  Proposals that utilize the building height bonus shall comply
with the following:
      1.   A proposal that includes one of the LID practices listed in A (1-4)
above may request an increase in building height up to 12 feet within the
building footprint.
      2.   The square footage of the building footprint allowed to receive the
height increase shall be calculated using the following ratios:
         a.   For park land, the ratio is 1:1 square feet of additional park
land to square feet of building footprint.  For example, if 1,000 square feet
of additional park land are provided, the height increase may be applied to
1,000 square feet of the building footprint.
         b.   For pervious surfacing, the ratio is 1:0.5.  For example, if
1,000 square feet of pervious surfacing are provided, the height increase may
be applied to 500 square feet of the building footprint. 
         c.   For rain gardens, the ratio is 1:0.75.
         d.   For mitigation of tree removal, the ratio is 10 caliper-inches to
1,000 square feet of building footprint.  For example, if five 4-inch caliper
mitigation trees are planted, the height increase may be applied to 2,000
square feet of building footprint.  Caliper inches are measured by diameter at
breast height (DBH). Tree mitigation must comply with Subsection (C) below.
      3.   The building height increase shall not result in buildings that
exceed 12 feet of height above the maximum building height standard of the
underlying zone.
      4.   The building(s) receiving the height increase shall be located
within the same subdivision where the LID benefit is being provided.
      5.   The height bonus may not be used on buildings that are directly
adjacent to an existing lot in a residential zone (R-1, R-1.5 or R-2).
      6.   Additional park land provided to utilize the height bonus shall be
consistent with all applicable standards and regulations of Chapter 16.120.
Figure 16.64.1: Height Bonus Diagram
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7000.png]
   C.   Standards for mitigation of tree removal.  Proposals that mitigate tree
removal in order to utilize the height bonus shall comply with the following:
      1.   Only mitigation for removal of existing, healthy trees over six-inch
caliper DBH shall be counted toward the height or density bonus.
      2.   Trees planted as mitigation for tree removal shall be at least two-
inch caliper DBH and must be approved by the city arborist.
      3.   The subdivision application must show the location, size and species
of exiting trees that will be removed and the location, size and species of
trees to be planted as mitigation.
      4.   Trees planted to comply with the street tree requirements in Chapter
12.32 may not be counted toward the height or density bonus.
   D.   Density bonus.  A density bonus will be allowed for subdivision
proposals that provide additional park land beyond what is required in Chapter
16.120.  Proposals that utilize the density bonus shall comply with the
following:
      1.   To qualify for the density bonus, a proposal must provide at least
110% of the park land required in Chapter 16.120.  For example, if Chapter
16.120 requires 1,000 square feet of park land, the proposal must provide at
least 1,100 square feet of park land to qualify.
      1.   The percent density bonus allowed will be as follows:
         a.   For provision of park land between 110 – 120% of the minimum
requirement, a 5% density bonus will be allowed.
         b.   For provision of park land between 121 – 130% of the minimum
requirement, a 10% density bonus will be allowed.
         c.   For provision of park land between 131 – 140% of the minimum
requirement, a 15% density bonus will be allowed.
         d.   For provision of park land over 140% of the minimum requirement,
a 20% density bonus will be allowed.
      3.   No subdivision will be allowed to exceed 120% of the density
standard for the underlying zone.
      4.   Additional park land provided to utilize the density bonus shall be
consistent with all applicable standards and regulations of Chapter 16.120. 
(Ord. 1338, 2010)
Chapter 16.66
Repealed
Chapter 16.68
SUBDIVISIONS FINAL PROCEDURES AND RECORDATION
Sections:
   
16.68.010   Responsibilities of applicant.
   
16.68.020   Submittal of subdivision plat.
   
16.68.030   Information required on plat.
   
16.68.040   Information to accompany plat.
   
16.68.050   Technical plat review.
   
16.68.060   Planning Commission approval.
   
16.68.070   Filing of final plat.
16.68.010   Responsibilities of applicant.
Following the action of the city in approving or conditionally approving a
tentative plat for a subdivision, the applicant shall be responsible for the
completion of all required improvements, or the posting of adequate assurances
in lieu thereof, to the satisfaction of the city, prior to transfer of title of
any of the lots involved.  (Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(9)(a), 1984; Ord 1237,
2007)
16.68.020   Submittal of subdivision plat.
Within two years after approval of the tentative plat, the subdivider shall
cause the subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed and a plat prepared in
conformance with the tentative plat, as approved.  The subdivider shall submit
the original hardboard drawing, a Mylar copy, and any supplementary information
to the city.  If the subdivider wishes to proceed with the subdivision after
the expiration of the two-year period following the approval of the tentative
plat, he must formally request an extension of time, in writing, stating the
reasons therefore.  The City shall review such requests and may, upon finding
of good cause, allow a time extension of not more than six additional months,
provided that the request for the time extension is properly filed before the
end of the two-year approval period.  (Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(9)(b), 1984;
Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.68.030   Information required on plat.
In addition to that required for the tentative plat or otherwise specified by
law, the following information shall be shown on the plat:
   A.   Date, north point and scale of drawing;
   B.   Legal description of the tract boundaries;
   C.   Name and address of the owner or owners, subdivider, engineer or
surveyor, and land planner or landscape architect;
   D.   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets and lot lines with
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs, points or curvature
and tangent bearings.  All bearings and angles shall be shown to the nearest
one second and all dimensions to the nearest 0.01 foot.  If circular curves are
proposed in the plat, the following data must be shown in tabulation form:
curve radius, central angles, arc length, length and bearing of long chord. 
All information shown on the face of the plat shall be mathematically accurate;
   E.   Easements denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified and, if
already of record, their recorded reference.  If an easement of record is not
definitely located, a statement of the easement shall be given.  The width of
the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the
easement with respect to the subdivision shall be shown.  If the easement is
being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's
certificates of dedication;
   F.   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other designated rights-
of-way;
   G.   Any building setback lines, if more restrictive than otherwise required
in Division III;
   H.   Numbering of blocks consecutively within the subdivision and numbering
of lots within each block;
   I.   Location and purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are
dedicated or reserved;
   J.   Easements and any other areas for public use dedicated without any
reservation or restriction whatever;
   K.   A copy of any deed restrictions written on the face of the plat or
prepared to record with the plat with reference on the face of the plat;
   L.   The following certificates which may be combined where appropriate:
      1.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
record title interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording
of the plat,
      2.   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all land
intended for public use except land which is intended for the exclusive use of
the lot owners in the subdivision, their licensees, visitors, tenants and
servants.
      3.   A certificate with the seal of, and signed by, the engineer or the
surveyor responsible for the survey and final plat,
      4.   Other certifications now or hereafter required by law;
   M.   Where any portion of the platted area is subject to inundation in the
event of a one-hundred-year flood, that area shall be clearly indicated on the
final plat.  (Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(9)(c), 1984)
16.68.040   Information to accompany plat.
The following data shall accompany the final plat:
   A.   A preliminary title report issued by a title insurance company in the
name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary
and their interest in the premises;
   B.   Sheets and drawings showing the following:
      1.   Traverse data including the coordinates of the boundary of the
subdivision and ties to section corners and donation land claim corners, and
showing the error of closing, if any,
      2.   The computation of distances, angles, and courses shown on the plat,
      3.   Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent
subdivisions, street corners and state highway stationing;
   C.   A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision;
   D.   A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents;
   E.   A certificate by the city engineer that the subdivider has complied
with the requirements for bonding or otherwise assured completion of required
improvements; and
   F.   A certificate of the subdivider of the total cost or estimate of the
total cost for the development of the subdivision in accordance with the
provisions and requirements of this title or any other ordinance or regulation
of the city relating to subdivision development.  This certificate is to be
accompanied by a final bid estimate of the subdivider's contractor, if there is
a contractor engaged to perform the work, and the certificate of the total cost
estimate must be first approved by the city engineer.  (Ord. 740 section
10.4.40(C)(9)(d), 1984; Ord. 1111 section 3, 2003)
16.68.050   Technical plat review.
   A.   Upon receipt by the city, the plat and other data shall be reviewed to
determine that the subdivision, as shown, is substantially the same as it
appeared on the approved tentative plat and that there has been compliance with
provisions of the law and of these regulations.
   B.   The City may make such checks in the field as are desirable to verify
that the plat is sufficiently correct on the ground, and their representatives
may enter the property for this purpose.
   C.   If the City determines that full conformity has not been made, the City
shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made and
shall afford the subdivider an opportunity to make the changes or additions. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(9)(e), 1984; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.68.060   Planning Commission approval.
Approval of the plat shall be indicated by the signatures of the Planning
Director or their designee.After the plat has been approved by all city and
county officials, one reproducible copy of all data (plat face, dedications,
certificates, approvals), one copy of all plat data in a "dxf" digital format,
and one copy of recorded restrictive and protective covenants shall be returned
to the City Planner. (Ord. 899 section 5, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(9)
(f), 1984; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.68.070   Filing of final plat.
Approval of the plat by the city, as provided by this division, shall be
conditioned on its prompt recording. The subdivider shall, without delay,
submit the plat to the county assessor and the county governing body for
signatures, as required by Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 92. The plat shall
be prepared as provided by Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 92. Approval of the
final plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within six months
of the date of the signature of the Planning Director. (Ord. 740 section
10.4.40(C)(9)(g), 1984; Ord 1237, 2007)
Division V. – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AND CONDOMINIUM REGULATIONS
Chapter 16.70
GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Ord. 890 section 55, 1993)
Sections:
   
16.70.010   General provisions.
   
16.70.020   Purpose.
   
16.70.030   Condominium projects treated as planned unit developments.
16.70.010   General provisions.
Planned unit developments may constitute a subdivision involving unique design
methods or the development of a single tract without property divisions. Where
proposed as a subdivision, the regulations of Division IV as well as the
requirements of this division shall apply. Where proposed as an overall
development of a single tract without property division, a planned unit
development shall be considered a conditional use in any zoning district.
Planned unit development regulations shall not be used for, or apply to,
partitions.  (Ord. 890 section 56, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.5.10[part], 1984)
16.70.020   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this division is to prescribe the procedures for the
development of a planned unit development. It is also the purpose of this
division to enable the development of planned unit development in order to
permit a degree of flexibility and diversification in the use of land through
grouped buildings or large-scale land planning and the arrangements of specific
structures and open spaces within such development.  For these reasons and to
permit the accomplishment of this purpose, the provisions of this division are
superimposed upon the regulatory provisions of Division III and IV.
   B.   It is therefore the purpose of a planned unit development, as the term
is employed in this title, of permitting the development of land in a manner
which would be as good as, or better than, that resulting from the traditional
lot-by-lot development while generally maintaining the same population density
and area coverage permitted in the zone in which the project is located. A
planned unit development of open spaces, circulation facilities, off-street
parking areas and the best utilization of site potentials characterized by
special features of geography, topography, size, location or shape. (Ord. 740
section 10.5.10(A), 1984)
   C.   Planned unit developments are also intended to preserve the natural
environment and water quality through the use of Low Impact Development (LID)
techniques when feasible and practical.  (Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.70.030   Condominium projects treated as planned unit development.
Any condominium development project, whether the construction of new units or
the conversion of existing rental units, must meet all the requirements of this
division, with the exception of the new construction of six or fewer units to
which the regulations of Chapter 16.78 shall apply. Applicants for condominium
projects shall bear full responsibility for compliance with county and state
requirements in all cases. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.40, 1984)
Chapter 16.72
APPLICATIONS
Sections:
   
16.72.010   General requirements.
   
16.72.020   Who may apply.
   
16.72.030   Form and content.
16.72.010   General requirements.
The requirements of Divisions III and IV governing application procedures for
conditional use permits and tentative subdivision plats, as applicable, must be
met for planned unit development proposals.  (Ord. 740 section 10.5.20[part],
1984)
16.72.020   Who may apply.
Planned unit development projects may be applied for by:
   A.   The owner of all the property involved, if under one ownership;
   B.   An application filed jointly by all owners having title to all of the
property in the area proposed for the planned unit development project, if
there is more than one owner;
   C.   An authorized agent acting on behalf of all property owners; or
   D.   A government agency.  (Ord. 740 section 10.5.20(A), 1984)
16.72.030   Form and content.
   A.   Applications shall be submitted to the City Planner on forms prescribed
for the purpose, typed or printed.
   B.   There shall be included as a part of the application all required
information for a subdivision (16.62.010), for planned unit development
applications involving division of property, or a conditional use permit
(16.50.020) for planned unit development applications of a single tract without
property divisions; proposed locations and dimensions of open space within the
site; proposed public dedications, if any, within the site;
   C.   The written information shall contain a statement of the general
purpose of the project and an explanation of all features pertaining to uses
and other pertinent matters not readily identifiable in map form.  Proposed
deed restriction in outline form, if any.  The adoption of the form specifying
the particular nonresidential uses permitted to locate on the site, if any,
shall constitute a limitation to those specific uses.  (Ord. 740 section
10.5.20(B), 1984; Ord. 981 section 11, 1997)
Chapter 16.74
USES PERMITTED
Sections:
   
16.74.010   Generally.
   
16.74.020   Uses permitted in residential zone.
   
16.74.030   Uses permitted in other than residential zone.
16.74.010   Generally.
   In a planned unit development the uses set out in this chapter are
permitted. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.30[part], 1984)
16.74.020   Uses permitted in residential zone.
In a planned unit development in a residential zone only the following uses are
permitted:
   A.   Residential units, either detached or in multiple type dwellings, but
at no greater density than is allowed for the zoning district as set forth in
Division III, except as may be modified for a density bonus as provided in
section 16.76.010 or Chapter 16.80.
   B.   Accessory and incidental retail and other nonresidential uses may be
specifically and selectively authorized as to exact type and size to be
integrated into the project by design. Accessory retail uses shall serve
primarily as a convenience to the inhabitants of the project.
   C.   Mobile home subdivisions, subject to the standards and criteria of
Division IV and Chapter 16.80.
   D.   Recreational facilities, including but not limited to tennis courts,
swimming pools, and playgrounds.  (Ord. 740 section 10.5.30 (A), 1984)
16.74.030   Uses permitted in other than residential zone.
In planned unit developments in areas zoned for other than residential uses,
uses shall be limited to those permitted by the zoning districts in which the
use is located. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.30(B), 1984)
Chapter 16.76
REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
   
16.76.010   Minimum requirements.
   
16.76.020   General requirements.
   
16.76.030   Standards and criteria.
   
16.76.040   Exceptions.
16.76.010   Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for a residential planned unit development shall
include the following two items:
   A.   A minimum of fifteen percent of the gross area of the development shall
be devoted to open space, and shall be located in a common area or dedicated to
the public, except in the case of conversions of existing rentals to unit
ownership, where the Planning Commission may permit a lesser requirement if it
is found that adequate recreation facilities exist for the units.
   B.   The average area per dwelling unit shall not be less than that allowed
within the zoning district in which the subdivision is located, unless
alternative lot layout is used pursuant to 16.64.040(B). The average area shall
be calculated by dividing the number of dwelling units into the gross area of
the total land development, minus that area occupied by streets. The commission
may grant a density bonus of not more than fifteen percent to planned unit
developments where it is found that unique, beneficial design features (such as
solar efficiency, recreation facilities, or other community assets) warrant
such a bonus. The commission shall clearly state its findings in support of
granting or denying a requested density bonus. 
   C.   To achieve the goals of low impact development, buildings are
encouraged to be clustered within the designated development area of the site. 
Clustering is intended to preserve open space, reduce total impervious surface
area, and minimize development impacts on critical areas and associated
buffers.  Preservation of open space reduces potential stormwater runoff and
associated impacts and provides area for dispersion, filtration and
infiltration of stormwater.  The arrangement of clustered buildings shall be
designed to avoid development forms commonly known as linear, straight-line or
highway strip patterns. 
   D.   The use of LID best management practices in site design and development
is required where site and soil conditions make it feasible option.  LID
practices shall meet the standards set forth in the Canby Public Works design
Standards.  (Ord. 740 section 10.5.50, 1984; Ord. 890 section 57, 1993; Ord.
1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.76.020   General requirements.
Prior to development, application shall be made to the commission for site
approval for all or any portion of the proposed development. Where only a
portion of the development is submitted for approval, a master plan shall also
be submitted indicating the intended layout for the total development. The form
of the application shall follow the requirements and be subject to the
standards and criteria of a subdivision or conditional use permit, depending
upon whether the proposed development involves the division of property.
Additional to the information which is otherwise required, the applicant shall
submit accurate information on all of the following which may be applicable:
   A.   Any areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public parks,
schools, playgrounds, or otherwise dedicated or reserved for public purposes;
   B.   Other undedicated open space set aside for the use of the residents of
the development in common. Access and types of access for the open space area
or areas shall be shown;
   C.   A general land use plan for the proposed subdivision indicating the
areas to be used for various purposes;
   D.   Types of dwellings and site locations thereof;
   E.   Proposed locations of off-street parking areas with dimensions;
   F.   Pedestrian walks, malls and other trails, both public and private. The
commission may require a complete circulation plan if warranted by the size and
type of development;
   G.   The stages to be built in progression, if any;
   H.   The location of adjacent utilities intended to serve the development
and a layout of the utilities within the development;
   I.   Table showing the density and lot coverage of the overall development;
   J.   Such other pertinent information as the commission may require in order
to make necessary findings on the site approval. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.60(A),
1984)
   K.   A Traffic Impact Study (TIS) may be required in accordance with Section
16.08.150.  (Ord. 1340, 2011)
16.76.030   Standards and criteria.
Additional to the standards and criteria listed in Divisions III and IV which
are applicable to planned unit development, the following standards and
criteria shall apply:
   A.   The site approval as acted upon by the commission shall be binding upon
the developer, and variations from the plan shall be subject to approval by the
commission.
   B.   All land within the planned unit development may be subject to
contractual agreements with the city and to recorded covenants providing for
compliance with the city's requirements.
   C.   The development of the property in the manner proposed will be in
keeping with the requirements of this title, other than those provisions
allowing for special treatment of PUD's.
   D.   The plan for the proposed development shall present a unified and
organized arrangement of buildings and service facilities.
   E.   The development must be designed so that the land areas and buildings
around the perimeter of the project do not conflict with the adjoining
properties. The commission may establish special conditions for the perimeter
of the development to minimize or mitigate potential conflicts.
   F.   Each planned unit development shall be a complete development
considering all previous requirements. The commission may, in addition, require
the inclusion of facilities such as special curbs, sidewalks, streetlights,
storm drainage, sanitary sewers, underground power and telephone lines,
landscaping and adequate easements for utilities.
   G.   Land which is not intended for physical development, such as buildings
or street uses, may be required to remain in open space usage perpetually.
Maintenance of such open space areas shall remain the responsibility of the
individual owner or owners' association, in a manner outlined in the by-laws of
such association.
   H.   The manner in which any open space or park and recreational area is to
be maintained shall be submitted, along with the preliminary copy of the
proposed owners' association bylaws and contractual agreements, with the
preliminary subdivision. In the case of an individual owner, the commission may
impose special requirements to assure long-term maintenance.
   I.   The Planning Commission may, and in the case of single story or
townhouse structures shall, require the separation of utilities from one unit
to the next.
   J.   In reviewing an application for the conversion of existing residential
units to condominiums, the commission shall utilize the general standards as
are applied to the new construction of planned unit developments. A proposed
conversion which is not found to meet the standards customarily applied to
planned unit developments will not be approved.
   K.   In reviewing an application for the conversion of existing residential
units to condominiums, the Planning Commission shall consider the vacancy rates
of multiple-family rental units throughout the city at the time of the
application.  It is the intent of the city to assure that there is at least one
suitable rental unit available and vacant for each unit converted to
condominium ownership.
   L.   No fence/wall shall be constructed throughout a planned unit
development where the effect or purpose is to wall said project off from the
rest of the community unless reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 740 section 10.5.60(B), 1984; Ord. 955 section 30, 1996)
16.76.040   Exceptions.
   A.   In considering a proposed planned unit development project, the
approval thereof may involve modifications in the regulations, requirements and
standards of the zoning district in which the project is located so as to
appropriately apply such regulations, requirements and standards to the
development. Modification of the lot size, lot width, and yard setback
requirements may be approved by the commission at the time of the approval of
the tentative subdivision plat or conditional use permit.
   B.   Building height shall conform to the zoning district in which the
development is located.
   C.   Off-street parking and off-street loading requirement shall be pursuant
to Division III.  (Ord. 740 section 10.5.60(C), 1984)
Chapter 16.78
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT INVOLVING NEW CONSTRUCTION OF SIX OR FEWER UNITS
Sections:
   
16.78.010   Generally.
   
16.78.020   Application – Filing Information.
   
16.78.030   Standards designated.
   
16.78.040   Review by City Planner.
   
16.78.050   Responsibilities of applicant.
   
16.78.060   Conversion to condominium.
16.78.010   Generally.
In that the new construction of small condominium projects is expected to have
no adverse impacts on the appropriate growth and development of the city, the
regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to such projects involving six
or fewer units on a single parcel. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.70[part], 1984)
16.78.020   Application – filing information.
Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter 16.89. (Ord. 740
section 10.5.70(A), 1984; Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.78.030   Standards designated.
The following standards shall apply to all condominium projects involving the
new construction of six or fewer units:
   A.   All utilities shall be separated on a unit-to-unit basis, except in
cases where the units are to be in multi-story structures where some of the
units will not have ground floors, in which case the utilities shall be
separated as much as possible from one unit to the next. The developer shall
present plans for utility separation to the city engineer, utility board
manager, Canby Telephone Association manager and, if warranted, an appropriate
official of the Northwest Natural Gas Company.
   B.   Applicants shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable
city, county and state regulations governing the construction, platting and
sale of condominium units.
   C.   Improvement requirements for small condominium projects shall be the
same as those which would be required for a subdivision of the property. These
shall include:
      1.   Curb, gutter and sidewalk construction to city standards;
      2.   Installation and extension of utilities;
      3.   Street improvements adjacent to site;
      4.   Dedication of right-of-way sufficient to allow for the widening or
expansion of the street;
      5.   Filing of a waiver of the right to remonstrate against any future
public facility or utility improvements which would benefit the property. (Ord.
740 section 10.5.70(B), 1984)
16.78.040   Review by City Planner.
   A.   The City Planner shall review the information submitted by the
applicant and shall determine whether it meets the requirements of this and
other applicable ordinances. Upon completion of this review, the City Planner
shall notify the applicant in writing of the required conditions to be met
prior to sale or occupancy of the units.
   B.   If modifications to the project are necessary to assure compliance with
the applicable regulations, the City Planner shall notify the applicant of such
modifications.
   C.   Included with the written notification from the City Planner will be
one copy of the proposed plot plan labeled  “tentatively approved,”  or 
“tentatively denied”  and marking any modification or corrections which may be
necessary. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.70(C), 1984)
16.78.050   Responsibilities of applicant.
   A.   The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable
requirements prior to sale or occupancy of the units. This shall include the
following final procedures as well as compliance with the basic standards of
this and other applicable ordinances.
   B.   The developer shall file with the City Planner a reproducible copy
(Mylar or sepia) of the recorded plat of the development.
   C.   Included with the copy of the plat will be copies of the by-laws of the
owners' association and any contracts, covenants, restrictions or waivers of
remonstrance recorded for the property. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.70(D), 1984)
16.78.060   Conversion to condominium.
Proposals to convert existing rentals or leased property to condominium
ownership shall comply with the requirements of section 16.70.030, regardless
of the number of units involved. Applicants intending to utilize the provisions
of this chapter must file the appropriate application and receive written
approval from the City Planner prior to receipt of a certificate of occupancy
for the units. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.70 (E), 1984)
Chapter 16.80
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS
(Ord. 890 section 58, 193)
Sections:
   
16.80.010   Treatment as planned unit development applications.
   
16.80.020   Surrounding development.
   
16.80.030   Minimum standards.
16.80.010   Treatment as planned unit development applications.
All manufactured or mobile home subdivisions, as defined in this title, are
treated as planned unit development applications. This insures an adequate
design review process for this type of development which may occur in any
residential zone. (Ord. 890 section 59, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.5.80[part],
1984)
16.80.020   Surrounding development.
Although it may warrant special conditions of approval in terms of exterior
appearance, the nature or value of surrounding development shall not be the
basis of denial of an application for a manufactured or mobile home
subdivision. (Ord. 890 section 60, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.5.80 (A), 1984)
16.80.030   Minimum standards.
   The following minimum standards shall be applied to all manufactured or
mobile home subdivisions:
   A.   Mean average lot size to be at least eighty-five percent of that
normally required for single-family dwellings within the zone, with no lots
smaller than sixty-eight percent of that normally required.
   B.   Any conventional residential units (i.e., not manufactured or mobile
homes) to be constructed within the subdivision are to be located on lots of at
least seven thousand square feet.
   C.   All units are to be placed on, and securely fastened to, permanent
foundations meeting city Building Code requirements.
   D.   All units are to be fully skirted in a manner which obscures the
undercarriage of the structure. Such skirting is to be of a material which
matches or reasonably compliments the siding of the unit. The commission may
require site preparation such that the frames of the mobile homes are not
elevated above the surrounding ground level, unless they are attached to a
permanent lower floor.
   E.   Adequate storage areas are to be provided. The commission may require
the construction of separate storage buildings on each lot within the
development or the construction of a single storage area for the use of the
entire subdivision.
   F.   Setbacks may be reduced to a minimum of five feet, except along the
perimeter of the development and along any public street, in which cases a
setback of twenty feet shall be maintained. The commission may use its
discretion to allow for some variation in building orientation from lot to lot
to increase visual variety.
   G.   A minimum of twenty percent of the total area shall be landscaped,
including a strip at least twenty feet in width along the perimeter of the
development.
   H.   A site-obscuring fence not less than four, nor more than six feet in
height shall be constructed around the perimeter of the development, other than
those areas where a reduced height is required for vision clearance on street
frontage.
   I.   Water line sizing and fire hydrant locations shall be established by
the supervisor of the water department and the Fire Marshal.
   J.   The commission may set special conditions of approval for the lots on
the perimeter of the development to assure that they are aesthetically
pleasing. Such conditions may include:
      1.   Requiring that the larger lots be located along the perimeter;
      2.   Requiring all units to have pitched roofs, lapped siding,
composition shingle or shake roofs, double-wide construction or similar
requirements to assure compatibility with nearby developments which may or may
not include manufactured or mobile homes. (Ord. 890 section 61 1993; Ord. 740
section 10.5.80 (B), 1984)
Chapter 16.82
SPECIAL HOUSING PROJECTS FOR THE ELDERLY OR HANDICAPPED
Sections:
   
16.82.010   Generally
   
16.82.020   Applicability.
   
16.82.030   Standards and criteria for review.
   
16.82.040   Modification of standards.
   
16.82.050   Higher than normal densities.
   
16.82.060   Restrictions on occupancy.
16.82.010   Generally.
   A.   The Planning Commission may permit the development of special housing
projects for the elderly or handicapped, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   It is recognized that the elderly and handicapped often have special
housing needs and frequently cannot afford conventional housing. In order to
reduce costs, densities may be increased beyond those normally allowed by
zoning, and parking requirements may be reduced if normal requirements are
found to be unnecessary for the type of development proposed.
   C.   Special emergency response or fire safety requirements may be imposed
in order to assure public safety in these unique developments. (Ord. 740
section 10.5.90(A), 1984)
16.82.020   Applicability.
The conditions of this chapter are intended to be applied to either condominium
or rental type developments which meet the criteria of housing for the elderly
or handicapped. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.90(B), 1984)
16.82.030   Standards and criteria for review.
In reviewing an application for a special housing project for the elderly or
handicapped, the Commission shall utilize the standards and criteria which are
applicable to other planned unit development proposals, requiring either a
conditional use permit or a subdivision approval, depending on whether the
development involves the division of property. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.90(C),
1984)
16.82.040   Modification of standards.
The standards normally applied to a planned unit development may be modified by
the Commission in the case of special housing projects for the elderly or
handicapped, provided that specific findings of fact are entered in support of
such modifications. The Planning commission may:
   A.   Increase the permitted density by not more than fifty percent of that
normally allowed within the zone;
   B.   Decrease the amount of required parking by not more than sixty percent
of that normally required;
   C.   Decrease the area required for outdoor recreation, if sufficient area
is provided for open space and if indoor recreation facilities are provided;
   D.   Increase the amount of permitted lot coverage by not more than ten
percent of that normally required;
   E.   Require special emergency access drives, fire hydrants, or other
improvements which are intended to ensure the safety of the residents;
   F.   Impose such special conditions of approval as are deemed to be
necessary to minimize any adverse impacts of a higher density development upon
surrounding properties.  (Ord. 740 section 10.5.90(D), 1984)
16.82.050   Higher than normal densities.
Special housing projects for the elderly or handicapped, where densities higher
than normally permitted by zoning are requested, shall be encouraged only in
locations which are near commercial services. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.90 (E),
1984)
16.82.060   Restrictions on occupancy
The Commission shall require adequate assurance that any development proposed
under the conditions of this chapter will be restricted to occupancy by the
elderly, handicapped, or such caretakers as may be necessary.
Division VI. – ANNEXATIONS
Chapter 16.84
REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
16.84.005   Background.
   
16.84.010   Purpose.
   
16.84.020   State regulations.
   
16.84.030   Filing procedure.
   
16.84.040   Standards and criteria.
   
16.84.050   Consideration of applications.
   
16.84.060   Legal advertisement of pending election.
   
16.84.070   Election procedures.
   
16.84.080   Setting of boundaries and proclamation of annexation.
   
16.84.090   Exceptions.
16.84.005   Background.
The process of annexation of land to the city allows for the orderly expansion
of the city and adequate provision for public facilities and services.  The
city charter requires that, unless mandated by state law, annexation, delayed
annexations, and extension of city services, may only be approved by a majority
vote among the electorate.  (Ord. 981 section 34, 1997)
16.84.010   Purpose.
It is the purpose and general intent of this division to delineate the
appropriate procedures to be followed to annex territory to the city. It is
recognized that alterations to the corporate limits are major land use actions
affecting all aspects of city government including taxation, the provision of
public services, land use patterns, vehicular circulation, etc. Decisions on
proposed annexations are, therefore, of critical importance to the city.  The
procedures and standards established in this chapter are required for review of
proposed annexations in order to:
   A.   Provide adequate public information and sufficient time for public
review before an annexation election;
   B.   Maximize citizen involvement in the annexation review process;
   C.   Establish a system for measuring the physical, environmental, and
related social effects of proposed annexations; and
   D.   Ensure adequate time for staff review. (Ord. 740 section 10.6.10, 1984;
Ord. 981 section 35, 1997)
16.84.020   State regulations.
The regulations and requirements of Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 222 are
adopted by reference and made a part of this division.  (Ord. 740 section
10.6.20, 1984)
16.84.030   Filing procedure.
Whenever an application for annexation is filed, it shall be reviewed in
accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   Application Filing Deadlines.  Application deadlines are established to
permit public hearings by both the Planning Commission and the City Council in
time to meet state and county requirements for submitting ballot information
for these election dates.  Application deadlines are as follows:
      1.   Regular annexation dates are in May and November.  Annexations must
be filed with the City before 5:00 p.m. on the last working day in August for a
ballot election in May and the last working day in February for a ballot
election in November.  Incomplete applications may result in missing these
planned election dates, at the City’s discretion.
      2.    Annexations can be scheduled for a special election provided that
all costs associated with the special election are covered by the applicant.
Special elections will be scheduled by the City Council following the required
City Council hearing on the application.
   B.   Application Submittal. Application procedures shall be as described in
Chapter 16.89, on forms provided by the Planning Department.  (Ord. 899 section
6, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.6.30, 1984; Ord. 981 section 36, 1997; Ord. 1019
section 18-20, 1999; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1294, 2008)
16.84.040   Standards and criteria.
   A.   The following criteria shall apply to all annexation requests.
      1.   The City of Canby Annexation Development Map shall determine which
properties are required to submit either (See Figure 16.84.040):
         a.   A Development Agreement (DA) binding for all properties located
within the boundaries of a designated DA area as shown on the City of Canby
Annexation Development Map.  The terms of the Development Agreement may
include, but are not limited to:
            1.   Timing of the submittal of an application for zoning
            2.   Dedication of land for future public facilities including park
and open space land
            3.   Construction of public improvements
            4.   Waiver of compensation claims
            5.   Waiver of nexus or rough proportionality objections to future
exactions
            6.   Other commitments deemed valuable to the City of Canby
For newly annexed properties that are within the boundaries of a DA area as
designated on the City of Canby Annexation Development Map:  A Development
Agreement shall be recorded as a covenant running with the land, binding on the
landowner’s successors in interest prior to the City Council granting a change
in zoning classification.
         b.   A Development Concept Plan (DCP) binding for all properties
located within the boundaries of a designated DCP area as shown on the City of
Canby Annexation Development Map. A Development Concept Plan shall address City
of Canby infrastructure requirements including:
            1.   Water
            2.   Sewer
            3.   Stormwater
            4.   Access
            5.   Internal Circulation
            6.   Street Standards
            7.   Fire Department requirements
            8.   Parks and open space
   For newly annexed properties that are within the boundaries of a DCP area as
designated on the City of Canby Annexation Development Map: A Development
Concept Plan shall be adopted by the Canby City Council prior to granting a
change in zoning classification.  (Ord 1294, 2008)
      2.   Analysis of the need for additional property within the city limits
shall be provided.  The analysis shall include the amount of developable land
(within the same class of zoning - low density residential, light industrial,
etc.) Currently within the city limits; the approximate rate of development of
those lands; and how the proposed annexation will affect the supply of
developable land within the city limits.  A supply of developable residential
land to provide for the anticipated population growth over the following three
years is considered to be sufficient;
      3.   Statement of potential physical, aesthetic and related social
effects of the proposed development on the community as a whole and on the
neighborhood of which it will become a part; and proposed actions to mitigate
identified concerns, if any. A neighborhood meeting is required as per Table
16.89,020 of the City of Canby Land Development and Planning Ordinance.
      4.   Statement of availability, capacity and status of existing water,
sewer, drainage, transportation, park and school facilities;
      5.   Statement of increased demand for such facilities to be generated by
the proposed development, if any, at this time;
      6.   Statement of additional facilities, if any, required to meet the
increased demand and any proposed phasing of such facilities in accordance with
projected demand;
      7.   Statement outlining method and source of financing required to
provide additional facilities, if any;
      8.   Statement indicating the type and nature of any comprehensive Plan
text or map amendments or Zoning  text or map amendments that may be required
to complete the proposed development. Proposed zoning must be consistent with
zoning identified in any applicable adopted Development Concept Plan. (Ord.
1292, 2008; Ord. 1422, 2015)
      9.   Compliance with other applicable city ordinances or policies;
      10.   Compliance of the application with the applicable sections of
Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 222.  (Ord. 740 section 10.6.40, 1984; Ord. 981
section 37, 1997; Ord. 1294, 2008)
16.84.050   Consideration of applications.
   A.   Upon receipt of an application, staff shall review the completeness of
the application.  After accepting the application as complete, staff shall
schedule a public hearing to be held by the Planning Commission.
   B.   The commission shall conduct a public hearing to evaluate the proposed
annexation and determine the appropriate zoning designation upon annexation. 
Following the close of the public hearing, the commission shall forward its
recommendation concerning the annexation to the City Council.  The commission’s
recommendation shall include findings that specify how the proposal has or has
not complied with the above review criteria (16.84.040).  The commission shall
specify such consideration as findings in support of its decision and
recommendation.
   C.   Upon receipt of the commission’s recommendation the matter shall be set
for review by the City Council following the procedures outlined in Division
VIII.  The City Council shall review all proposals prior to the city
application deadline for submitting measures to the voters in May or November. 
The City Council shall only set for an election those annexations that are
consistent with the above review criteria (16.84.040).  The City Council shall
specify such considerations as findings in support of its decision to schedule
an annexation for an election.
   D.   The City Council’s decision to submit an annexation to the electorate
is the last discretionary decision in the process.  Certifying the election
after votes are counted is not a discretionary decision.
   E.    The council’s decision not to set an election for the annexation (a
decision of denial), or the results of the election is the final action in the
city’s review of an annexation application.  (Ord. 740 section 10.6.50, 1984;
Ord. 981 section 38, 1997; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.84.060   Legal Advertisement of Pending Election.
After City Council review and approval, the city administrator shall cause a
legal advertisement describing the proposed annexation and pending election to
be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city.  The
advertisement shall be placed at least 14 days prior to the election.  The size
of the advertisement shall be determined by the City Administrator, but shall
not be less than one-half of a full page.  The advertisement shall contain: a
description of the location of the property, the size of the property, its
current zoning and zoning upon annexation, a general description of the land
use intended, a description of any Comprehensive Plan text or Map amendment of
Zoning Ordinance text or Map amendment that is required; and a description of
the positive and negative effects contained in the staff report, as well as the
findings upon which the City Council based its decision.  (Ord. 981 section 39,
1997)
16.84.070   Election Procedures.
   A.   Pursuant to ORS 222.130(1), the statement of chief purpose in the
ballot title for a proposal for annexation shall contain a general description
of the boundaries of each territory proposed to be annexed.  The description
shall use streets and other generally recognized features.  Notwithstanding ORS
250.035, the statement of chief purpose shall not exceed 150 words.  The ballot
title wording shall be prepared by the City Attorney.
   B.   Pursuant to ORS 222.130(2), the notice of an annexation election shall
be given as provided in ORS 254.095 and 254.205, except that in addition the
notice shall contain a map indicating the boundaries of each territory proposed
to be annexed.
   C.   Pursuant to ORS 222.11(7), two or more proposals for annexation of
territory may be voted upon simultaneously; however, each proposal shall be
stated separately on the ballot and voted on separately.  (Ord. 981 section 40,
1997)
16.84.080   Setting of Boundaries and Proclamation of Annexation.
If the annexation is approved by the electorate, the City Council, by
resolution or ordinance, shall set the final boundaries of the area to be
annexed by a legal description and proclaim the annexation (ORS 222.170(3)). 
(Ord. 981 section 41, 1997; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.84.090   Exceptions.
The City Council may authorize an exception to any of the requirements of this
chapter.  An exception shall require a statement of findings that indicates the
basis for the exception.  Exceptions may be granted for reasons including, but
not limited to: identified health hazards, limited development potential, or
administrative error.  An exception to referring an annexation application that
meets the approval criteria to an election cannot be granted except as provided
in the Oregon Revised Statutes.  (Ord. 981 section 42, 1997)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ca38d38e0479b5dac2ad41e0751104e15f762b3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7002.png]
Figure 16.84.040
Division VII. – STREET ALIGNMENTS
Chapter 16.86
REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
16.86.010      Purpose.
   
16.86.020   General provisions.
   
16.86.040   Recommended roadway standards.
   
16.86.060   Street Alignment Regulations
16.86.010   Purpose.
This chapter is intended to insure that adequate space is provided in
appropriate locations for the planned expansion, extension, or realignment of
public streets. Further, it is intended to allow for the safe utilization of
streets once developed. The street standards are also intended to encourage the
efficient layout of streets, minimize impervious surfaces, and incorporate LID
green street treatments whenever feasible.  This section is to be used in
conjunction with other general ordinances of the city which affect public
improvements, roads, highways, etc. (Ord. 740 section 107.10, 1984; Ord. 1338,
2010)
16.86.020   General provisions.
   A.   The Transportation System Plan shall be used to determine which streets
are to be arterials, collectors, and neighborhood connectors.  All new streets
are  required to comply with the roadway design standards provided in Chapter 7
of the TSP.  The city may require right-of-way dedication and/or special
setbacks as necessary to ensure adequate right-of-way is available to
accommodate future road widening projects identified in the TSP.
   B.   Right-of-way widths and cross section standards for new streets shall
be in conformance with the Canby Transportation System Plan and the Public
Works Design Standards.
   C.   The Public Works Director shall be responsible for establishing and
updating appropriate alignments for all streets.
   D.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a new
structure within the planned right-of-way of a new street, or the appropriate
setback from such a street as established in Division III.
   E.   Existing structures which were legally established within a planned
road alignment or abutting setback shall be regarded as nonconforming
structures.
   F.   Bikeways and bike lanes shall be provided consistent with the Bicycle
Plan element of the Transportation System Plan.
   G.   Pedestrian facilities shall be provided consistent with the Pedestrian
Plan element of the Transportation System Plan. (Ord. 740 section 10.7.20,
1984; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010; 1340, 2011)
16.86.040   Recommended Roadway Standards
Specific standards for roadway design are located in the Transportation System
Plan and Canby Public Works Design Standards.  (Ord. 1338, 2010)
16.86.060   Street Connectivity
When developing the street network in Canby, the emphasis should be upon a
connected continuous grid pattern of local, collector, and arterial streets
rather than discontinuous curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs.  Deviation from
this pattern of connected streets shall only be permitted in cases of extreme
topographical challenges including excessive slopes (35 percent plus), hazard
areas, steep drainage-ways and wetlands.  In such cases, deviations may be
allowed but the connected continuous pattern must be reestablished once the
topographic challenge is passed.  (Ord. 1340, 2011)
Division VIII. – GENERAL STANDARDS
Chapter 16.88
STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES: GENERAL,
TEXT AMENDMENTS, COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS, AND TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
Sections:
   
16.88.010   Applicability.
   
16.88.020   Action on application.
   
16.88.030   Applications and fees
   
16.88.040   Temporary permits.
   
16.88.050   Business license review.
   
16.88.060   Council acceptance of dedicated land.
   
16.88.080   Administration and enforcement.
   
16.88.090   Revocation of conditional use permits and variances.
   
16.88.100   Interpretation.
   
16.88.110   Penalties and civil remedies.
   
16.88.120   Enforcement procedure.
   
16.88.160   Public officials
   
16.88.170   Amendments to text of title.
   
16.88.180   Comprehensive Plan Amendments.
   
16.88.190   Conformance with Transportation System Plan and Transportation
Planning Rule
16.88.010   Applicability.
The general standards and procedures set out in this chapter apply to the
regulations of all sections of this title, except as may be specifically noted.
(Ord. 740 10.8.10[part), 1984)
16.88.020   Action on application.
   A.   Any action taken by the commission or council on any application filed
pursuant to the requirements of this title shall be based upon findings of fact
entered by the commission or council in making the decision. Such findings of
fact shall be based upon the standards and criteria listed in the pertinent
section of this title and upon such other legal requirements as may exist.
      1.   It is recognized that the burden of proof on all applications is
upon the applicant in terms of justifying the proposal.
      2.   The scope of the required findings of fact shall vary with the scope
of the project such that a major project requires more extensive justification
than does a minor project.
(Ord. 740 section 10.8.10(A), 1984; Ord. 981 sections 54 & 55, 1997; Ord. 1080,
2001)
16.88.030   Applications and Fees
Applications for annexations, zone changes, variances, conditional use permits,
design review, appeals, other permits or approvals and property divisions
initiated by property owners or their agents shall be made in writing and
submitted to the City Planner. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee.
Said fees shall be set out by resolution approved by the City Council.  Fees
shall differentiate between various processes and applications and no part of
which shall be refunded.  (Ord. 850 sections 1 and 2, 1990; Ord. 740 section
10.8.10(B), 1984)
16.88.040   Temporary permits.
The Building Official may issue temporary permits for buildings to be used for
a construction office, storage incidental to construction of buildings on the
property and for signs advertising a subdivision or tract of land or the lots
therein. Such permits shall be issued for a specific time period and shall
include a signed statement from the applicant agreeing to remove the structure
or sign at the completion of that period. (Ord. 740 section 10.8.10(C), 1984)
16.88.050   Business license review.
Applications for a business license shall be reviewed for compliance with these
regulations. The administrative procedure established by the city administrator
for review of business license applications shall be followed in order to
assure that business operators are made aware of code requirements such as sign
regulations, parking standards, and land use regulations. No business license
shall be issued until it is found that the proposed business will comply with
the requirements of this code. Except, however, that a change in the type of
business in an area zoned for industrial use need not meet complete parking
requirements unless required to do so as a part of a discretionary hearing
process conducted by the commission or City Council. (Ord. 740 section 10.8.10
(D), 1984)
16.88.060   Council acceptance of dedicated land.
No property shall be considered to be dedicated to the city unless first
accepted as such by the council, or shown as such on a legally recorded
subdivision plat which has been signed by the City. The Planning Commission is
empowered to accept dedication of land for public street purposes in a
subdivision only, with all other dedications being the responsibility of the
council. The applicant shall be responsible for furnishing adequate title
insurance for any such land to be dedicated, unless this requirement is waived
by the council for good cause.  (Ord. 740 section 10.8.10(E), 1984; Ord 1237,
2007)
16.88.070   
(Ord. 740 section 10.8.10(F), 1984; repealed by Ord. 981 section 12, 1997)
16.88.080   Administration and enforcement.
   A.   Purpose. Recognizing the need for fair and impartial administration and
the importance of strict enforcement of these regulations, it is the intent of
the council in adopting these regulations that all reasonable means of
enforcement be utilized and maximum allowable penalties be sought for willful
violations.
   B.   Duty. It shall be the duty of the City Planner, with assistance from
other city staff, to administer and enforce this title. (Ord. 740 section
10.8.20 (A) and (B), 1984)
16.88.090   Revocation of conditional use permits and variances.
(Ord. 740 section 10.8.20(C), 1984; Ord. 955 section 31, 1996; renumber to
16.50.070 and 16.53.030; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.88.100   Interpretation.
The provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements
fulfilling its objectives. (Ord. 740 section 10.8.20(D), 1984)
16.88.110   Penalties and civil remedies.
   A.   Unless otherwise provided, a person who knowingly violates this title
is punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than two thousand five
hundred dollars. Each day a violation exists is a separate offense and may be
punished as such.
   B.   When costs (attorney fees, court costs, staff or consultant expenses)
are accrued in the enforcement of this title, the city may institute
appropriate civil action to recoup the costs from the violators.
   C.   In case a building or other structure is, or is proposed to be located,
constructed, maintained, repaired, altered, or used in violation of this title,
the building or land in violation shall constitute a nuisance, and the city
may, as an alternative for enforcing these requirements, institute injunction,
mandamus, abatement, or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin
temporarily or permanently, abate, or remove the unlawful location,
construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use.
   D.   Individuals who have been victimized by illegal land development
practices shall be encouraged to seek civil relief from the developers for any
and all costs and inconveniences which they have suffered as a result of such
illegal practices. (Ord. 830 section 14, 1989; Ord. 740 section 10.8.20(E),
1984)
16.88.120   Enforcement procedures.
   A.   City staff and officials will work closely with local title insurance
companies, developers and members of the real estate profession to ensure fair
and reasonable enforcement of these regulations.
   B.   Upon finding any indication of a violation of state law relative to
land division, city staff shall contact the Real Estate Division of the state
Department of Commerce.
   C.   Upon finding that the regulations of this title have apparently been
violated, the City Planner shall cause the following steps to be taken:
      1.   A member of the staff shall attempt to contact the property owner or
apparent violator, explaining the requirements of this title and type of action
which the city can be expected to take if the violation is not corrected.
      2.   If the property owner and/or violator is willing to correct the
violation, he/she shall be given a reasonable amount of time to make such
corrections.
      3.   If the owner and/or violator cannot be reached, is reached but does
not intend to comply, or fails to comply within the time limits previously
agreed to, the city shall take any of the following steps which are deemed
appropriate in the situation:
         a.   Record a document affecting the title of all properties involved
in the violation, thereby clouding the title and stating that no further
permits will be issued for the development of any of the subject property;
         b.   Withhold any and all permits for the development of the property;
         c.   Disconnect the property from city services;
         d.   Cite the individual into a court of competent jurisdiction;
      4.   The City Planner shall notify, by certified mail, all record owners
of the property involved, stating the nature of the remedial actions which the
city is taking to correct the apparent violation. (Ord. 740 section 10.8.20(F),
1984)
16.88.130
(Ord. 740 section 10.8.30, 1984; Ord. 1019 section 12, 1999; Ord. 1043 section
3, 2000; mod. & renum. to 16.89 by Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.88.135   
(Ord. 955 section 32, 1996; mod. & renum. to 16.89 by Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.88.140
(Ord. 740 section 10.8.40, 1984; Ord. 981 section 13, 1997; mod. & renum. to
16.89 by Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.88.150
(Mod. & renum. to 16.53 by Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.88.160   Public officials.
The terms "City Administrator," "City Recorder," "City Engineer," "City
Planner," and other references to individual employees by title, shall include
any city staff member or consultant operating in an official capacity for the
city. The terms are offered for the convenience of the user of this title and
are not intended to impair the validity of this title.  (Ord. 740 section
10.8.70, 1984; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.88.170   Amendments to text of title.
   A.   Authorization to Initiate Amendments. An amendment to the text of this
title may be initiated by the City Council, by the Planning Commission or by
the application of a property owner or his authorized agent. The Planning
Commission shall, within forty days after closing the hearing, recommend to the
City Council, approval, disapproval, or modification of the proposed amendment.
   B.   Application and Fee. Application procedures shall be as described in
Chapter 16.89.
   C.   Public Hearing on an Amendment. Before taking final action on a
proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
amendment following the requirements for advertising and conduct of hearings
prescribed in Division VIII.
   D.   Standards and Criteria.  In judging whether or not this title should be
amended or changed, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider:
      1.   The Comprehensive Plan of the city, and the plans and policies of
the county, state, and local districts, in order to preserve functions and
local aspects of land conservation and development;
      2.   A public need for the change;
      3.   Whether the proposed change will serve the public need better than
any other change which might be expected to be made;
      4.   Whether the change will preserve and protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents in the community;
      5.   Statewide planning goals.
   E.   Record of Amendments.  The City Planner shall maintain a record of
amendments to the text of this title in a form convenient for the use of the
public. (Ord. 740 section 10.8.60, 1984; Ord. 981 section 15, 1997; Ord. 1080,
2001)
16.88.180   Comprehensive Plan Amendments
   A.   Authorization to Initiate Amendments. An amendment to the Comprehensive
Plan may be initiated by the City Council, by the Planning Commission, or by
the application of a property owner or his authorized agent. The Planning
Commission shall, within forty days after closing the hearing, recommend to the
City Council approval, disapproval, or modification of the proposed amendment.
   B.   Application. Application procedures shall be as described in Chapter
16.89.
   C.   Legislative Plan Amendment Standards and Criteria.  In judging whether
or not a legislative plan amendment shall be approved, the Planning Commission
and City Council shall consider:
      1.   The remainder of the Comprehensive Plan of the city, and the plans
and policies of the county, state, and local districts, in order to preserve
functions and local aspects of land conservation and development;
      2.   A public need for the change;
      3.   Whether the proposed change will serve the public need better than
any other change which might be expected to be made;
      4.   Whether the change will preserve and protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents in the community;
      5.   Statewide planning goals.
   D.   Quasi-judicial Plan Amendment Standards and Criteria.  In judging
whether a quasi-judicial plan amendment shall be approved, the Planning
Commission and City Council shall consider:
      1.   The remainder of the Comprehensive Plan of the city, as well as the
plans and policies of the county, state, or any local school or service
districts which may be affected by the amendments;
      2.   Whether all required public facilities and services exist, or will
be provided concurrent with the anticipated development of the area. (
   E.   For proposed comprehensive plan amendments, which must consider the
long-term adequacy of the transportation system for TPR 660-10-060 compliance,
ODOT must be consulted to determine whether a highway project is “reasonably
likely to be funded” based on funding projections at that time.  (Ord. 740
section 10.8.80, 1984; Ord. 981 section 16, 1997; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1340,
2011; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.88.190   Conformance with Transportation System Plan and Transportation
Planning Rule
   A.   A proposed comprehensive plan amendment, zone change or land use
regulation change, whether initiated by the city or by a private interest,
shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a
transportation facility, in accordance with the Transportation Planning Rule
(OAR 660-012-0060).  A plan or land use regulation amendment significantly
affects a transportation facility if it:
      1.   Changes the functional classification of an existing or planned
transportation facility;
      2.   Changes standards implementing a functional classification system;
      3.   As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the
adopted plan:
         a.   Allows types or levels of land use that would result in levels of
travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of a
transportation facility; or
         b.   Would reduce the performance of the facility below the minimum
acceptable performance standard identified in the Transportation System Plan;
         c.   Would worsen the performance of a facility that is otherwise
projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard
identified in the Transportation System Plan.
   B.   Amendments to the comprehensive plan and land use regulations which
significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land
uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and performance standards
(e.g., level of service, volume to capacity ratio, etc.) of the facility
identified in the Transportation System Plan. This shall be accomplished by one
of the following:
      1.   Adopting measures that demonstrate allowed land uses are consistent
with the planned function, capacity, and performance standards of the
transportation facility.
      2.   Amending the TSP or comprehensive plan to provide transportation
facilities, improvements or services adequate to support the proposed land uses
consistent with the requirements of Section – 0060 of the TPR.  Such amendments
shall include a funding plan or other mechanism so that the facility,
improvement or service will be provided by the end of the planning period.
      3.   Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to
reduce demand for vehicle travel and meet travel needs through other modes of
transportation.
      4.   Amending the TSP to modify the planned function, capacity or
performance standards of the transportation facility.
      5.   Providing other measures as a condition of development, including
transportation system management measures, demand management or minor
transportation improvements.
   C.   A Traffic Impact Study may be required by the City in accordance with
Section
16.08.150. (Ord. 1043, section 3, 2000; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1340, 2011)
Chapter 16.89
APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
Sections:
   
16.89.010   Purpose.
   
16.89.020   Description and summary of processes.
   
16.89.030   Type I procedure.
   
16.89.040   Type II procedure.
   
16.89.050   Type III procedure.
   
16.89.060   Type IV procedure.
   
16.89.070   Neighborhood meetings.
   
16.89.080   Application requirements and completeness.
   
16.89.090   Modifications.
   
16.89.100   Administrative Reviews
16.89.010   Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standard decision-making procedures
that will enable the City, the applicant, and the public to review applications
and participate in the decision-making process in a timely and effective way.
(Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.89.020   Description and Summary of Processes.
All land use and development applications shall be decided by using the
procedures contained in this Chapter. Specific procedures for each type of
permit are contained in Sections 16.89.030 through 16.89.060. The procedure
type assigned to each permit governs the decision-making process for that
permit. Additional requirements may be found in the individual chapters
governing each permit type. The four types of procedure are described below.
Table 16.89.020 lists the City’s land use and development applications and
their required procedures.
   A.   Type I Procedure (Ministerial). Type I decisions are made by the
Planning Director without public notice and without a public hearing. The Type
I procedure is used when there are clear and objective approval criteria or
provisions and applying those criteria or provisions requires no use of
discretion.  The appeal of a Type I Planning Director’s decision is heard by
the Planning Commission.
   B.   Type II Procedure (Administrative). Type II decisions are made by the
Planning Director with public notice and an opportunity for a public hearing.
The appeal of a Type II decision is heard by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial/Legislative). Type III decisions are
made by the Planning Commission after a public hearing, with appeals reviewed
by the City Council. Type III procedures generally use discretionary approval
criteria.
   D.   Type IV procedure (Council Decision). Type IV decisions generally apply
to legislative matters, but include certain other applications as well.
Legislative matters involve the creation, revision, or large-scale
implementation of public policy (e.g., adoption of land use regulations, zone
changes, and comprehensive plan amendments that apply to entire districts).
Type IV matters are considered initially by the Planning Commission with final
decisions made by the City Council. Annexations and certain quasi-judicial
applications are also processed under the Type IV process. (Ord. 1080, 2001;
Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
TABLE 16.89.020
Land Use and Development Application Procedures
 
Application Type Process Type Notice Radius (Feet) Neighborhood Meeting
                                                   Required
Access permit to public street                                      I   n/a No
Administrative Review                                               I   n/a No
Administrative Review                                               II  100 No
Amendments to Zoning Map                                            IV  500 Yes
Annexation, Minor and Major                                         IV  500 Yes
Appeals                                                             III 200 No
Building Permit                                                     I   n/a No
Comprehensive Plan Amendment                                        IV  500 Yes
Conditional Use Permit                                              III 500 No
Condominium Construct. (less than 6 units)*                         I   n/a No
Interpretation                                                      See Section
                                                                    16.05.020
Lot Line Adjustment**                                               II  100 No
Modification                                                        See Section
                                                                    16.89.090
Non-Conforming Structure/Use                                        II  100 No
Parking Lot/Paving projects                                         I   n/a No
Partition                                                           II  100 No
Planned Unit Development                                            III 200 Yes
Sign Permit (non-SDR)                                               I   n/a No
Sign Permit – Discretionary Monument Sign or A-Frame Sign Permit  II  100 No
(16.42.040)
Site and Design Review – Type II                                  II  100 No
Site and Design Review – Type III                                 III 500 Yes
Site Plan Review                                                    I   n/a No
Temporary Permit (16.44.090)                                        See Chapter
                                                                    16.44
Temp. Hardship Permit (16.44.100)                                   II  100 No
Subdivision                                                         III 500 Yes
Text Amendment                                                      IV  500 Yes
Variance, Minor                                                     II  200 No
Variance, Major                                                     III 200 No
 
NOTES:      * See also Chapter 16.78                ** See also Chapter 16.58.
16.89.030 Type I procedure.
   A.   Application requirements. Type I applications shall be made on forms
provided by the Planning Director. The application shall be accompanied by all
required information and fees.
   B.   Decision requirements.  The Planning Director’s decision shall address
all of the approval criteria. Based on the criteria and the facts contained
within the record, the Planning Director shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the requested permit or action. A written record of the
decision shall be provided to the applicant and kept on file at the City.
   C.   Final decision. The decision shall be final on the date it is mailed or
otherwise provided to the applicant, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.89.040   Type II procedure.
   A.   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference may be
required by the Planning Director for Type II applications.
   B.   Application requirements. Type II applications shall be made on forms
provided by the Planning Director. The application shall be accompanied by all
required information and fees.
   C.   Public notice.
      1.   Before making a Type II decision, the Planning Director shall mail
notice meeting the requirements of state law to:
         i.   All owners of real property and, if the owner’s address is
different from the site address, all residents of property, within the distance
prescribed in Table 16.89.020.
         ii.   Any person who submits a written request to receive notice; and
         iii.   Any governmental agency which is entitled to notice under an
intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City. The City may notify
other affected agencies, as appropriate, for review of the application.
         iv.   Any application that involves access to OR 99E or that is
expected to impact the state highway system must be provided to the Oregon
Department of Transportation for their review and comment regarding conformance
with state access management and mobility standards and requirements.
         v.   Any application that is expected to impact a road under the
jurisdiction of Clackamas County must be provided to Clackamas County for
review and comment regarding county standards.
      2.   Notice of any proposal that includes a new transportation facility
or improvement and where these facilities or improvements included or may
impact a collector or arterial street, will be sent to the ODOT and Clackamas
County or any special interest transportation groups as appropriate.  Special
interest transportation groups could include trucking organizations, bicycles
and pedestrian interest groups, and interest groups for people with
disabilities.  Information that should be conveyed with the notice includes the
following:
         a.   Project location
         b.   Proposed land use action
         c.   Location of project access point(s)
      3.   The public notice shall allow a 10-day period for submitting written
comments before a decision is made on the permit.
      4.   The City shall prepare an affidavit of mailing for the public notice
and make the affidavit part of the application file.
   D.   The Planning Director shall make Type II decisions in writing
addressing all of the relevant approval criteria and standards. Based upon the
criteria and standards, and the facts contained within the record, the Planning
Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested permit
or action.
   E.   Notice of Decision.
      1.   Within five days of making a final decision on a Type II
application, a notice of decision shall be sent to:
         i.   All owners of real property and, if the owner’s address is
different from the site address, all residents of property, within the distance
prescribed in Table 16.89.020;
         ii.   Any person who submits a written request to receive notice; and
         iii.   Any governmental agency which is entitled to notice under an
intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City.
      2.   The notice of decision shall include information on the application,
the City’s decision, and a statement explaining how an appeal of the decision
may be filed.
   F.   Effective Date. A Type II decision is final for purposes of appeal when
it is mailed by the City.
   G.   Appeal. A Type II decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission
as follows:
      1.   The following persons have legal standing to appeal a Type II
decision:
         i.   The applicant;
         ii.   Any person who was mailed notice of the decision; and
         iii.   Any other person who participated in the proceeding by
submitting written comments.
      2.   Procedure.
         a.   A Notice of Appeal shall be filed in writing, on forms provided
for the purpose by the Planning Director, within 10 days of the date the Notice
of Decision was mailed.
         b.   The Notice of Appeal shall be accompanied by all required
information and fees.
         c.   An appeal of a Type II decision shall be made following the Type
III public notice procedures, as described in Section
16.89.050.D.
         d.   The appeal shall be limited to the specific issues raised during
the written comment period unless the hearings body allows additional evidence
or testimony concerning any other relevant issue. The hearings body may allow
additional evidence if it determines that such evidence is necessary to resolve
the case. The purpose of this requirement is to limit the scope of Type II
appeals by encouraging persons to submit specific concerns in writing during
the comment period. Only in extraordinary circumstances should new issues be
considered by the hearings body on appeal of a Type II decision.
      3.   The decision of the Planning Commission regarding an appeal of a
Type II decision is the final decision of the City unless appealed to the City
Council. An appeal to the City Council shall follow the same notification and
hearing procedures as for the appeal of the staff decision.
   H.   Any decision or interpretation of this title made by staff that is not
a Type II decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission without fee,
provided that such appeal is filed in writing within ten days of the staff
decision. Such appeals shall be heard as a new business item. The Planning
Commission’s decision on such appeals may be appealed to the City Council
following the Type III public notice procedures, as described in Section
16.89.050.D. (Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1340, 2011)
16.89.050   Type III Decision.
   A.   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference may be
required by the Planning Director for Type III applications.
   B.   Neighborhood meetings. As directed in Table 16.89.020, the applicant
may be required to present their development proposal at a neighborhood meeting
before the City accepts the application as complete. See Section
16.89.070.
   C.   Application requirements. Type III applications shall be made on forms
provided by the Planning Director. The application shall be accompanied by all
required information and fees.
   D.   Public notice.
      1.   At least 20 days prior to a public hearing on a Type III decision or
a Type II appeal decision, the Planning Director shall mail notice meeting the
requirements of state law to:
         a.   All owners of real property and, if the owner’s address is
different from the site address, all residents of property, within the distance
prescribed in Table 16.89.020;
         b.   The appointed chair of any neighborhood association whose
boundaries include the subject property;
         c.   Any person who submits a written request to receive notice; and
         d.   Any governmental agency which is entitled to notice under an
intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City.
         e.   For appeals, the appellant and all persons who provided
testimony.
      2.   Notice of any proposal that includes a new transportation facility
or improvement, and where these facilities or improvements included or may
impact a collector or arterial street, will be sent to the ODOT and Clackamas
County or any special interest transportation groups as appropriate.  Special
interest transportation groups could include trucking organizations, bicycle
and pedestrian interest groups, and interest groups for people with
disabilities.  Information that should be conveyed with the notice includes the
following:
         a.   Project location
         b.   Proposed land use action
         c.   Location of project access point(s)
      3.   The City shall prepare an affidavit of mailing for the public notice
and make the affidavit part of the application file. Failure of any individual
to receive notice as prescribed in this section does not invalidate the
proceedings.
      4.   Written notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in Canby once in either of the two consecutive weeks prior to the
hearing.
      5.   At least ten (10) days before the hearing, written notice shall be
posted at City Hall and such other conspicuous locations as the Council may
determine to be appropriate.
      6.   At least ten (10) days before the hearing, the applicant shall post
notice of the hearing on the property as directed by the Planning Director.
      7.   The Planning Director may expand the notice area or take other steps
to assure that affected property owners or residents are made aware of the
pending public hearing.
      8.   Any application that involves access to the state highway system
must be provided to the Oregon Department of Transportation for their review
and comment regarding conformance with state access management standards and
requirements.
   E.   Conduct of public hearing.
      1.   In all evidentiary hearings required by this title the following
procedures shall be followed:
         a.   All interested persons in attendance shall be heard on the matter
of hearing, and this fact shall be communicated to those in attendance;
         b.   A summary of the application or other matter for hearing shall be
given by the presiding officer or their designee;
         c.   The staff report shall be made followed by questions, if any, of
the staff by the hearings body;
         d.   The public hearing shall be opened and testimony shall be
received in the following order:
            i.   Applicant;
            ii.   Proponents;
            iii.   Opponents; and
            iv.   Rebuttal by proponents or applicant;
         e.   Close public hearing;
         f.   Questions and discussion by hearing body;
         g.   Decision by the hearing body except that further discussions,
decision, or reopening of the public hearing may be postponed to another
meeting, the time, date, and place of which shall be announced before
adjournment.
      2.   All persons who speak at the hearing shall identify themselves by
name, address, and interest in the matter. Attorneys or other agents shall be
allowed to speak on behalf of all participants.
      3.   Physical evidence in the form of written documents, photographs, or
other exhibits may be accepted by the hearing body if deemed to be pertinent.
      4.   A record made at any prior evidentiary hearing may be accepted,
considered, and used by the hearing body at any subsequent hearing, and said
body, by majority vote of a quorum present, may deny to accept or hear any
repetitious matter.
      5.   The hearing body may recess a hearing in order to obtain additional
information or to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons it
decides may be interested. Upon recessing for these purposes, the hearing body
shall announce the time and date when the hearing will be resumed.
      6.   Before the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any
participant may ask the hearings body for an opportunity to present additional
relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing. The
hearings body shall grant the request by scheduling a date to finish the
hearing as follows:
         a.   If the hearings body grants a continuance, the completion of the
hearing shall be continued to a date, time, and place at least seven days after
the date of the first evidentiary hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at
the second hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence
and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the second hearing,
any person may request, before the conclusion of the second hearing, that the
record be left open for at least seven days, so that they can submit additional
written evidence or testimony in response to the new written evidence; or
         b.   If the hearings body leaves the record open for additional
written evidence or testimony, the record shall be left open for at least seven
days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the City in writing for an
opportunity to respond to new evidence submitted during the period the record
was left open. If such a request is filed, the hearings body shall reopen the
record as follows:
            i.   When the hearings body re-opens the record to admit new
evidence or testimony, any person may raise new issues which relate to that new
evidence or testimony.
            ii.   An extension of the hearing or record granted pursuant to
this subsection is subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178 (120-day rule),
unless the continuance or extension is requested or agreed to by the applicant.
            iii.   If requested by the applicant, the City shall allow the
applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons
to submit final written arguments in support of the application, unless the
applicant expressly waives this right. The applicant’s final submittal shall be
part of the record but shall not include any new evidence.
   F.   Decision process.
      1.   Approval or denial of a Type III decision or appeal of a Type II
decision shall be based on standards and criteria located in the code.
      2.   The hearings body shall issue a final written order containing
findings and conclusions that approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application.
      3.   The written decision shall explain the relevant criteria and
standards, state the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and justify
the decision according to the criteria, standards, and facts.
      3.   In cases involving attorneys, the prevailing attorney shall prepare
the findings, conclusions, and final order. Staff shall review and, if
necessary, revise, these materials prior to submittal to the hearings body.
   G.   Notice of Decision.
      1.   The written findings shall be sent to:
         a.   Any person who submits a written request to receive notice,
provides written comments during the application review period, or provides
written or oral testimony in the public hearing;
         b.   The applicant and owner of the subject property;
         c.   Any governmental agency which is entitled to notice under an
intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City.
      2.   The written findings shall include information on the application,
the City’s decision, and a statement explaining how an appeal of the decision
may be filed.
   H.   Effective Date. A Type III decision is final for purposes of appeal
when it is mailed by the City.
   I.   Appeal. The Planning Commission’s decision on a Type III decision or
Type II appeal may be appealed to the City Council as follows:
      1.   The following have legal standing to appeal:
         a.   The applicant;
         b.   Any person who was mailed notice of the decision;
         c.   Any other person who participated in the proceeding by testifying
or submitting written comments; and
         d.   The City Council, on its own motion.
      2.   Procedure.
         a.   A Notice of Appeal shall be filed in writing, on forms provided
for the purpose by the Planning Director, within 10 days of the date the Notice
of Decision was mailed.
         b.   The Notice of Appeal shall be accompanied by all required
information and fees.
         c.   The appeal shall be limited to the specific issues raised during
the comment period and public hearing process unless the hearings body allows
additional evidence or testimony concerning any other relevant issue. The
hearings body may allow additional evidence if it determines that such evidence
is necessary to resolve the case. The purpose of this requirement is to limit
the scope of appeals by encouraging persons to be involved in the public
hearing. Only in extraordinary circumstances should new issues be considered by
the hearings body on an appeal.
      3.   The City Council shall overturn the decision of the Planning
Commission only when one or more of the following findings are made:
         a.   That the Commission did not correctly interpret the requirements
of this title, the Comprehensive Plan, or other requirements of law;
         b.   That the Commission did not observe the precepts of good planning
as interpreted by the Council; or
         c.   That the Commission did not adequately consider all of the
information which was pertinent to the case.
      4.   The Council’s action on an appeal shall be governed by the same
general regulations, standards, and criteria as apply to the Commission in the
original consideration of the application.
   J.   Any decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council unless otherwise specified in this Title.  Such appeals will be
processed using the Type III procedures unless otherwise specified in this
Title.
   K.   The decision of the City Council regarding a Type IV decision, appeal
of a Planning Commission decision, or any other process contained within this
title, is the final decision of the City. (Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1111 section
5, 2003; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.89.060   Type IV decision.
For certain applications, the City Council makes a final decision after a
recommendation by the Planning Commission. These application types are referred
to as Type IV decisions.
   A.   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference may be
required by the Planning Director for Type IV applications.
   B.   Neighborhood meetings. The applicant may be required to present their
development proposal at a neighborhood meeting (see Section
16.89.070). Table 16.89.020 sets the minimum guidelines for neighborhood review
but the Planning Director may require other applications to go through
neighborhood review as well.
   C.   Application requirements. Type IV applications shall be made on forms
provided by the Planning Director. The application shall be accompanied by all
required information and fees.
   D.   Public notice and hearings. The public notice and hearings process for
the Planning Commission’s review of Type IV applications shall follow that for
Type III applications, as provided in subsections 16.89.050.D and 16.89.050.E.
   E.   Decision process.
      1.   Approval or denial of a Type IV decision shall be based on the
standards and criteria located in the code.
      2.   The hearings body shall issue a final written order containing
findings and conclusions recommending that the City Council approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the application.
      3.   The written decision shall explain the relevant criteria and
standards, state the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and justify
the decision according to the criteria, standards, and facts.
      4.   In cases involving attorneys, the prevailing attorney shall prepare
the findings, conclusions, and final order. Staff shall review and, if
necessary, revise, these materials prior to submittal to the hearings body.
   F   City Council proceedings:
      1.   Upon receipt of the record of the Planning Commission proceedings,
and the recommendation of the Commission, the City Council shall conduct a
review of that record and shall vote to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
      2.   The City Council may question those individuals who were a party to
the public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission if the Commission’s
record appears to be lacking sufficient information to allow for a decision by
the Council. The Council shall hear arguments based solely on the record of the
Commission.
      3.   The City Council may choose to conduct public hearings on
Comprehensive Plan amendments, amendments to the text of this title, zone map
amendments, and annexations. If the Council elects to conduct such hearings, it
may do so in joint session with the Planning Commission or after receiving the
written record of the Commission. (Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.89.070   Neighborhood Meetings.
   A.   Applicants are encouraged to meet with adjacent property owners and
neighborhood representatives prior to submitting their application in order to
solicit input, identify issues, and exchange information about the proposed
meeting.
   B.   The Planning Commission or Planning Director may require an applicant
to hold a meeting in the neighborhood prior to accepting an application as
complete. A neighborhood meeting is required for some application types, as
shown in Table 16.89.020, unless this requirement is waived by the Planning
Director.
   C.   At least two weeks prior to the neighborhood meeting, the applicant
shall mail notice of the meeting to:
      1.   The appointed chair of any neighborhood association in whose
boundaries the application lies; and
      2.   All of those who would receive notice of the application’s public
hearing before the Planning Commission. 
   D.   The meeting shall be held in a fully accessible location approved by
the City.
   E.   Following a required neighborhood meeting, applicants shall prepare a
written summary of pertinent issues raised and shall prepare a detailed
response to each issue. This material shall be submitted to the Planning
Department in electronic format at least two weeks before the initial public
hearing.
   F.   Applicants or attendees may make audio or video recordings of the
neighborhood meeting if desired. (Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1111 section 5, 2003;
Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)
16.89.080   Application Requirements and Completeness.
   A.   Submittal. Applications for land use and development permits shall be
filed on forms provided by the purpose by the Planning Director. The
application shall be made with all required information and fees.
   B.   Fees. Fees shall be set out by resolution adopted by the City Council.
Fees shall differentiate between various processes and applications and no part
of the fee shall be refunded unless approved by the Planning Director.
   C.   Amendments to forms. Application forms may be amended by the Planning
Director. The Planning Commission shall first review and approve all proposed
amendments as New Business Items.
   D.   Completeness. In reviewing an application for completeness, the
following procedure shall be used:
      1.   When an application is received by the City, the Planning Director
shall immediately determine whether the following essential items are present.
If they are not, the Planning Director may choose not the accept the
application, in which case the application shall be immediately returned to the
applicant:
         a.   The required form;
         b.   The required fee; and
         c.   The signature of the applicant on the form, and signed written
authorization of the property owner of record if the applicant is not the
owner.
      2.   Completeness.
         a.   After the application is accepted, the Planning Director shall
review the application for completeness. If the application is incomplete, the
Planning Director shall notify the applicant in writing exactly what
information is missing within thirty (30) days of the application and allow the
applicant 180 days to submit the missing information;
         a.   In accordance with the application submittal requirements, the
application shall be deemed complete upon the receipt by the Planning Director
of all required information. The applicant shall have the option of withdrawing
the application or refusing to submit information requested under (a), above.
For the refusal to be valid, it shall be made in writing and received by the
Planning Director no later than fourteen (14) days after the date on the letter
of incompleteness. If the applicant refuses in writing to submit the missing
information, the application shall be deemed complete for the purposes of
processing on the 31st day after first acceptance of the application.
   E.   The City shall take final action on permit applications which are
subject to this chapter, including resolution of all appeals, within 120 days
from the date the application is deemed complete. Any exceptions to this rule
shall conform to the provisions of ORS 227.178. This 120-day rule does not
apply to legislative comprehensive plan and text amendment applications as
defined under ORS 227.178.
   F.   Standards and criteria. Approval or denial of a complete application
shall be based upon the standards and criteria that were applicable at the time
the application was first accepted. (Ord. 1080, 2001)
16.89.90   Modifications.
Any proposed modification to previously approved land use applications,
including site plans, elevations, or conditions of approval, shall be reviewed
by the Planning Director to determine if they are minor, intermediate, or
major.  Factors to be considered in this determination include the date of the
original application, the impact on neighboring properties, and the impact on
public service provision. Modifications shall be processed as indicated in
subsections A through D below. Modification applications shall be made on forms
provided for the purpose by the Planning Director.
   A.   Minor Modification. Minor modifications have a negligible impact on an
approved site plan, land use decision, or condition of approval. The Planning
Director will review all minor modifications under the Type I process.
   B.   Intermediate Modification. Intermediate modifications are those that do
not fit the definitions in 16.89.090(A) or (C). The Planning Director will
review intermediate modifications under the Type II process. If the Planning
Director approves an intermediate modification, notice of the decision will be
made in accordance with the Type II process. The individuals noticed may obtain
a public hearing on the issue by filing a request in writing within ten days of
the notice mailing date.  Any additional costs of such hearings shall be paid
by the modification applicant.  Hearing notice shall follow the requirements of
the procedure type of the original application.
   C.   Major Modification. Any modification that would result in a substantial
impact to an approved site plan, land use decision, or condition of approval is
a major modification.  Major modifications shall be processed using the
procedure type of the original application.
   D.   Modification criteria.  Modification applications shall be evaluated
based on the criteria pertaining to the original application being modified. 
(Ord. 1111, 2003; Ord 1237, 2007)
16.89.100   Administrative Reviews.
Where a determination about a proposed use, structure or the legality of a
parcel cannot be made without interpretation or the exercise of factual, policy
or legal judgment, the proposed use, structure, or the legality of a lot or
parcel may be reviewed as an administrative review subject to submittal of an
application as provided in this chapter. The administrative review procedures,
as provided below, shall be followed in making these decisions.
   A.   The decision shall be made on the basis of the applicable city
comprehensive plan and applicable standards and criteria in the City Of Canby
land development and planning ordinance. The Planning Director or designee may
attach any conditions of approval deemed necessary to ensure conformance of the
use, structure, lot or parcel to the standards or criteria. Administrative
Review Applications may be submitted and shall be signed as required in this
chapter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the Planning
Director or designee may forward any land use permit or application to the
planning commission for a public hearing and initial decision.
   B.   Notice of a decision shall be sent to the applicant, the owner(s) of
the subject property, the co-tenants if the subject property is owned by
tenants in common, and all property owners within the notification area
prescribed by this chapter or as required by state law or administrative rule.
   C.   The applicant or any persons aggrieved or affected by the decision may
file a request for a hearing to the City Planning Department within 10 days of
the date the decision was rendered. The request must follow procedures in
Sections 16.89.030 and 040.
   D.   The applicant may file a request for reconsideration without a hearing
to the Planning Department within 10 days of the date the decision was
rendered. The request must be in writing and received in the Planning
Department office prior to the decision being final, and should explain wherein
the decision is factually or legally incorrect, or state new facts material to
the decision that were not available to the Planning Director, or propose
modifications that will better conform the proposal to the requirements of this
title. The request for reconsideration shall include a signed 30-day waiver of
the 120-day time limit in the Oregon Revised Statues.
      Applicants shall be limited to one request for reconsideration per
application. The Planning Director shall reconsider the matter and provide
notice to the person requesting reconsideration and as required in subsection
(B) of this section.
   E.   When reconsideration has been requested, the decision is stayed until
final action is taken. (Ord. 1514, 2019)
Division X. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION
CHAPTER 16.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
16.110.010   Purpose.
   
16.110.020   Definitions.
   
16.110.025   Heritage and Landmarks Commission.
   
16.110.030   Heritage and Landmarks Commission – powers and duties.
   
16.110.035   Inventory of historic resources.
   
16.110.040   Register of Historic Landmarks and Historic Districts.
   
16.110.045   Designation procedure for Historic Landmarks and Historic
Districts.
   
16.110.050   Review notice and public hearing procedures.
   
16.110.055   Criteria for Historic Landmark and Historic District designation.
   
16.110.070   Building Code requirements and handicap access.
   
16.110.075   Moving or demolition of a landmark or contributing resource.
   
16.110.080   Alteration of a Historic Landmark or contributing resource, or new
construction a within a Historic District.
   
16.110.085   Partitions and subdivisions.
   
16.110.090   Incentives.
   
16.110.095   Casualty destruction.
   
16.110.100   Fees.
   
16.110.105   Enforcement.
   
16.110.110   Penalties.
   
16.110.115   Official action.
   
16.110.120   Abatement of violation.
   
16.110.125   Injunctive relief.
   
16.110.130   Evidence of violation.
   
16.110.135   Cumulative remedies.
   
16.110.140   Interpretation, regulations, and procedures.
   
16.110.145   Appeals.
   
16.110.185   Carryover provisions.
   
16.110.190   Severability.
16.110.010   Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the historic, educational, cultural,
architectural, economic and general welfare of the public, and to safeguard the
city's historic and cultural heritage through the identification, preservation
and protection of structures, site, objects and districts of cultural interest
within the city. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   A.   Foster community pride and a sense of cultural identity.
   B.   Strengthen the city's economy by enhancing property values and
enhancing the historic and cultural resources for tourists, visitors and
residents and to serve as a support and stimulus for business and industry.
   C.   To encourage public knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the
city's history and culture.
   D.   To facilitate and encourage restoration and maintenance of historic
buildings, structures, or other physical objects and geographical areas.
   E.   To preserve diverse architectural styles reflecting periods of the
city's historical and architectural development, and to encourage complementary
design and construction impacting historic development.
   F.   To identify and resolve conflicts between the preservation of historic
and cultural resources and alternative land uses.
   G.   To integrate the management of historic and cultural resources into
public and private land management and development processes.
   H.   To provide an additional means to implement the mandates of Statewide
Planning Goal 5 and the Comprehensive Plan policies relating to historic
resources.
   I.   To recognize the importance of historic transportation corridors
(railroad venue and 99-E, Road of a Thousand Wonders, Territorial and Market
roads) and waterways (Willamette and Molalla Rivers) to the origin and
development of the Canby community. (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.015
(Ord. 905, 1994; Deleted by Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.020   Definitions.
For purposes of Division X, the following terms mean:
   Alteration .  Changes to the exterior of a Landmark or Contributing
Resource; minor being that which does not change the existing appearance or
material, or which duplicates or restores the affected exterior features and
materials, as determined from historic photographs or other evidence of
original features or materials; major being that which does change the existing
material or appearance.  (See section 16.110.080)
   Building Code .  State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code (Commercial
Code); or state of Oregon One and Two Family Dwelling Code (Residential Code)
   Heritage and Landmarks Commission .  An appointed committee of volunteers
who are each experts in some aspect of historic preservation and who review all
designations, alterations, demolitions and other activities involving historic
resources. (See section 16.110.025) (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   Certificate of Appropriateness .  An official permit which indicates
approval of all proposed alterations, construction, and development affecting
designated landmarks or districts. This is in addition to the normal building
permit.  (see section 16.10.080).
   Commission .  Canby's Planning Commission.  (See Chapter 16.06)
   Conflicting Use .  Development or redevelopment planned for a property which
may result in demolition, alteration or moving of a Landmark or Contributing
Resource.
   Contributing Resource. A building, site, structure, or object within a
Historic District that contributes to its character. Such resources to be
identified at the time of adoption of the Historic District or added at a later
date through the same process.
   Corridor .  See Historic Corridor.
   Council .  Canby's City Council.
   Demolish .  Raze, destroy, dismantle, deface or, in any other manner, cause
partial or total destruction of a Contributing Resource or Landmark.  (See
section 16.110.075)
   Historic Corridor .  A linear shaped grouping of properties, sites, trail,
roadway, rail corridor, landscape corridor, or waterway, associated with events
that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history.
   Historic District .  Includes contiguous or non-contiguous districts or
corridors. A contiguous district is a geographically defined area composed of
structures, sites and objects classified as Landmarks, Contributing Resources
and non-contributing resources.  A non-contiguous district is a non-
geographically related collection of landmark quality structures, sites and
objects which have a common builder, style, theme, or other relationship.  May
be referred to as a district within the ordinance. (See section 16.110.045)
   Historic Landmark .  Any building, site, object, or structure and the
property surrounding it designated under this division as historically,
architecturally, or environmentally significant. May be referred to as landmark
within ordinance. (See section 16.110.040)
   Historical Protection Overlay Zone .  Specific zoning that is additional to
base zone as per section 16.36. The Historical Protection Overlay Zone is
applied to each property designated as a Historic Landmark or District, unless
the City Council denies such zoning (See section 16.110.045).
   Historic Resource .  A general term for buildings, sites, structures and
objects which are Historic Landmarks or Historic District, or have potential to
be.
   Historic Resource of Statewide Significance. A building, structure, object,
site, or district that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
   Historic Themes .  Archeology and prehistory, exploration, western
migration, settlement, agriculture, commerce and industry, transportation,
government politics and military activities or culture.
   Moving .  Relocating a historic or cultural resource from its existing
parcel or tax lot, to another site.
   Non-compatible .  An addition or new construction which is not
architecturally or stylistically consistent with a historic resource or
surrounding resources in a District.
   Non-contiguous District .  see Historic District.
   Non-contributing Resource .  A structure, site or object within a Historic
District, which is neither a Contributing Resource, nor a Landmark.
   Planning Director .  Person holding the position of Planning Director for
the City of Canby, or their designated representative. (Ord. 905, 1994; Ord.
1061, 2000)
16.110.025   Heritage and Landmarks Commission.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the decisions regarding alterations to
Historic Landmarks and recommendations for designation of Historic Landmarks or
Districts, shall be accomplished by a City of Canby Heritage and Landmarks
Commission. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   A.   Appointment and Composition.  The City Council shall appoint seven (7)
individuals with a demonstrated positive interest, knowledge, or competence in
historic preservation. An additional non-voting member shall be a High School
Student, residing within the Canby School District boundary.  To the extent
possible, individuals chosen to serve on the Heritage and Landmarks Commission
shall represent the disciplines listed in The Secretary of the Interior’s
Proposed Historic Preservation Qualification Standards. A majority of Heritage
and Landmarks Commission voting members shall reside or work inside Canby’s
Urban Growth Boundary. (Ord. 1369, 2013; Ord. 1435 2016; Ord. 1469, 2018)
   Members are appointed by the City Council upon recommendation by the
Committee Chairperson and assigned Council Liaison. The Mayor may vote only to
break a tie, if necessary. Any Heritage and Landmarks Commission member failing
to attend three (3) consecutive meetings without approval of the Heritage and
Landmarks Commission Chairperson may be removed by the Council and a new member
appointed to complete the unexpired term. Heritage and Landmarks Commission
members serve at the pleasure of the City Council and are subject to removal at
any time by the Council with or without cause. (Ord. 1369, 2013; Ord. 1469,
2018)
   B.   Terms of Service.  The members of the Heritage and Landmarks Commission
shall be appointed for three (3) years, and may be reappointed or removed at
the discretion of the City Council.  The High School Student’s term shall end
upon graduation. (Ord. 905, 1994; Ord. 1061, 2000; Ord. 1369 2013; Ord. 1369,
2013; Ord. 1469, 2018)
   C.   Officers.  Each year at the first meeting the Heritage and Landmarks
Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson who shall serve for
a term of one (1) year.
16.110.030   Heritage and Landmarks Commission– Powers and Duties
It is the responsibility of the Heritage and Landmarks Commission to ensure
that the purposes of this section are implemented, and to perform the following
duties (Ord. 1469, 2018):
   A.   Adopt rules to govern its deliberations and decisions, including a
method to record its proceedings.
   B.   Carry out the duties described for it in this ordinance and assist the
Planning Director, Planning Commission and City Council on historic
preservation matters (Ord. 1469, 2018).
   C.   Maintain and update an inventory of historic resources within the city,
as provided under section 16.110.035.
   D.   Review and render decisions on all historic landmark and historic
district applications, as provided under section 16.110.045.
   E.   Review and make recommendations on application of the Historical
Protection Overlay Zone, as provided under section 16.110.045.
   F.   Review and render decisions on proposals to alter the exterior of a
Historic Landmark subject to the procedures and criteria set forth in section
16.110.080.
   G.   Review and render decisions on all proposed new construction on
property where a Historic Landmark is located, or within a Historic District,
subject to the procedures and criteria set forth in section 16.110.080.
   H.   Review all requests for demolition of a historic landmark or
contributing resource, as provided under section 16.110.075.
   I.   Review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission on all
Conditional Use applications under section 16.38.
   J.   Review and make recommendations on all partitions and subdivisions of
designated properties, as provided under section 16.110.085.
   K.   Disseminate information to educate the public as to local, state and
federal laws protecting antiquities and historic places.
   L.   Act as consultant for local preservation groups, educational workshops,
signage and monumentation projects, and other similar projects.
   M.   Advise interest groups, agencies, boards, commissions, and citizens on
matters relating to historic preservation within the city.
   N.   Provide design guidance for historic property owners. (Ord. 905, 1994;
Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.035   Inventory of Historic Resources
   A.   The Planning Commission, upon initiation and review by the Heritage and
Landmarks Commission, shall develop or adopt a system for evaluating historic
resources. The system shall rank surveyed historic resources as eligible,
potentially eligible, or ineligible for designation as a Historic Landmark or
Historic District. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   B.   The Planning Commission, upon initiation and review by the Heritage and
Landmarks Commission, shall periodically update the Inventory of Historic
Resources and make it available to the public. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   C.   Properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
including all properties within National Register Historic District boundaries,
are automatically designated as Historic Landmarks or Historic Districts. As
Historic Resources of Statewide Significance, all such properties are subject
to the regulations in Sections 16.110.070-085, pursuant to Oregon
Administrative Rule 660-023-200. However, only properties designated as
Historic Landmarks or Historic Districts by the City of Canby as provided for
under this Division are eligible for the localpublic incentives and zoning
designation herein. (Orig. section del., repl. by Ord. 1061, 2000; Ord. 1111,
2003)
16.110.040   Register of Historic Landmarks and Historic Districts.
   A.   The Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall maintain a register of
Historic Landmarks and Historic Districts, consisting of all properties so
designated by the City Council. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   B.   The three structures already designated under the Historic Overlay
provisions in 1984, by Ordinance No. 742, are hereby added to the Register of
Historic Landmarks.
   C.   Designated Historic Landmarks and Historic Districts shall have the
Historical Protection Overlay Zone applied to them unless the City Council
finds that such zoning is not appropriate to a specific piece of property.
(Orig. section del., repl. by Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.045   Designation Procedure for Historic Landmarks and Historic
Districts.
   A.   The City’s Historic Landmark designation procedure may be initiated by
the City Council, Planning Commission, Heritage and Landmarks Commission, or
owner(s) of the proposed landmark, hereby referred to as applicant. (Ord. 1469,
2018)
   B.   The City’s Historic District designation procedure may be initiated by
the Heritage and Landmarks Commission, the City Council, Planning Commission,
any citizen, or by owners of at least fifty-one (51) percent of the privately
owned property in the area to be designated. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   C.   No property shall be designated without the written consent of the
owner, or, in the case of multiple ownership, a majority of the owners. If the
owner or owners refuse to consent to designation at any point during the
designation process, the property shall be removed from any form of
consideration for local designation.
   D.   The Planning Director shall establish standards for a complete
application and may require a pre-application conference. Upon acceptance of a
complete application, the Planning Director shall schedule a public hearing
pursuant to applicable state laws.
   E.   After review, notice and public hearing, as specified in section
16.110.050, the Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall make a decision on the
City’s Historic Landmark or Historic District designation. In addition the
Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall make a recommendation to the Canby
Planning Commission and City Council for assignment of the Historical
Protection Overlay Zone. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   F.   The Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall develop findings to support
its decisions. These findings shall indicate those elements of a property or
district that are included in the designation and subject to regulation under
the provisions of this Division. A list of Contributing Resources shall be
identified upon creation of a Historic District. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   G.   Upon receipt of the record of the Heritage and Landmarks Commission
proceedings and the recommendation of the Heritage and Landmarks Commission,
the Planning Commission shall conduct a review of that record and shall make a
recommendation to the City Council on the overlay zone designation. The City
Council shall conduct a review of the records of both the Heritage and
Landmarks Commission and Planning Commission and shall vote to approve, deny,
or approve subject to modifications the recommendation that has been forwarded
to them. The Planning Commission and City Council may, but are not required to,
hold new public hearings on the matter. (Ord. 905, 1994; Ord. 1061, 2000; Ord.
1111, 2003; Ord. 1469, 2018)
16.110.050   Review, Notice, Public Hearing Procedures.
   A.   Review of any application pursuant to this chapter shall follow
procedures set forth in Canby Ordinance Chapter 16.89.
   B.   The Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall follow the public hearing
procedures found in ordinance section 16.88.130(C) and the notice requirements
of ordinance section 16.88.130 (D) when reviewing the following applications
(Ord. 1469, 2018):
      1.   Designation of a Historic Landmark or Historic District;
      2.   Modification of a Historic District boundary;
      3.   Demolition or moving of a Historic Landmark or Contributing
Resource;
      4.   Alterations subject to the Heritage and Landmarks Commission review.
(Ord. 1469, 2018)
      5.   New construction subject to the Heritage and Landmarks Commission
review. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   C.   The Planning Commission shall apply the criteria of this ordinance to
major alterations to be reviewed within its jurisdiction for reasons other than
Historic Preservation purposes, but which occurs on or to a Historic Landmark
or a Contributing Resource within a Historic District. The Heritage and
Landmarks Commission will make recommendations regarding these matters to the
Planning Commission and the commission shall recognize such recommendations in
its action. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   D.   The Planning Director shall apply the criteria of this ordinance when
reviewing:
      1.   Minor alterations subject to the Planning Director's jurisdiction
(see section 16.110.020, definition of Alterations.)
      2.   Lot line adjustments which occur on or to a Landmark or within a
Historic District.
   E.   All other historically related administrative actions for which the
Planning Director has decision making authority shall be subject to the review
procedures provided in section 16.89.
   F.   The Planning Commission shall receive notice of all public hearings
held by the Heritage and Landmarks Commission (Ord. 905, 1994; renumb., mod. by
Ord. 1061, 2000; Ord. 1080, 2001; Ord. 1469, 2018)
16.110.055   Criteria for Historic Landmark and Historic District Designation.
   A.   In order to designate buildings, sites, objects, or structures as
Historic Landmarks or Historic Districts, it shall be found that:
      1.   The resource is about 50 years or older, or the resource is less
than 50 years old but of exceptional importance with regard to its historical,
architectural or environmental significance; and
      2.   There is historical, architectural, or environmental significance.
   B.   The following factors shall be considered in determining whether the
criteria found in subsection 1(b) of this section are satisfied:
      1.   Historical Significance.
         a.   Association with the life or activities of a person, group,
organization, or institution that has made a significant contribution to the
city, county, state or nation.
         b.   Association with an event that has made a significant
contribution to the city, county, state or nation.
         c.   Association with broad patterns of cultural, political, social,
economic, industrial, or agricultural history.
         d.   Potential for providing information of a prehistoric or historic
nature in the city, county, state, or nation.
         e.   Listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
      2.   Architectural Significance.
         a.   Example of a particular architectural style, building type and/or
convention.
         b.   Example of quality of composition, detailing and/or
craftsmanship.
         c.   An example of a particular material and/or method of
construction.
         d.   It retains original design features, materials and/or character.
         e.   The only remaining, or one of few remaining resources of a
particular style, building type, design, material, or method of construction.
         f.   The work of a master architect.
      3.   Environmental Significance.
         a.   A visual landmark in the neighborhood or community.
         b.   Existing land use surrounding the resource contributes to the
integrity of the pertinent historic period.
         c.   It consists of a grouping of interrelated elements including
historic structures, plant materials and landscapes, view sheds and natural
features.
         d.   It contributes to the continuity or historic character of the
street, neighborhood and/or community. (Ord. 905, 1994; renumb., mod. by Ord.
1061, 2000)
16.110.070   Building Code Requirements, Handicapped Access.
   A.   Permits Required.  Any alteration or relocation of a Historic Landmark
shall be subject to the applicable regulations under the Building Code.
   B.   Waivers.  Except for 1-2 family structures, as provided in section 104
(f) of the Uniform Building Code, repairs, alterations, and additions necessary
for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or continued use of a
Historic Landmark, or building within a Historic District or Historic Corridor,
may be made without conformance to all the requirements of the Uniform Building
Code when authorized by the Building Official, provided:
      1.   Any unsafe conditions as described in the Uniform Building Code are
corrected;
      2.   The restored building or structure will be no more hazardous, based
on life safety, fire safety, and sanitation, than the existing building; and
      3.   The Building Official seeks the advice of the Heritage and Landmarks
Commission and/or the Oregon State Historic Preservation Officer. (Ord. 1469,
2018)
   C.   Alterations of Landmarks and Contributing Resources to provide handicap
access, as approved by the Building Official with advice from the Planning
Director and Heritage and Landmarks Commission, shall be allowed. To the extent
practical, the design of the alteration shall be discreet and preserve the
historic features upon which the designation is based. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   D.   Modifications to certain regulations. As pertains to designated
properties, the Planning Commission may modify the Land Development and
Planning Code regulations pertaining to signs, fence and wall provisions,
general provisions regarding height, yards, area, lot width, frontage, depth,
coverage, number of off-street parking spaces required, and regulations
prescribing setbacks, if the modifications:
      1.   Are necessary to preserve the historic character, appearance or
integrity of the proposed Historic Landmark, and
      2.   Are in accordance with the purposes of the zoning and sign
regulations. 
   The Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall make recommendations to the
Planning Commission on such matters. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   E.   Appeals. In the case of appeals related to the application of the
Uniform Building Code to a Historic Landmark, or building within a Historic
District, the City Council or the appropriate Local or state appeals board
shall seek the advice of the state Historic Preservation Officer. (Ord. 905,
1994; Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.075   Moving or Demolition of a Landmark or Contributing Resource.
   A.   Purpose.  The intent of this subsection is to protect Historic
Landmarks and Historic Districts from destructive acts and to provide the
citizens of the city time to review the significance of a Historic Landmark or
Contributing Resource within a Historic District, and to pursue options to
preserve such building(s) if historic preservation is deemed in the best
interest of the community.
   B.   Prior to submittal of a request for moving or demolition, a
preservation plan is required.
      1.   The applicant shall prepare and submit a plan for preservation of
the Landmark or Contributing Resource. A pre-application conference shall be
scheduled to allow the applicant and staff to discuss the proposal, the
preservation plan requirements, and the applicable criteria. The plan shall be
reviewed by the Heritage and Landmarks Commission. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
      2.   The Preservation Plan shall include a narrative describing how the
applicant will accomplish all of the following:
         a.   The resource shall be advertised in the local, regional and
historic preservation newspapers of general circulation in the area, once per
week during the pre-application period.
         b.   A city-provided sign shall be placed on the property informing
the public of intended action which will remove or demolish the structure. The
sign shall remain on the property until a permit is issued.
         c.   Information will be prepared and made available, related to the
history and sale of the property, to all who inquire.
         d.   The proposed plan for the new use of the Historic Landmark site
shall be provided.
         e.   A record of the parties who have expressed an interest in the
structure shall be provided and, to ensure that an adequate effort has been
made to secure a relocation site, a list of locations and owners who have been
contacted regarding purchase of a relocation site shall be provided.
      3.   Following receipt of the preservation plan, the Planning Director
shall review and approve said plan and shall issue a media release to local
newspapers of general circulation. The media release shall include, but not be
limited to, a description of the significance of the Historic Landmark, the
reasons for the proposed demolition or removal, and the possible options for
preserving the Historic Landmark.
   C.   Moving or Demolition Permit.  No building designated as a Historic
Landmark or Contributing Resource within a Historic District shall be
intentionally moved unless such action is approved by the Heritage and
Landmarks Commission. No building designated as a Historic Landmark or
Contributing Resource within a Historic District shall be intentionally
demolished unless such action is approved by the City Council. Application for
permit to move or demolish such a building shall be made to the Planning
Director. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   D.   Public Hearing Review. The Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall hold
a public hearing under provisions and procedures in Subsection 16.110.050, to
review the request to move, demolish or destroy a Historic Landmark or
Contributing Resource within a Historic District. The Heritage and Landmarks
Commission shall make a final decision on applications to move a Landmark or
Contributing Resource and shall make a recommendation to the City Council on
demolitions. The Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall make written findings
supporting its decision to approve or suspend the request. The burden of proof
lies with the applicant. For demolition applications, the City Council shall
review the record and findings of the Heritage and Landmarks Commission and
make a final decision. The Council may, but is not required to, hold a public
hearing on the matter. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   E.   Moving a Historic Landmark or Contributing Resource.  In order to allow
the moving of a Historic Landmark or Contributing Resource, the Heritage and
Landmarks Commission shall consider the following (Ord. 1469, 2018):
      1.   Relocation is the only alternative for preservation of the Historic
Landmark or Contributing Resource;
      2.   The proposed relocation site will not greatly reduce the historical
and/or architectural significance of the Historic Landmark or Contributing
Resource; the site is a contextually appropriate setting; it is within the city
and preferably within the neighborhood within which it is currently located;
      3.   The designated resource cannot reasonably be used in conjunction
with the proposed use;
      4.   The continued location of the Landmark or Contributing Resource on
the proposed development site precludes development on the site which would
provide a greater community benefit;
      5.   The designated Landmark or Contributing Resource is structurally
capable of relocation;
      6.   If the Landmark or Contributing Resource is relocated within the
city, the owner of the relocation site agrees, as a condition of the purchase
agreement, to apply within ninety (90) days of relocation, to the city for
designation as a Historic Landmark, to be protected under the provisions of
this ordinance;
      7.   The loss of the Landmark or Contributing Resource will not affect
the integrity of a Historic District; and adequate effort has been made to seek
a relocation site within the Historic District.
   F.   Demolition of a Historic Landmark or Contributing Resource.  In order
to allow the demolition of a Landmark or Contributing Resource, the Heritage
and Landmarks Commission and City Council shall consider the following (Ord.
1469, 2018):
      1.   All plans, drawings, and photographs submitted by the applicant;
and,
      2.   Information presented at the public hearing concerning the proposed
work proposal; and,
      3.   The Canby Comprehensive Plan; and
      4.   The purposes of this ordinance as set forth in section 16.110.010;
and
      5.   The criteria used in the original designation of the Historic
Landmark or Historic District in which the property under consideration is
situated; and,
      6.   The historical and architectural style, the general design,
arrangement, materials of the structure in question, or its appurtenant
fixtures; the relationship of such features to the other buildings within the
district or corridor; and the position of the building in relation to public
rights-of-way and to other buildings and structures in the area; and,
      7.   The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of the district or corridor which cause it to possess a
special character or special historical or aesthetic interest or value; and,
      8.   Whether suspension of the permit will involve substantial hardship
to the applicant, and whether approval of the request would act to the
substantial detriment of the public welfare and would be contrary to the intent
and purposes of this ordinance; and,
      9.   When applicable, the findings of the Building Official in
determining the status of the subject building as a dangerous building under
section 15.16 of the Municipal Code, and the feasibility of correcting the
deficiencies to meet the requirements of the City Council rather than
demolishing the building.
   G.   Approval of Moving or Demolition Request/Appeals.  The Heritage and
Landmarks Commission or City Council may approve the moving or demolition
request in consideration of the provisions under 3 and 4, above. The action of
the Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall be transmitted to the applicant in
writing within ten (10) days of the decision on the request, and shall be final
after a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of the letter and findings
approving the request, unless a notice of appeal is filed by any aggrieved
party, pursuant to section 16.89. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   H.   Suspension of Moving or Demolition Permit Request.  The Heritage and
Landmarks Commission may suspend the request for moving or demolition of a
Historic Landmark or Contributing Resource if it determines that in the
interest of preserving historic values for public benefit, the building should
not be moved or demolished. Written findings supporting the suspension of the
request shall be transmitted to the applicant within ten (10) days of the final
public hearing on the request. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   I.   Stay of Moving or Demolition.  If the moving or demolition request is
suspended by the Heritage and Landmarks Commission, the written finding
supporting the action to suspend the request shall be transmitted to the
Planning Director, along with a request that the enforcement of any applicable
notice and order of the building official be stayed during the pendency of an
appeal, or for a period of not more than sixty (60) days from the date of the
letter and findings supporting the suspension. During this stay of demolition
period, the following actions may be taken (Ord. 1469, 2018):
      1.   The Fire Marshal, Chief of Police, or the City Council designee, may
require the owner or other party responsible for the subject building to take
appropriate actions, other than demolition, to protect the public from
hazardous conditions associated with the building.
      2.   The applicant may be required by the Heritage and Landmarks
Commission to continue to carry out the Preservation Plan (Section
16.110.075 (2)) activities through the entire stay of moving or demolition.
(Ord. 1469, 2018)
      3.   The Heritage and Landmarks Commission may research programs or
projects underway which could result in public or private acquisition of the
subject building and site, and assess the potential for the success of these
programs or projects. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
         a.   If the Heritage and Landmarks Commission determines that there is
reasonable grounds to believe that such program or project may be successful,
it may extend the suspension period up to thirty (30) additional days per
extension, not to exceed more than a total of 120 days from the date of the
letter and finding suspending the request. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
         b.   If the Heritage and Landmarks Commission determines that all such
programs or projects are unlikely to be successful, and the applicant has not
withdrawn his application for a demolition permit or taken appropriate
alternative action to correct the hazards associated with the subject building
as provided in a notice and order of the City Council, then at the end of the
stay of demolition period, the building official may, with advice of the
Planning Director, issue such permit, subject to all other applicable codes and
ordinances. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   J.   Appeal of Stay of Demolition.  Action of the Heritage and Landmarks
Commission in suspending issuance of the permit for demolition may be appealed
by the applicant, to the City Council, within fifteen (15) days of the date of
the written findings suspending the demolition permit, by filing a notice of
appeal, as provided in section 16.88.140. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   K.   Documentation Required.  When moving or demolition is imminent, whether
by direct approval or if efforts during the Preservation Plan and Stay of
Demolition are unsuccessful, the following complete documentation of the
structure(s) is required to be submitted to the Planning Director by the
applicant, or access allowed to a designee of the Heritage and Landmarks
Commission (Ord. 1469, 2018):
      1.   Floor plans, to scale, of the structure(s) and related structures.
      2.   Site plan, to scale, showing surrounding roadways, landscaping,
natural features, structure(s) and related structure(s).
      3.   Photographs of all exterior elevations.
      4.   Photographs of architectural detail not shown in elevation
photographs.
      5.   The Historic Preservation League of Oregon, Canby Heritage League,
Old Home Forum, and any other local preservation group shall be given written
notice of the opportunity to salvage and record the resource. A copy of such
notice shall also be given to the Planning Director.
   L.   Moving or Demolition Permit Issuance.  A moving or demolition permit
for a Landmark found to comply with all provisions set forth in Division 10 of
this ordinance shall not be issued until all development permit applications
for the new use or development have been approved by the city.  (Ord. 905,
1994; Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.080   Alteration of a Historic Landmark or Contributing Resource, or New
Construction Within a Historic District.
   A.   Purpose.  It is the intent of this subsection to provide for the
appropriate level of review for proposed new construction, alterations and
development affecting properties within Historic Districts, or those affecting
Historic Landmarks, and to provide criteria for review.
   B.   Application Requirements.  In addition to any normally required
building permits, a Certificate of Appropriateness is required. Prior to formal
application, a pre-application conference between the applicant and Planning
Director shall occur. All applications for alterations and development made
pursuant to this section shall include:
      1.   The applicant's name and address.
      2.   The owner's name(s) and address.
      3.   A detailed explanation of proposed alterations.
      4.   A written description of the location of the site and, if
applicable, boundaries of the Historic District or Corridor.
      5.   A map illustrating the location of the site and, if applicable,
boundaries of the District.
      6.   A list of exterior materials pertinent to the application request.
      7.   Drawings:
         a.   Side elevation for each side of any affected structure,
         b.   Shall indicate dimensions and be to scale,
         c.   Photographs may be used in lieu of drawings for small projects.
   Site plan showing relationship of structure(s) to roadways, parking areas,
access drives, landscape features, plant materials, fences and other pertinent
elements, drawn to scale.
   C.   Maintenance.  The normal responsibilities of the property owner to
care, repair and replace with like materials can be done without formal review.
Normal maintenance may include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Painting and related preparation of the structure.
      2.   Repair and/or replacement of roofing materials with the same kind
existing.
      3.   Ground care and maintenance required for the permitted use on the
property.
      4.   Replacement of fences, shrubs or other yard fixtures or landscaping
with like type or style.
      5.   Existing materials may be replaced in-kind, of either building or
grounds because of damage or decay of materials.
      6.   Installation and maintenance of irrigation systems.
   D.   Minor Alterations.  The Planning Director shall determine the status of
a proposed alteration. While the following improvements may not always require
a regular building permit, minor alterations shall always be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Director, who may consult with the Heritage and
Landmarks Commission, or any member thereof, in applying the provisions of this
section. A Certificate of Appropriateness is required for minor alterations. 
An alteration shall be considered minor when the result of the proposed action
is to restore portions of the exterior to the original historic appearance
while performing repairs, such as (Ord. 1469, 2018):
      1.   Addition of gutters and downspouts (suggest repair of built-in,
wooden, or half-round gutters and round downspouts).
      2.   Repairing or providing a compatible new foundation that does not
result in raising or lowering the building elevation.
      3.   Change in material to match original type of material on the
structure or grounds.
      4.   Change in type of roof material in character with the original
roofing material.
      5.   Replacement of storm windows or doors with wooden, dark anodized,
clad or painted in compatible color.
   E.    New Construction or Major Alterations Criteria.  The Heritage and
Landmarks Commission shall review all proposed new construction and alterations
which exceed a minor status. A request for a new construction or alteration
permit under this provision shall be made on the appropriate application form
provided by the Planning Department. Review and approval of an application
shall consider the following Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation (Ord. 1469, 2018):
      1.   A property shall be used as it was historically or be given a new
use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features,
spaces, and special relationships.
      2.   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features and
spaces and special relationships that characterize a property shall be avoided.
      3.   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other
historic properties, shall not be undertaken.
      4.   Changes to properties that have acquired historic significance in
their own right shall be retained and preserved.
      5.   Distinctive materials, features, finish and construction techniques
or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property shall be
preserved.
      6.   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall
be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence.
      7.   Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, shall be undertaken
using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic
materials shall not be used.
      8.   Archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and
preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures
shall be undertaken.
      9.   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials, features, and special relationships that
characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old
and shall be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale, and
proportion and massing, to protect the historic integrity of the property and
its environment.
      10.   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property, including historic plant materials, and
its environment would be unimpaired.  (Additional Criteria for Consideration)
      11.   The location and orientation of the new structure on the site is
consistent with the typical location and orientation of similar structures on
the site or within the District or Corridor, considering setbacks, distances
between structures, location of entrances and similar siting considerations.
      12.   Changes to yard areas including planters, fences, ponds, walkways
and landscape materials, should be compatible with the overall historic
setting. (Ord. 905, 1994; Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.085   Partitions and Subdivisions.
The Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall review and make recommendations, as
soon as possible, to the Planning Commission, on all proposed partitions or
subdivisions of sites designated as a Landmark or located within a Historic
District. The Planning Director shall transmit applications to the Heritage and
Landmarks Commission as soon as possible. Review of proposed subdivisions or
partitions shall be based on the following criteria (Ord. 1469, 2018):
   A.   The partition or subdivision does not allow a significant feature of
the original site, as identified in the designation action and inventory, to be
located on a separate site from the Landmark.
   B.   The partition or subdivision allows adequate setbacks from Landmark
improvements to provide for buffering and mitigation of impacts associated with
development of the new parcels. Such special required setbacks shall be
indicated on the plat or partition or in deed covenants.
   C.   Yard and landscaped areas including large trees and shrubs associated
with the Historic Landmark structure shall be retained with the structure
whenever possible. (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.090   Incentives.
   A.   Economic.
      1.   The Planning Director or Heritage and Landmarks Commission shall
provide all applicants and interested parties with details regarding monies
available from national, state, county, and local sources. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
      2.   The city shall explore and consider the feasibility and advisability
of the adoption of economic incentives for the benefit of owners of historic
resources (i.e. revolving fund, to offset hardship, buy endangered properties,
offer low interest loans or grants, tax relief).
      3.   The city shall explore and consider property tax rebates for
designated properties.
      4.   The city shall explore and consider Community Development Block
Grants for rehabilitation of designated properties.
      5.   The city shall encourage the establishment of a mechanism for
providing opportunities for:
      6.   Cooperative purchase of materials for improvement;
      7.   Assistance in application for National Register application; and
      8.   Facilitating loan and insurance availability for designated
properties.
   B.   Educational.
      1.   The Planning Director shall provide owners of historic resources
with the names of local, state, and national preservation organizations and
pertinent publications.
      2.   All owners of historic resources shall be invited to attend an
annual preservation workshop sponsored either by the city, or in partnership
with other jurisdictions in the county and shall be made aware of their
eligibility for and advantage of membership in the Historic Preservation League
of Oregon.
      3.   The Heritage and Landmarks Commission members may provide design
guidance (but not to be construed as free long-term design service). (Ord.
1469, 2018)
      4.   The Heritage and Landmarks Commission and the Planning Director
shall work with Parks Development and local developers to feature historic
themes at appropriate sites. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   C.   Recognition.
      1.   The city shall provide all owners of designated Landmark properties
with an appropriate certificate.
      2.   Consistent with the requirements of the Sign Code section 16.42,
property owners of Historic Landmarks and Contributing Resources shall be
encouraged to display a standard identifying sign, as available through local
preservation organizations. (Ord. 905, 1994; renumb. by Ord. 1061; 2000)
16.110.095   Casualty Destruction.
A historic resource damaged or destroyed by unintentional means, to the extent
that the cost of rebuilding damaged portions would exceed fifty (50) percent of
the replacement value of the entire historic resource, may be removed from the
Landmark status list by requesting such action of the City Council, and
providing such proof as is necessary to establish that the requirements of this
section are met. (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.100   Fees.
No fees or deposits for applications, plan reviews, interpretations or any
other action pursuant to this chapter, shall be established. (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.105   Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Planning Director to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and to insure compliance with conditions of approval or postponement.
(Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.110   Penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with, or who violates any provision of this
chapter, except the demolition provisions of section 16.110.075, or who
violates or fails to carry out the terms and conditions of any approval granted
pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 or
more than $500.00 per violation. The demolition of a Landmark in violation of
section 16.110.075 is punishable by a fine of not less than $500, nor more than
$25,000. (Ord. 905, 1994; Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.115   Official Action.
All officials, departments and employees of the city vested with authority to
issue permits or grant approvals shall adhere to and require conformance with
this chapter, and shall issue no permit or grant approval for any development,
alteration, moving or demolition which violates or fails to comply with
conditions or standards imposed to carry out this chapter. Any permit or
approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this chapter,
whether intentional or otherwise, shall be void. (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.120   Abatement of Violations.
Any development which occurs contrary to the provisions of this chapter or
contrary to any permit or approval issued or granted hereunder is hereby
declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and may be abated by appropriate
proceedings.(Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.125   Injunctive Relief.
Upon request of the city administrator, the City Attorney may institute an
appropriate action in any court to enjoin the demolition, alteration or moving
of any historic resources, or noncontributing resource or construction on or to
any Landmark or within any Historic District which is in violation of any
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.130   Evidence of Violation. 
Proof of a violation of this chapter or permit or approval issued or granted
hereunder shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such violation is that of
the owner of the property upon which the unlawful activity, condition,
building, structure or other development exists. Prosecution, or lack thereof,
of the owner of the property, the occupant, or other person in possession or
control of the property shall not be deemed to relieve any other responsible
person. (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.135   Cumulative Remedies.
The rights, remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative, are
not mutually exclusive, and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and
penalties available to the city under any other provision of law. A person
holding a city business license who violates the provisions of this chapter is
also subject to a proceeding to consider revocation of the license pursuant to
Code section 5.04, Business Licenses. (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.140   Interpretation, Regulations and Procedures.
The Planning Director shall have the initial authority and responsibility to
interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this section. A request for
an interpretation of this section shall be made in writing and may be appealed
pursuant to section 16.110.145. The Planning Director may develop rules,
regulations and procedures to aid in the implementation and interpretation of
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 905, 1994; Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.145   Appeals.
   A.   Any person may appeal a decision of the Planning Director to the
Heritage and Landmarks Commission. The appeal must be filed within fifteen (15)
days of the written decision of the Planning Director. (Ord. 1469, 2018)
   B.   Any person may appeal a decision of the Heritage and Landmarks
Commission within fifteen (15) days of the written decision of the Commission.
The appeal will be heard by the City Council, pursuant to procedures set forth
in Code section 16.89. (Ord. 905, 1994; Ord. 1061, 2000; Ord. 1469, 2018)
16.110.150   
(Ord. 1061, 2000; del. by Ord. 1111, 2003)
16.110.155
(Renumb. to 16.110.090 by Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.160, .165, .170, .175, .180
(Ord. 905, 1994; Del. by Ord. 1061, 2000)
16.110.185   Carryover Provisions.
Any alteration of the three structures already designated under the Historic
Overlay provisions in 1984, by Ordinance No.742, shall be reviewed under
provisions of this chapter. (Tax Lot 6900 of Tax Map 3-1E-33CD; Tax Lot 1100 of
Tax Map 3-1B-33CC; and Tax Lot 2600 of Tax Map 3-1E-33CC.) (Ord. 905, 1994)
16.110.190   Severability.
Invalidity of a section or part of a section of this ordinance shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections or parts of sections. (Ord. 905,1994)
16.110 page 15
Division XI. – PARKS, OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION LAND
Chapter 16.120
GENERAL PROVISION
Sections:
   
16.120.010   Purpose
   
16.120.020   Minimum standards for park, open space and recreation land
   
16.120.030   Dedication procedures
   
16.120.040   Cash in lieu of dedication of land
   
16.120.050   Review procedure
   
16.120.060   Partial credit for private park, open space and recreational
facilities/areas:
   
16.120.070   Minimum standards for open space
   
16.120.090   Preservation and maintenance
16.120.010   Purpose
The availability of park, open space, and recreation land is an important
element in determining the character of a developing neighboring city to the
metropolitan area, such as City of Canby.  Land which substitutes trees, grass,
and vegetation for structures, paving, and other urban features provides not
only an aesthetically pleasing landscape with striking views of Mt. Hood, but
also buffers incompatible uses, and preserves sensitive environmental features
and important resources.  Parks, open space, natural parks and trail recreation
lands, together with support facilities, also help to meet the active and
passive recreational needs of the population of Canby; therefore, concurrent
development of support facilities is equally important.  This chapter
implements policies of Goal 8 of the Comprehensive Plan, the Park and
Recreation Master Plan, and Park and Open Space Acquisition Plan by outlining
provisions for parks, open space and recreational facilities in the City of
Canby.
16.120.020   Minimum standard for park, open space and recreation land
   A.   Parkland Dedication:  All new residential, commercial and industrial
developments shall be required to provide park, open space and recreation sites
to serve existing and future residents and employees of those developments. 
Multi-family developments which provide some “congregate” services and/or
facilities, such as group transportation, dining halls, emergency monitoring
systems, etc., but which have individual dwelling units rather than sleeping
quarters only, are considered to be multi-family developments for the purpose
of parkland dedication.  Licensed adult congregate living facilities, nursing
homes, and all other similar facilities which provide their clients with
individual beds and sleeping quarters, but in which all other care and service
are communal and provided by facility employees, are specifically exempt from
park land dedication and system development fee requirements.
      1.   The required parkland shall be dedicated as a condition of approval
for:
           a.   Approval of a tentative plat of a subdivision or partition.
         b.   Approval of site and design review for all development but
single-family and duplex development.
         c.   The replat or amendment of any site plan for multi-family
development or manufactured home park where dedication has not previously been
made or where the density of the development involved will be increased.
      2.   The City shall require land dedication or payment of the system
development charge (SDC) in lieu of land dedication (Section
4.20.170).  In addition, the City may credit private on-site park, open space
and recreation area(s) and facilities (Section
16.120.060).  The City may approve any combination of these elements.  Prior to
parkland dedication, a Level I Environmental Assessment of the lands proposed
for dedication shall be performed by the applicant as part of the site plan
approval for the project. 
   The following factors shall be utilized in the City’s choice of whether to
accept land or cash in lieu:
         1.   The topography, geology, public streets access to, parcel size,
shape, and location of land in the development available for dedication;
         2.   Relationship of site to surrounding land uses and the surrounding
transportation system;
         3.   Potential adverse/beneficial effects on environmentally sensitive
areas;
         4.   Compatibility with the Park and Recreation Master Plan and Park
and Open Space Acquisition Plan, Public Facilities element of the Comprehensive
Plan, Transportation System Plan and the City of Canby Parks Capital
Improvement Plan in effect at the time of dedication;
         5.   Opportunity for preservation of natural and historical features,
scenic viewpoints, watershed environments, and sections of land for wildlife
habitat.
         6.   Connections with, and continuity of, open space links, trails,
and other major components of the open space system for parks.
         7.   Availability of previously acquired property;
         8.   Opportunity for shared use with other community facilities;
         9.   Opportunity for future expansion of the site; and
         10.   The feasibility of dedication.
      3.   Calculation of a Land Required:  The total requirement of park, open
space and recreational land shall be 0.01 of an acre per person based on the
City standard of 10 acres of land per 1,000 residents.  This standard
represents the land-to-population ratio the City of Canby requires for city
parks, and may be adjusted periodically through amendments to the Parks and
Recreation Master Plan.
         a.   Population Formula:  The following table of persons per unit
shall be used in calculating the required dedication of acres of land:
Table 1
Persons per Dwelling Unit
 
Type of Unit                 Total Persons Per Unit
Single Family Residential    2.7
Standard Multi-family Unit   2.0
Manufactured dwelling park   2.0
Congregate multi-family unit 1.5
 
      Persons per unit, age distribution, and local conditions change with
time.  The specific formula for the dedication of land will, therefore, be
subject to periodic review and amendment.
      b.   Determination of Resident Population:  The projected resident
population of the land to be subdivided or developed is determined by
multiplying the maximum number of units allowed by the plat or the site plan by
the appropriate number of standard of persons per unit set forth in Table 1
above.  This figure is then to be multiplied by 0.01 to determine the total
acreage that must be dedicated or deeded to the City for park, open space or
recreation
         (Maximum units) x (persons/unit) x 0.01 (acreage to be dedicated)
16.120.030    Dedication procedures
When the final plat or site plan is approved, the developer shall dedicate the
land as previously determined by the City in conjunction with approval of the
tentative plat or site plan.  Dedication of land in conjunction with multi-
family development shall be required prior to issuance of permits and
commencement of construction.
Dedication of land or covenants approved as part of a preliminary plat or site
plan approval may be given or provided when the final plat is presented for
approval.  The developer must clear, or fill and grade all parkland to be
dedicated to the satisfaction of the City and shall cause a Level I
Environmental Assessment, as referenced by Section
16.120.020 Minimum standards for park, open space, and recreation land of this
Code, to be performed on all lands to be dedicated as part of the City’s
construction plan approval for the plat.
   A.   In addition to a formal dedication on the plat or site plan to be
recorded, the subdivider shall convey the required lands to the City by general
warranty deed.  The developer of a multi-family development or manufactured
home park shall deed the lands required to be dedicated by a general warranty
deed.  In any of the above situations, the land so dedicated and deeded shall
not be subject to any reservations of record, encumbrances of any kind or
easement which, in the opinion of the Planning Director, will interfere with
the use of the land for park, open space or recreational purposes.
      If any questions exits as the presence of any reservation, encumbrances
or easements, the subdivider or developer may be required to present to the
City a title insurance policy on the subject property ensuring the marketable
state of the title.
   B.   Where any reservation, encumbrances or easements exist, the City shall
require payment in lieu of the dedication of lands (see Section
16.120.040 Cash in lieu of dedication below) unless the City chooses to accept
the land subject to encumbrances.
   C.   If the developer does not own the property held subject to the land
dedication the Planning Commission may, at its discretion, approve the grant of
a long-term lease of land, which will satisfy the intent of the parkland
dedication provisions set forth within this Code.
   D.   Trails that are to be dedicated that are within the floodway of a 100-
year floodplain shall be credited no more than 25% of land dedication
requirements.  Trails that are to be dedicated that are not within the
floodway, but are within the 100-year floodplain, or which are part of
irrigation ditches or stormwater detention areas shall be credited no more than
50% of land dedication requirement.  No other land dedicated in a floodplain
shall receive any credit.
16.120.040   Cash in lieu of dedication of land
In no case shall land dedication  requirements  be in excess of 15 percent of
the gross land area of the development without the agreement of the developer. 
The decision of whether land is acceptable for use by the public for park and
recreation purposes is to be made by the City Planning Commission based on the
findings and planning set forth in the Canby Park and Recreation Master Plan
and Acquisition Plan.  Formal acceptance of parks and recreation lands required
to be dedicated shall be by the City Council following any land use hearing and
recommendation by the City Planning Commission.  In all cases, except for
PUD’s, actual dedication of land shall occur prior to final plat sign-off. 
Dedication of land in the case of a PUD shall occur, by separate instrument,
prior to commencement of construction of the project.
If land proposed for dedication to the public does not meet the criteria set
forth in the Canby Park and Open Space Acquisition Plan, then at the option of
the city, a park system development charge shall be required.  Once calculated,
the dedication of land shall remain the same, and not change, unless the
original plans are altered.
   A.   Procedures for Land Dedication.  Development applications shall include
a scaled plan which identifies the sites proposed to be dedicated as park
land.  Parkland and recreational sites shall be clearly and accurately depicted
on the final plat map and documented in the tax lot files.  All phased
residential subdivisions and planned unit developments shall show any proposed
parkland for dedication on the overall master plan plat for the proposed
development in addition to other anticipated public facilities.  Such master
plan as finally approved and accepted by the Planning Commission is considered
binding on all future phases.  Any requests by the developer to change parkland
dedication for future phases must be brought back to the Commission for
approval.  In case of phased development where separate plats are recorded,
land dedication shall occur prior to final platting of forty percent of the
gross land area.
      Tentative approval of parkland boundaries shall be made by the hearing
body at the time of the public hearing on the development proposal.  All sites
shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service including electrical,
water, sewer and streets as is applicable to the location of the site or as
necessary infrastructure and/or improvements to adjacent sites can be made at
the discretion of the city.  In case of phased development, sites may be
improved as each phased is developed rather than at the time of original
dedication.  An environmental audit sufficient to meet DEQ requirements shall
be required on all parkland proposed to be dedicated to the city prior to
acceptance.  The cost of such an audit shall be split equally between the city
and the developer.
      All lands dedicated to the city for parkland and recreational space shall
be conveyed to the city either by warranty deed or be depicted on the final
recorded plat as so dedicated.  The conveyor shall be responsible for payment
of all title searches, real estate taxes, and recording fees at the time of
conveyance.
   B.   Options for Meeting System Development Charge Requirements.  Any land
proposed or required for parkland dedication, including improvements thereon,
shall be appraised at its fair market value at the time it is dedicated to the
city.  The cost of the appraisal shall be divided equally between the developer
and the city.  This value of the property shall be credited toward the system
development charge calculated for the development with the difference being the
cash owed the System Development Improvement Fund.  In no case may the city
require more land of the developer than would be required if the entire amount
of the system development charge was paid in cash.  Similarly, no developer may
dedicate parkland above the valuation required by the system development charge
so that the city would be required to refund money to the developer unless
mutually agreed upon by the city and developer.
   If no parkland dedication is required or requested by the city, the full
amount of the park system development charge will be assessed and is due and
payable at the time the first building permit(s) is/are issued.
      a.   Cash charged in lieu of land dedication shall be based on the City’s
System Development Charge for parkland, as provided by the Systems Development
Charge ordinance.
      b.   Cash in lieu of parkland dedication may be paid in installments on a
per building basis for multi-family development or a per lot basis for platted
single family or duplex subdivisions.  Payment must be made in full for each
building or lot in conjunction with construction permits.
16.120.050   Review procedure
Decisions made for section 16.120.020 Minimum standards for park, open space
and recreation land and Section
16.120.030 Dedication procedures shall be made by the Planning Director for
Type I and Type II decisions and by the Planning Commission for Type III
decisions.  The applicant shall have full rights of appeal to the Planning
Commission or City Council according to procedures set forth in Division VIII
General Standards and Procedures.
16.120.060   Partial credit for private park, open space and recreational
facilities/areas:
Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a
proposed residential development and such space is to be privately owned and
maintained by the future residents of the development, partial credit, not to
exceed 50% may be given against the dedication if the Planning Commission finds
that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards
are met:
   1.   That yards, court areas, and setbacks required to be maintained by the
zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the
computation of such private parkland.
   2.   That the private ownership and maintenance of the parkland is
adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance or
restrictions.
   3.   That the use of the private parkland is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor
of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated
without the consent of the City or its successor.
   4.   That the proposed private parkland is reasonably adaptable for use for
park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size,
shape, topography, geology, access and location.
   5.   That facilities proposed for the parkland are in substantial accordance
with the provision of the Canby Park and Recreation Master Plan and Canby Park
and Open Space Acquisition Plan and,
   6.   That the parkland for which credit is given is a minimum of two acres
and provides a minimum of three of the basic local park elements listed below,
or a combination of such and other recreational improvements that will meet the
specific recreation park needs of the future residents of the area:
CRITERIA LIST                               ACRES
Children’s play apparatus area            .50 – .75
Landscaped park-like and quiet areas            .50 - 1.00
Family picnic area                  .25 - .75
Game court area                  .25 - .50
Turf play field                     1.00 - 3.00
Recreation center building               .15 - .25
Swimming pool (42’ x 75’) w/adjacent deck and lawn area    .25 -.50
Recreation and community gardening         .15 - .25
   Before credit is given, the Planning Commission shall make written findings
that the above standards are met.
16.120.070   Minimum standards for open space
   A.   Purpose:  Areas unsuitable or undesirable for development, including,
but not limited to, areas containing drainageways, floodplains, identified
steep slopes, significant natural features or other environmentally sensitive
land may be set aside as permanent open space.  No more than 25% of the
required parkland dedication shall be within an identified flood plain or on an
identified steep slope.  The following procedures shall apply:
      1.   The types of open space which may be provided, together with
maintenance required for each type, are as follows:
           a.   Natural Areas are areas of undisturbed vegetation, steep
slopes, wetlands, wildlife habitat areas or areas replanted with native
vegetation after construction.  Maintenance is limited to removal of litter,
dead tree and plant material and brush.  Natural water courses are to be
maintained as free flowing and devoid of debris.  Stream channels shall be
maintained so as not to alter flood plain levels.
           b.   Agricultural Uses.  No specific maintenance is required.
           c.   Garden plots are the division of open space into plots for
cultivation as gardens by residents.  Maintenance may be limited to weeding.
           d.   Greenways are linear green belts linking residential areas with
other open space areas.  These greenways may contain bicycle paths or
footpaths.  Connecting greenways between residences and recreational areas is
encouraged.  Maintenance is limited to a minimum removal of litter dead brush
and avoidance of hazards, nuisances or unhealthy conditions.
           e.   Lawns and landscaped areas consisting of grass with or without
trees.  Maintenance is limited to mowing, removal of litter, dead plant
material, and necessary pruning.
      2.   An open space plan shall be submitted as part of the application for
a tentative plat or site plan.  This plan will designate the boundaries of all
required open space areas as specified in the Canby Parks Acquisition Plan. 
The open space plan must:
           a.   Designate areas to be reserved as open space.
           b.   Specify the manner in which the open space shall be
perpetuated, maintained, and administered (see Section
16.120.090 Preservation and maintenance below).
      3.   Dedication of open space may occur concurrently with development of
the project.  At the discretion of the City, for development which will be
phased, the open space may be set aside in totality and/or developed in
conjunction with the first phases of the development or incrementally set aside
and developed in proportion to the development occurring in each phase.
      4.   Open space must be residentially zoned and must be located adjacent
to the primary site.
16.130.090   Preservation and Maintenance
Open space areas shall be maintained so that the use and enjoyment thereof is
not diminished or destroyed.  Open space areas may be owned, preserved, and
maintained by any of the following mechanisms or combinations thereof:
     A.   Dedication to the City of Canby or an appropriate public agency
approved by the City, if there is a public agency will to accept the
dedication.
     B.   Common ownership by a homeowner’s association which assumes full
responsibility for its maintenance.
     C.   Dedication of development rights to an appropriate public agency with
ownership remaining with the developer or homeowner’s associations. 
Maintenance responsibility will remain with the property owner; and/or
     D.   Deed-restricted private ownership preventing development and/or
subsequent subdivision and providing for maintenance responsibilities.
In the event that any private owner of open space fails to maintain it
according to the standards of this Code, the City of Canby, following
reasonable notice, may demand that the deficiency of maintenance be corrected,
and may enter the open space for maintenance purposes.  All costs thereby
incurred by the City shall be charged to those persons having the primary
responsibility for maintenance of the open space.
Division XII. – RIPARIAN PRESERVATION
Chapter 16.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
16.130.010   Purpose
   
16.130.020   Definitions
   
16.130.030   Applicability and generalized mapping
   
16.130.040   Permitted and prohibited activities
   
16.130.050   Alteration requiring mitigation
   
16.130.060   Setback adjustment
   
16.130.070   Variances
   
16.130.080   Molalla River riparian reduction
   
16.130.090   Appeals
   
16.130.105   Conflicts
   
16.130.110   Findings of facts
   
16.130.120   Amendments
   
16.130.130   Severability
16.130.010   Purpose
Riparian land regulations contained in this chapter are intended to implement
the policies of the Canby Comprehensive Plan, and are intended to resolve
conflicts between development and conservation of riparian areas. 
Specifically, this chapter allows reasonable economic use of property while
establishing clear and objective standards to protect and maintain the
integrity of the rivers and streams in Canby by minimizing erosion, promoting
bank stability, maintaining and enhancing water quality, and fish and wildlife
habitats, and preserving scenic quality and recreation potential.
16.130.020   Definitions
   1.   "Building Envelope” means the land area, outside of all required
setbacks, which is available for construction of a primary structure on a
particular property.
   2.   “Fish Use” means inhabited at any time of the year by anadromous or
game fish species or fish that are listed as threatened or endangered species
under the federal or state endangered species acts.  Fish use is determined
from Oregon Department of Forestry Stream Classification maps.
   3.   “Impervious surface” means any material which reduces and prevents
absorption of storm water into previously undeveloped land.
   4.   “Lawn”: is grass or similar materials maintained as a ground cover of
less than 6 inches in height.  For purposes of this ordinance, lawn is not
considered native vegetation regardless of the species used.
   5.   “Mitigation” means taking one or more of the  following actions listed
in order of priority:
      a.   Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain development
action or parts of that action;
      b.   Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the
development action and its implementation;
      c.   Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the
affected environment;
      d.   Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and
maintenance operations during the life of the development action by monitoring
and taking appropriate corrective measures;
      e.   Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing comparable
substitute resources or environments.
   6.   “Net Loss” means a permanent loss of habitat units or habitat value
resulting from a development  action despite mitigation measures having been
taken.
   7.   “Non-conforming” is a structure or use that does not conform to the
standards of this ordinance but has been in continuous existence from prior to
the date of adoption of this ordinance up to the present.  Non-conforming uses
are not considered violations and are generally allowed to continue, though
expansion, re-construction, or substantial improvement may be regulated.
   8.   “Off-Site Mitigation” means habitat mitigation measures undertaken in
areas distant from a development action, and which are intended to benefit fish
and wildlife populations other than those directly affected by that action.
   9.   “On-Site Mitigation” means habitat mitigation measures undertaken
within or in proximity to areas affected by a development action, and which are
intended to benefit fish and wildlife populations directly affected by that
action.
   10.   “Riparian corridor ” includes a river or major stream, associated
wetlands, and the “riparian setback” area:
   11.   The “riparian setback area” is a slope distance measured from the
Molalla River top-of-bank, mean high water line, or the edge of an associated
wetland, whichever is greater.  The riparian setback is the same as the
“riparian corridor boundary” in OAR 660-23-090 (1) (d).
      a.   Within the City Limits of Canby, the standard Molalla River riparian
setback if 75 feet, unless modified in accordance with this chapter;
      b.   Clackamas County 100 foot riparian setbacks for the Molalla River
apply to lands currently outside the City Limits but within the Urban Growth
Boundary (Section 704 of Clackamas CountyZoning and Development Ordinance.
      c.   Isolated wetlands and minor streams (including adjacent wetlands)
have no riparian setback;
   12.   “Structure” is a building or other major improvement that is built,
constructed or installed, not including minor improvements, such as fences,
utility poles, flagpoles, or irrigation system components, that are not
customarily regulated through zoning ordinances.
   13.   “Substantial Improvement” is any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the market value of the structure either:
      a.   Before the improvement or repair is started, or
      b.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition Substantial Improvement is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
      The term does not, however, include either:
      c.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      d.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   14.   “Top of Bank” means the stage or elevation at which water overflows
the  natural banks of streams or the waters of the state and begins to inundate
upland areas.  It has the same meaning as ‘bankfull stage” as defined in OAR
141-85-0101 (2): In the absence of physical evidence aerials may be used to
approximate the bankfull stage or delineate the top of bank.
16.130.030   Applicability and generalized mapping
The inventory of riparian areas contained in the Canby Wetlands and Riparian
Inventory specifies which streams and lakes are fish-bearing, and the stream
–size category.  Based on the classification contained in this inventory, the
following riparian corridors shall be established:
   1.   Along the Molalla River within the City Limits, with average annual
stream flows greater than 1,000 cubic feet per second (2760 cfs ), the riparian
corridor boundary shall be 75 feet upland from the top of each bank.
   2.   Clackamas County 100 foot riparian setbacks for the Molalla River apply
to lands currently outside the City Limits but within the Urban Growth Boundary
(See Section 704 of Clackamas County Zoning and Development Ordinance).
   3.   Where the riparian corridor includes all or portions of a significant
wetland as identified in the Local Wetland and Riparian Inventory, and mapped
on the Canby Wetland and Riparian Inventory Map, the standard distance to the
riparian corridor boundary shall be measured from, and include, the upland edge
of the wetland.
   4.   Except as provided for in 16.130.030(2), the measurement of distances
to the riparian corridor boundary shall be from the top of bank.  The
measurement shall be a slope distance.  In areas where the top of each bank is
not clearly defined, the riparian corridor boundary shall be measured from the
ordinary high water level, or the line of non-aquatic vegetation, whichever is
most land ward.  In areas where the predominant terrain consists of steep
cliff, the distance to the corridor boundary shall be measured as a horizontal
distance until the top of the cliff is reached, and as a slope distances from
that point.
16.130.040   Permitted and prohibited activities
   A.   The permanent alteration of the riparian area by grading or by the
placement of structures of impervious surfaces is prohibited, except for the
following uses provided they are designed to minimize intrusion into the
riparian area and no other option or location area feasible:
      1.   Streets, roads, and paths;
      2.   Drainage facilities, utilities, and irrigation pumps;
      3.   Water related and water-dependent uses;
      4.   Replacement of existing  structures with structures in the same
location that do not disturb additional riparian surface area;
      5.   Structures or other non-conforming alterations existing fully or
partially within the riparian area may be expanded provided the expansion does
not occur within the riparian area.  Substantial improvement of a non-
conforming structure in the riparian area shall require compliance with the
standards of this ordinance.
      6.   Existing lawn within the riparian area may be maintained, but not
expanded within the riparian area.  Development activities on the property
shall not justify replacement of riparian area with lawn.
      7.   Existing shoreline stabilization and flood control structures may be
maintained.  Any expansion of existing structures or development of new
structures shall be evaluated by the Director and appropriate natural resource
agency staff.  Such alteration of the riparian area shall be approved only if
less-invasive or non-structural methods will not adequately meet the
stabilization or flood control needs.      
   B.   Removal of riparian vegetation is prohibited, except for:
      1.   Removal of non-native vegetation and replacement with native plant
species. The replacement vegetation shall cover, at a minimum, the area from
which vegetation was removed, and shall maintain or exceed the density of the
removed vegetation.
      2.   Removal of vegetation necessary for the development of approved
water-related or water-dependents uses.  Vegetation removal shall be kept to
the minimum necessary to allow the water –dependent or water –related use.
   Trees in danger of falling and thereby posing a hazard to life or property
may be removed, following consultation and approval from this department . if
no hazard will be created, the department may require these trees, once felled,
to be left in place in the riparian area.
16.130.050   Alteration requiring mitigation
   A.   Permanent alteration of the riparian area by placement of structures or
impervious surfaces is allowable under the following procedures, subject to the
mitigation requirements of 16.130.050 (B).
      1.   A setback adjustment as allowed under 16.130.060.
      2.   A Variance to the riparian setback approved through the procedures
of 16.130.070.
      3.   On the Molalla River, having average annual stream flow exceeding
1,000 cubic feet per second and having a 75-100-ft. riparian buffer established
under this ordinance, the riparian setback may be reduced as allowed under
160.130.080.
   B.   Proposals for development activities within the riparian area allowed
in 16.130.050 shall be reviewed by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife
(ODFW), as per OAR 635-415 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy.  A
mitigation recommendation shall be obtained from ODFW. For purposes of
implementing Goal 5, the goal is no net loss of protected resources;
correspondingly, for purposes of designing appropriate mitigation , site should
be considered at least in “Habitat Category 2” (OAR 635-415-030), which strives
for no net loss of habitat values. Approval of the development proposal shall
be conditional, requiring compliance with the mitigation recommendation of
ODFW.
16.130.060   Setback adjustment
   1.   Qualifying lots:  Lots on which the riparian setback required by this
ordinance exceeds any other setback in a particular yard, and which, when
combined with other required yard setbacks, results in a building area depth of
25 ft. or less or a building envelope of 800 sq ft or less.
   2.   Setback reduction procedure.  Setback reduction shall be the minimum
necessary to create a building envelope 25-feet deep or a building envelope of
800 sq ft (whichever requires a lesser reduction of the setback).  The yard
setback opposite the riparian area may be reduced of to ½ the standard
setback.  If this does not create a sufficient building envelope, the riparian
setback may be reduced up to ½ the required setback.  Additional reduction of
setbacks require a variance.  Removal of vegetation within the original
riparian setback shall be the minimum necessary to allow development of the
use, and shall  otherwise conform with the standards of Section IIB of this
ordinance.
16.130.070   Variances
   1.   In cases where the provision for a Setback Adjustment under Section
16.130.060 are not sufficient, a property owner may request a Variance to the
riparian setback.  Granting of a Variance requires finding that:
      a.   the proposed development requires deviation from the riparian
standards; and
      b.   strict adherence to the riparian setback and other applicable
standards would effectively preclude a use of the parcel that could be
reasonably expected to occur in the zone, and that the property owner would be
precluded a substantial property right enjoyed by the majority of landowners in
the vicinity; and
      c.   the provisions of Section
16.130.060 are insufficient to remedy the hardship.
16.130.080   Molalla river riparian reduction
   A.   Molalla River Riparian Reduction :  Structures and impervious surfaces
may be placed within the 75-100 foot riparian setback as follows:
      1.   The removal of vegetation shall be limited to the minimum amount
necessary to accommodate the use.  Any vegetation removed in excess of this
standard shall be non-native species, and the proposal shall specify
replacement of that vegetation with native species.
      2.   The applicant shall provide sufficient information regarding the
proposed development and potential impacts to riparian resources to allow the
staff, in consultation with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, to
determine whether the proposal will provide equal or better protection of
riparian resources.  This information includes, but is not necessarily limited
to: a plot plan showing the top of the stream or water body bank, the extent of
development within the riparian setback, uses that will occur within the
riparian setback and potential impacts (for example: chemical runoff, noise,
etc.), the extent of vegetation removal proposed, characteristics of the
existing vegetation (types, density), any proposed alterations of topography or
drainage patterns, existing uses on the property and any potential impacts they
could have on riparian resources.
      3.   In no case shall such alterations occupy more than 50% of the width
of the riparian area measured from the upland edge of the corridor.
16.130.090   Appeals
Any decision by the City of Canby on a land use application concerning the
riparian protection requirements herein may be appealed to the Planning
Commission and City Council pursuant to Canby’s Land Development and Planning
Ordinance.
16.130.105   Conflicts
To best protect important values of riparian areas in the event that the
requirements of this section conflict with other ordinance requirements, the
City shall apply the requirements that best provide for the protection of the
resource.
16.130.110   Findings of facts
The City Council adopts the above findings of fact as a basis for adoption of
this land use ordinance.
16.130.120   Amendments
All amendments made to this ordinance shall be in accordance with the amendment
procedures set forth in Canby’s Land Development and Planning Ordinance.
16.130.130   Severability
The sections and subsections of this ordinance are severable.  The invalidity
of one section or subsection shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections, or permit approvals and prosecutions brought pursuant to this
section.
Division XIII. – WETLANDS
Chapter 16.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
16.140.010   Purpose
   
16.140.020   Definitions
   
16.140.030   Applicability and Generalized Mapping
   
16.140.040   Permitted uses
   
16.140.045   Uses subject to site and design review
   
16.140.050   Prohibited uses
   
16.140.060   DSL notification required
   
16.140.070   Appeals
   
16.140.080   Variances
   
16.140.090   Conflicts
   
16.140.100   Findings of facts
   
16.140.105   Amendments
   
16.140.110   Severability
16.140.010   Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish a process and standards which
will minimize the degradation and destruction of significant wetlands within
the City of Canby’s Urban Growth Boundary, and conserve wetland resources and
their functions and values.  This ordinance is intended to protect and enhance
local water quality; to preserve fish and wildlife habitat; to provide flood
storage capacity, and to preserve open spaces within the City of Canby.
16.140.020   Definitions
As used in this ordinance the following words and phrases shall mean:
Enhancement: An activity which improves one or more specific functions or
values of an existing wetland.
Function and Values: Functions refers to the environmental roles served by
wetlands and buffer areas including, but not limited to , water quality
protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, flood storage, nutrient
attenuation , and sediment trapping.    Values refers to the qualities ascribed
to a wetland such as educational and recreational opportunities, open space and
visual aesthetic qualities.
Restoration: To improve a disturbed wetland by returning wetland parameters
which may be missing; adding soils, water, or plants.  The restoration may
return a missing or damaged wetland function to achieve a desired outcome.
“Wetland” is an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or  ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions;
   a.   A “significant Wetland” is a wetland that meets the Division of State
Lands definition of a Locally Significant Wetland, and which appears on the
City of Canby Wetlands and Riparian Corridors Map;
   b.   An “Associated Wetland” is a significant wetland, all or part of which
is within 75 feet of the Molalla River top-of-bank.
   c.   An “Isolated Wetland” is a significant wetland, all of which is located
outside of the riparian setback;
   d.   A “Non-Significant Wetland” is a wetland that does not meet the
Division of State Lands definition of a Locally Significant Wetland.  Non-
significant wetlands are not regulated by this chapter, but do require DSL
notification under ORS  227.350.
16.140.030   Applicability and Generalized Mapping
The wetland regulations contained in this ordinance apply to those areas
identified as significant wetlands on the Canby Wetlands and Riparian Corridors
Map, and wetland sites meeting Division of State Lands criteria.  Precise
wetland boundaries may vary from that shown on the Canby Wetlands and Riparian
Inventory Map if an on-site delineation or other City approved documentation
indicate more accurate boundaries.  For any proposed development impacting
significant wetlands or within 50 feet of identified significant wetlands, the
applicant shall be required to conduct a wetland delineation to determine the
precise wetland boundary for application of the Removal –Fill Law, and if
applicable, the nature and extent of development impacts on adjacent wetlands. 
The more precise boundaries obtained through a wetland delineation can be
identified, mapped, and used for a development without a change in the Canby
Wetland and Riparian Inventory Map. All developments proposed within or
adjacent to a designated
Wetland area shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance and Site Plan
Review pursuant to Canby’s Land Development and Planning Ordinance.
16.140.040   Permitted uses
The following uses are permitted within wetlands identified as locally
significant.
   1.   Removal of fill and any refuse that is in violation of local, state or
federal regulation.  Removal of fill must be consistent with State of Oregon
Removal-Fill regulations.
   2.   Removal of non-native vegetation or invasive plant species.
   3.   Planting or replanting with native plants.
   4.   Channel maintenance to maintain storm water conveyance and flood
control capacity, as required by local policies, state and federal regulations,
or intergovernmental agreements.
   5.   Site management and maintenance practices, whose purpose is to maintain
or improve natural functions and values or protect public health and safety,
and which are consistent with adopted plan and policies, including but not
limited to perimeter mowing and other cutting necessary for hazard prevention;
   6.   Wetland and natural area restoration and enhancement of natural
function and values which involve displacement, excavation or relocation of
less than 50 cubic yards of earth, and which carry out the objective of this
ordinance and are consistent with adopted policies and plans.
   7.   Preservation and maintenance activities associated with historic
structures.
16.140.045   Uses subject to site and design review
Within locally significant wetlands the following uses are subject to site and
design review in accordance with Canby’s Land Development and Planning
Ordinance.
   1.   Nature interpretive centers and wetland research facilities, when
specified in or consistent with adopted plans or policies.
   2.   Maintenance facilities for storage of equipment and materials used
exclusively for maintenance of wetlands and other natural resources
   3.   Construction of trails, boardwalks, viewing platforms, information
kiosks, and trail signs.
   4.   Realignments and reconfigurations of channels and pond banks, including
the restoration and enhancement of natural functions and values which involve
displacement, excavation or relocation of more than 50 cubic yards or earth and
which carry out the objectives of this ordinance.
   5.   Construction of access roads for maintenance of channels, wetlands and
other natural resource areas.
   6.   Construction of bikeways and other paved pathways.
   7.   Construction of stormwater quality treatment facilities that use
biofiltration methods.
16.140.050   Prohibited uses
Within locally significant wetlands, practices that are specifically not
allowed and would adversely affect wetland function and values include, but are
not limited to the following:
   1.   New development or expansion of existing development.
   2.   Storage or use of chemical pesticides, fertilizers, or other hazardous
or toxic materials.
   3.   Construction of new septic drainfields.
   4.   Channelizing or straightening natural drainageways.
   5.   Removal or destruction of rare, threatened or endangered plant species
or valuable native plant species as found on a list determined by the Oregon
Natural Heritage Program and kept on file an Canby City Hall.
   6.   Filling, grading, and/or excavating wetland areas.
16.140.060   DSL notification required
In addition to the restrictions and requirements of this Section, all proposed
development activities wholly or partially within areas identified as wetlands
are also subject to DSL standards and approval.  Where there is a difference,
the more restrictive regulation shall apply. The City shall be responsible for
notifying DSL whenever any portion of any wetland is proposed for development,
in accordance with ORS 227.350.  No action can be taken on a proposed
development until such notification is provided.
16.140.070   Appeals
Any decision by the City of Canby on a land use application concerning the
wetland protection requirements herein may be appealed to the Planning
Commission and City Council pursuant to Canby’s Land Development and Planning
Ordinance.
16.140.080   Variances
   A.   For parcels  that have no usable building site through application of
the requirements of this ordinance, a variance may be granted to allow
development on the parcel, provided that the design of the development
minimizes impact to the wetland.
   B.   A variance may be granted in those instances where claims of map error
are verified by the Division of State Lands.
   C.   A variance may be granted in those instances where the Planning
Commission and City Council jointly determine that the public need outweighs
the potential adverse impacts of the development in or near a locally
significant wetland resource.
16.140.090   Conflicts
To best protect important values of wetlands in the event that the requirements
of this section conflict with other ordinance requirements, the City shall
apply the requirements that best provide for the protection of the resource.
16.140.100   Findings of facts
The City Council adopts the above findings of fact as a basis for adoption of
this land use ordinance.
16.140.105   Amendments
All amendments made to this ordinance shall be in accordance with the amendment
procedures set forth in Canby’s Land Development and Planning Ordinance.
16.140.110   Severability
The sections and subsections of this ordinance are severable.  The invalidity
of one section or subsection shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections, or permit approvals and prosecutions brought pursuant to this
section.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                Authorizing the City Administrator to enter into an agreement
996  6-17-1998  between the city and Canby Telephone Association to extend the
                current non-exclusive franchise agreement
                Amending Section 7 of Ord. 668 regarding annual franchise fee
                to be paid by the Franchisee, Canby Telephone Association, to
1000 7-15-1998  the city, increasing the annual franchise fee from 3.7 to 7 of
                the gross annual revenue for local exchange service, and
                repealing Ord. 845
                Amending Section 12 of Ord. 788 regarding annual franchise fee
1001 7-15-1998  to be paid by the franchisee, Northwest Natural Gas Company to
                the city, increasing the annual franchise fee from 3 to 5 of
                the gross annual revenue for local natural gas service
                Authorizing the City Administrator to enter into an agreement
                between the city and Canby Telephone Association to further
1012 12-2-1998  extend the current non-exclusive franchise agreement. The
                extension shall be controlled by the terms and conditions of
                Ord. 732 except that the additional extension shall expire and
                be of no legal effect as of January 21, 1999
                Authorizing the City Administrator to enter into an agreement
                between the city and Canby Telephone Association to further
                extend the current non-exclusive franchise agreement. The
1014 1-20-1999  extension shall be controlled by the terms and conditions of
                Ord. 732 except that the additional extension shall expire and
                be of no legal effect as of April 22, 1999, or on such date as
                the city may grant a new non-exclusive franchise to CTA,
                whichever occurs first.
                Granting a non-exclusive franchise to North Willamette Telecom
1017 4-7-1999   to provide cable service within the city for a period of 12
                years from the effective date of the ordinance
                Extending the current non-exclusive franchise agreement between
                the city and Canby Telephone Association for the provision of
                telecommunication services within the city. Ord. 668 is amended
1040 11-17-1999 by extending the expiration date thereof to June 6, 2000, or on
                such date as the city may grant a new non-exclusive franchise
                to Canby Telephone Association, whichever first occurs. The
                terms and conditions of Ords. 668 and 845 shall control the
                extension.
                Granting to Canby Telephone Association a nonexclusive
                franchise for the provision of telecommunications services
1053 7-19-2000  within the city pursuant to Chapter 12.36 of the Code of
                Ordinances, for a term of ten years, commencing with the
                effective date of Ord. 1053
                Granting to Canby Telephone Association a non-exclusive
1169 2-2-2005   franchise for a period of 12 years from the effective date of
                Ord. 1160, to operate and maintain a cable television system in
                the city
                Granting to Northwest Natural Gas Company a non-exclusive gas
1208 6-7-2006   utility franchise for a period of 20 years and fixing terms,
                conditions and compensation of such franchise and repealing
                Ord. 788
                Granting an exclusive franchise to Canby Disposal Company to
1328 6-16-2010  provide solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris
                collection service with the city
                Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Canby Telephone
1342 5-18-2011  Association to provide telecommunication services within the
                city, for a period of 5 years retroactively effective from June
                7, 2010
1347 10-19-2011 Amending the cable television franchise agreement with
                WaveDivision VII, LLC, and extending its term to March 4, 2017
1349 10-19-2011 Amending the cable television franchise agreement with Canby
                Telephone Association to maintain competitive equity
                Granting a nonexclusive franchise to Lightspeed Networks, Inc
1370 3-6-2013   to construct, operate, and maintain a telecommunications
                network
                Granting to Clackamas County a nonexclusive franchise to
1388 11-20-2013 construct, operate and maintain a telecommunications network
                and provide telecommunications services with the city
                Granting to TW Telecom of Oregon LLC, a nonexclusive franchise
1389 11-20-2013 to construct, operate and maintain a telecommunications network
                and provide telecommunications services with the city
1425 11-4-2015  Granting to Canby Telephone Association a nonexclusive
                franchise to provide telecommunication services within the city
                Granting to Extenet Systems Incorporated, a non-exclusive
1503 2-20-2019  franchise to construct operate and maintain a
                telecommunications network and provide telecommunications
                services
               
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oregon Revised Statutes
Prior Ordinance List and Disposition Table
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OREGON REVISED STATUTES
 
O.R.S. Section Code Section
8.665                   12.24.050
Ch. 10                  1.16.030
10.050                  1.16.070
Ch. 34                  13.16.077
                        4.04.100,
34.010 to 34.100        5.06.050 ,
                        5.06.140 ,
                        12.24.060
Ch. 88                  2.40.090
Ch. 131 through 133     9.04.020
133.005(1)              9.50.020
133.005(3)              12.24.060
133.455                 9.50.040
Ch. 135 through 138     9.04.020
                        9.04.020,
                        9.32.070,
Ch. 153                 10.04.010,
                        12.13.120,
                        12.24.050
Ch. 156 through 157     9.04.020
Ch. 162 through 167     9.04.010
162.015 - 162.121       5.06.020
162.265 - 162.385       5.06.020
Ch. 163                 5.16.060
Ch. 164                 5.16.060
164.005 - 164.235       5.06.020
164.377                 5.06.020
164.395 - 164.415       5.06.020
164.805(2)              6.08.040
Ch. 165                 5.06.020 ,
                        5.16.060
Ch. 166                 5.16.060
Ch. 174                 1.04.080
183.450                 5.06.140
190.240                 12.36.030
Ch. 197                 4.32.010
197.015                 3.30.060
199.430                 2.40.010
199.460 to 199.534      2.40.010
                        4.12.080,
Ch. 223                 4.20.110,
                        4.24.220,
                        13.12.030
223.205 through 223.300 4.04.120
223.297 to 223.314      4.20.150
223.405 through 223.490 4.04.180
223.505 through 223.595 12.16.05
223.510 through 223.595 15.16.090
267.380                 3.24.010,
                        3.24.080
267.385                 3.24.160
Ch. 279                 2.16.010
283.140                 12.36.030
Ch. 316                 3.24.010
319.210                 3.40.140
319.280 through 319.320 3.40.200
320.350                 3.50.020
320.350(5)(a) or (c)    3.50.020
357.400-621             2.20.010
357.975                 2.20.100
390.005 through 390.124 12.24.010
Ch. 401                 2.52.040,
                        2.52.080
401.025                 12.36.030
                        9.12.010,
Ch. 426                 9.50.020,
                        9.50.040
Ch. 446                 3.20.130
446.003(26)             3.20.130
457.010                 2.68.010
457.045(3)              2.68.030
                        5.16.020,
Ch. 471                 5.16.050,
                        9.04.010
Ch. 475                 9.04.010
475.035                 9.32.020
527.620                 8.14.030
Ch. 674                 4.32.020
Ch. 726                 5.06.030 ,
                        5.06.090
726.010(2)              5.06.020
726.040                 5.06.020
726.280 - 726.285       5.06.030
Ch. 743                 10.04.010
759.005(1)              12.36.030
759.010                 12.36.030
801.208                 10.04.020
806.010                 10.12.010,
                        10.12.030
806.080                 10.12.010
Ch. 819                 10.04.100
                        
 
PRIOR ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE
 
Ord. No. Subject, Code Section/Disposition
706 Purchase contract (Special)
707 Reroofing contract (Special)
708 Paving contract (Special)
709 Street improvements (Special)
710 City forester and street trees; repeals Ord. 512 (Voided)
711 Rezone (Special)
712 Building setback review applications (Rejected)
713 Building and fire safety standards adopted; repeals Ords. 336 and 684 (Repealed
    by 734)
714 Purchase contract (Special)
715 Street vacation (Special)
716 Purchase contract (Special)
717 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
718 Purchase contract (Special)
719 Criminal procedure code adopted; repeals Ords. 552 and 615 (Repealed by 763)
720 Traffic regulations; repeals Ord. 553 (Repealed by 764)
721 Municipal court juries and jury list; repeals Ord. 589 (1.16)
    Adds § 10.8.70 to and amends §§ 10.1.20, 10.3.18, 10.3.20, 10.3.21, 10.3.24,
722 10.3.25, 10.3.26, 10.3.28, 10.3.31 and 10.8.20 of Ord. 690, zoning (Repealed by
    740)
723 Award of contract (Special)
724 Repeals § 12 of Ord. 668, franchise grant to Canby Telephone Association
    (Repealer)
725 Cable television communications systems (5.08) (Repealed by 1018)
726 Street paving (Special)
727 Sewage collection and treatment system; repeals Ords. 566, 618 and 679 (Repealed
    by 835)
728 Annexation and boundary change fees; repeals Ords. 579 and 616 (2.40)
729 Authorizes changes to certain contract (Special)
730 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
    Adds § 10.10(J) and (K); and amends §§ 7.3(B), 10.5(C), 10.6(B), 10.10(I) and
731 12.2; repeals § 12.4 and renumbers §§ 12.5 and 12.6 to be §§ 12.4 and 12.5, and
    amends § 12.5(A) of Ord. 725, cable television communications systems (5.08)
732 Franchise grant to Canby Telephone Association, cable communications (Special)
733 Dog control (Repealed by 766)
734 Building and fire safety standards adopted; repeals Ord. 713 (Repealed by 790)
735 Street trees (Repealed by 852)
736 Consent to financing agreement for cable television franchise (Special)
737 Financing for public improvements (4.12)
738 Rezone (Special)
739 Rezone (Special)
    Land development and planning; repeals Ords. 690 and 772 (16.02, 16.04, 16.06,
    16.08, 16.10, 16.12, 16.14, 16.16, 16.18, 16.20, 16.22, 16.24, 16.26, 16.28,
740 16.30, 16.32, 16.34, 16.36, 16.38, 16.40, 16.42, 16.44, 16.46, 16.48, 16.50,
    16.52, 16.54, 16.56, 16.58, 16.60, 16.62, 16.64, 16.66, 16.68,16.70, 16.72,
    16.74, 16.76, 16.78, 16.80, 16.82, 16.84, 16.86, 16.88) (§ 16.42.130 repealed by
    1002)
741 Rezone (Special)
742 Rezone (Special)
743 Contract review board established; repeals Ord. 600 (2.16) (Repealed by 1170)
744 City surveyor (2.12)
745 Flood hazards and flood control (Repealed by 1279)
746 Election to receive state revenue (Special)
747 Rezone (Special)
748 Makes various changes to official zoning map (Special)
749 Amends §§ 10.3.31(A), 10.3.85(D) and (F) of Ord. 740, land development and
    planning (16.32, 16.54)
750 Drug paraphernalia (9.32)
751 Business licenses; repeals Ords. 439 and 484 (5.04)
752 Amends §§ 11(A) and 13(B) of Ord. 732, CATV franchise (Special)
753 Authorizes purchase of property for municipal building (Special)
754 Public library and library board; repeals Ord. 596 (2.20)
755 Street improvements (Special)
756 Construction finance agreement (Special)
757 Emergency assistance alarms (8.20)
758 Upgrading of traffic signals (Special)
759 Sewer plant lab construction (Special)
760 Abandoned vehicles; repeals Ords. 410 and 475 (10.08)
761 Uniform fire code; repeals Ord. 688 (8.16)
762 General provisions (1.04)
763 Criminal code; repeals Ord. 719 (9.04, 9.08, 9.12, 9.16, 9.20, 9.24, 9.28)
764 Traffic regulations; repeals Ord. 720 (10.04)
765 General penalty (1.08)
766 Dog control; repeals Ords. 567 and 733 (6.12)
    Amends § 3 of Ord. 306, chief of police; § 7 of Ord. 380, initiative petitions; §
    10 of Ord. 393, appeal of assessments; § 12 of Ord. 401, garbage collection; § 1
767 (7) of Ord. 418, concessions in parks; § 15 of Ord. 465, advertisements; and § 1
    (11) of Ord. 620, evidentiary hearings (1.12, 2.08, 2.28, 4.04, 8.04, 8.12,
    12.24)
768 Repeals Ord. 362, § 14 of Ord. 465, Ord. 512 and §§ 4 and 5 of Ord. 572
    (Repealer)
769 Rezone (Special)
770 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
771 Creates separate accounts for certain municipal funds (3.12)
772 Official custodians for certain municipal funds (3.12)
773 Authorizes purchase of equipment (Special)
774 Authorizes contract for architectural services (Special)
775 Canby adult center (2.48) (§§ 2.48.040 through 2.48.080 repealed by 1015)
776 Emergency preparedness (2.52)
777 Canby swim center (2.56)
778 Code adoption (1.01) (Repealed by 990)
779 Authorizes contract for communication equipment (Special)
780 Authorizes contract for engineering services; repeals Ord. 584 (Special)
781 Authorizes contract for engineering services; repeals Ord. 584 (Special)
782 Residency requirements officers and employees (2.60) (Repealed by 1125)
783 Authorizes a contract for renovation of the Koehler Building (Special)
784 Amends § 10.04.010A and C, traffic (10.04)
785 Rezone (Special)
786 Authorizes contract for architectural services (Special)
787 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
788 Grants nonexclusive gas utility franchise; repeals Ord. 496 (Not codified)
    (Amended by 1001)
789 Rezone (Special)
790 Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, building code (15.04) (Repealed by 1085)
791 Amends §§ 8.16.010, 8.16.060 and 8.16.080, fire prevention (8.16)
792 Abatement of dangerous buildings (15.16)
793 Solid waste franchise; repeals Ord. 401 (Not codified)
794 Rezone (Special)
795 Authorizes truck purchase (Special)
796 Authorizes agreement for road improvement (Special)
797 Authorizes agreement for construction of a shop facility (Special)
    Adds §§ 10.04.075, 10.04.085, 10.04.095, 10.04.105, 10.04.115 and 10.04.125;
798 amends §§ 10.04.070, 10.04.080, 10.04.090, 10.04.100, 10.04.110 and 10.04.120,
    traffic code (10.04)
799 Authorizes purchase of police department vehicles (Special)
800 Sidewalk vending (5.12)
801 Street vacation (Special)
    Changes name of Ch. 16.44 to "Mobile Homes and Trailers"; amends §§ 16.22.010(1),
802 16.26.030(F)(2), 16.28.030(F)(2), 16.30.030(F)(2), 16.42.030 and 16.44.010 and
    Table 16.44.100, planning and zoning (16.22, 16.26, 16.28, 16.30, 16.42, 16.44)
803 Election to receive state revenue (Special)
    Adds §§ 16.04.385, 16.04.387, 16.40.014, 16.40.016, 16.40.018, 16.40.050 and
804 16.88.150(E), planning and zoning; amends §§ 15.12.010 - 15.12.090, 15.12.110 and
    15.12.150 - 15.12.180 and repeals § 15.12.120, buildings and construction (15.12,
    16.04, 16.40, 16.88) (§ 16.88.150 deleted by 1080; Ch. 15.12 repealed by 1279)
    Adds §§ 16.04.666 and 16.52.035; amends §§ 16.22.010(1), 16.52.010 - 16.52.030,
805 16.52.040 - 16.52.070 and 16.88.150(D), planning and zoning (16.04, 16.22, 16.52,
    16.88) (§ 16.88.150 deleted by 1080)
806 Authorizes purchase of police department vehicle (Special)
807 Authorizes purchase of real property for park expansion (Special)
808 Amends §§ 2.40.090 and 2.40.110; repeals §§ 2.40.060 - 2.40.080 and 2.40.100,
    annexation and boundary change fees and charges (2.40)
809 Authorizes agreement for paving of a shop facility (Special)
810 Authorizes agreement for street improvement engineering services (Special)
811 Rezone (Special)
812 Amends § 12.28.090, cemetery reserve fund (12.28)
813 Rezone (Special)
814 Rezone (Special)
815 Rezone (Special)
816 Authorizes purchase of real property for library development (Special)
817 Rezone (Special)
818 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
819 Authorizes agreement for sewer line construction (Special)
820 Authorizes agreement for street repaving (Special)
821 Authorizes agreement for sewer main construction engineering services (Special)
822 Alley vacation (Special)
823 Authorizes purchase of truck crane (Special)
824 Authorizes purchase of trailer-mounted sewer cleaner (Special)
825 Rezone (Special)
826 Authorizes purchase of dump bed hot box (Special)
827 Rezone (Special)
828 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
829 Adds (D) to and amends (B) of § 15.04.010, buildings and construction (15.04)
    (Repealed by 1085)
    Amends §§ 16.04.240(E), 16.04.550, 16.04.670, 16.24.030(F)(1), 16.26.030(F)(1),
830 16.28.010(D), 16.28.030(C)(1) and (F)(1), 16.30.030(C)(1) and (F)(1), 16.32.030
    (C)(1) and (F)(1), and Ch. 16.42, planning and zoning (16.04, 16.24, 16.26,
    16.28, 16.30, 16.32, 16.42)
831 Compensation for mayor and council; repeals Ords. 594 and 693 (2.32) (Repealed by
    989)
832 Rezone (Special)
833 Rezone (Special)
834 Authorizes agreement for construction of mausoleum (Special)
835 Sewer system; repeals Ords. 566, 618, 679 and 727 (Repealed by 868)
836 Amends § 2.24.010, retention of records (2.24)
837 Authorizes agreement for architectural services for remodeling of certain
    building (Special)
838 Adds (D) to and amends (A) of § 10.04.010, traffic code (10.04)
839 Amends §§ 9.04.010(A), 9.04.020(A) and 9.32.040(A) and (D), public peace, morals
    and welfare (9.04, 9.32)
840 Authorizes contract for engineering services (Special)
841 Authorizes purchase of dump truck (Special)
842 Authorizes contract for asbestos removal (Special)
843 Authorizes contract for remodeling of old Ace Hardware building (Special)
844 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
845 Amends Ord. 668, § 7 (Not codified) (Repealed by 1000)
846 Authorizes contract for street sweeping services (Special)
847 Amends §§ 15.04.010(B) and 15.04.030, building code (15.04) (Repealed by 1085)
848 Amends Chap. 16.10, planning and zoning (16.10)
849 Street improvements (Special)
850 Amends § 16.88.030, land development and planning (16.88)
851 Amends § 13.24.070(A), public services (13.24)
852 Tree regulations; repeals Chap. 12.20 (12.20, 12.32)
853 Manufactured homes, amends Chap. 16 (Repealed by 859)
854 Amends Ord. 848, planning and zoning (16.10)
855 Authorizes contract for renovation (Special)
856 Street Reserve Fund (Special)
857 Rezone (Special)
858 Amends §§ 16.48.010 and 16.48.050(E), planning and zoning (16.48)
859 Amends § 16.04.387; repeals Ord. 853, planning and zoning (16.04)
860 Sewer Reserve Fund (Special)
861 Construction engineering contract (Special)
862 Election to receive state revenue (Special)
863 Amends §§ 12.12.030 and 12.12.040; adds §§ 12.12.035(A) and (B), sidewalk
    displays (12.12)
864 Amends §§ 5.04.070, 5.04.220 and 5.04.240, business licenses (5.04)
865 Award of contract (Special)
866 Adds Chaps. 16.90, 16.95 and 16.100, land development and planning (16.90, 16.95,
    16.100)
867 Establishes system development charges (4.20)
868 Sewage collection and treatment systems; repeals Ords. 566, 618, 679, 727 and 835
    (13.04, 13.08, 13.12, 13.16, 13.20) (Repealed by 1153)
869 Authorizes contract for issuance of sewer revenue bonds (Special)
870 Rezone (Special)
871 Amends § 6.04.030, animals generally (6.04)
872 Amends § 16.10.070, off-street parking and loading (16.10)
873 Amends § 10.04.010(A), city traffic code (10.04)
874 Amends §§ 9.04.010(A) and 9.04.020(A), criminal code (9.04)
875 Street vacation (Special)
876 Street vacation (Special)
877 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
878 Amends § 12.24.040; repeals §§ 12.24.040(B), (C) and (D), city parks (12.24)
    Amends §§ 8.20.040(A) and (C), 8.20.070(A)(2), (B)(2), (C) and (E)(2), 8.20.080
879 (A), (B), (B)(5), and (C); repeals 8.20.080(B)(6); renumbers 8.20.080(B)(7) to
    (B)(6) and amends it, emergency assistance alarms (8.20) (Superseded by 1479)
880 Authorizes installation of roof system on Canby library (Special)
881 Amends §§ 10.08.010(A) and (B), 10.08.020, 10.08.030, 10.08.040 and 10.08.070,
    abandoned vehicles (10.08)
882 Street vacation (Special)
883 Renumbers § 10.04.105(C) to (D) and adds new (C), traffic code (10.04)
884 Amends §§ 15.04.010(B), 15.04.030(A), (B), (C), (D), (E) and (F), building code
    (15.04) (Repealed by 1085)
885 Authorizes contract for in-line television equipment (Rescinded)
886 Authorizes renovation and upgrading of sewage treatment facility (Special)
887 Authorizes purchase of real property for industrial park (Special)
888 Amends § 15.04.030(F); repeals § (2)(F) of Ord. 884, building code (15.04)
    (Repealed by 1085)
889 Authorizes contract for in-line television equipment (Special)
    Adds §§ 16.02.020, 16.04.065, 16.04.125, 16.04.155, 16.16.010(H), 16.20.010(E)
    and (F), 16.24.010(R), 16.32.020(C), 16.36.040, 16.49.140, 16.76.010(C); amends
    §§ 16.04.030, 16.04.240, 16.08.110, 16.10.010(A), 16.10.030(D) and (G), Table
    16.10.050, 16.10.070(A)(2) and (B)(13)(e), Figure 1: Parking Table, 16.12.010,
    16.16.010(D) and (E), 16.16.020(C), (K), (L), (M) and (N), 16.16.030(C)(3), the
    title of Chap. 16.20, 16.20.010(D), 16.20.020, 16.20.030(C)(3) and (F)(1-4),
    16.22.010, 16.24.010(A), 16.24.020(A) and (B), 16.28.010(A), 16.28.020, 16.30.010
    (A), 16.32.010(B) and (R), 16.32.030(F)(1-3), 16.34.030(F)(1,2), 16.42.040(A),
890 16.42.110(E), the title of Chap. 16.44, 16.44.010, 16.44.030(E-H) and (J),
    16.44.070, 16.46.010(A)(1-4), 16.49.030, 16.49.050(2), 16.49.080(2)(a-c), (3),
    (4)(B) and (7), 16.49.090(1), 16.49.100(2), 16.49.110 (2)(B), 16.49.120(3-5),
    16.60.020, 16.60.040(E), 16.62.020(D), 16.64.040(I)(2), the title of Division V,
    16.70.010, 16.76.010(A), the title of Chap. 16.80, 16.80.010, 16.80.020,
    16.80.030(B) and (J)(2); deletes § 16.22.020(C), planning and zoning (16.02,
    16.04, 16.08, 16.10, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.22, 16.24, 16.28, 16.30, 16.32,
    16.34, 16.36, 16.42, 16.44, 16.46, 16.49, 16.60, 16.62, 16.64, 16.70, 16.76,
    16.80)
891 Authorizes contract for sewer line construction (Special)
892 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
893 Authorizes contract to construct pedestrian pathway system (Special)
894 Authorizes contract for street improvement (special)
895 Street vacation (Special)
896 Authorizes purchase of sewer lift station (Special)
897 Authorizes contract for transportation and traffic-ways plan (Special)
898 Authorizes contract for storm water master plan (Special)
    Amends § 16.50.020, 16.60.010(A), 16.62.010(A), 16.64.070(K)(2), 16.68.060(B),
899 16.84.030, 16.88.150(D) (1-6), planning and zoning (16.50, 16.60, 16.62, 16.64,
    16.68, 16.84, 16.88) (§ 16.88.150 deleted by 1080)
900 Creates Clackamas Regional Elected Group (Special)
901 Amends § 6.08.045, animal nuisances (6.08)
902 Establishes library endowment fund (3.16) (Repealed by 1399)
903 Amends Chap. 4.12, advance financing of public improvements
904 Amends § 9.08.030, weapons (9.08)
905 Amends §§ 16.38.020 and 16.38.030; adds §§ 16.38.040 and Division X, 16.110.005 -
    16.110.190, planning and zoning (16.38, 16.110)
906 Rezone (Special)
907 Amends § 10.04.010(A), city traffic code (10.04)
908 Establishes liquor license review (5.16)
909 Street vacation (Special)
910 Amends §§ 9.04.010(A) and 9.04.020(A), criminal code (9.04)
911 Authorizes contract for engineering and design services (Special)
912 Amends § 1.16.050(C), jury trials (1.16)
913 Amends Chap. 16.42, signs, planning and zoning (16.42)
914 Amends §§ 12.24.010 and 12.24.020; adds § 12.24.050, city parks (12.24)
915 Authorizes impounding of uninsured vehicles, vehicles and traffic (10.12)
916 Authorizes purchase of real property for street realignment (Special)
917 Authorizes contract for street and utility improvements (Special)
918 Rezone (Special)
919 Authorizes loan from special public works fund (Special)
920 Amends §§ 2.56.030, 2.56.040, 256.060 and 2.56.090, Canby swim center (2.56)
921 Amends § 10.12.020, impounding uninsured vehicles (10.12)
922 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
923 Amends §§ 9.40.010, 9.40.030 and 9.40.040, curfew (Repealed by 1997 code
    adoption)
924 Amends § 12.24.020, city parks (12.24)
925 Failed to pass
926 Authorizes construction of city park (Special)
927 Authorizes purchase of wheel tractor backhoe loader (Special)
928 Amends §§ 4.20.030, 4.20.040(B), 4.20.100(A)(2), (C) and (D), 4.20.120(B) and
    4.20.160, system development charges (4.20)
929 Establishes construction excise tax (3.20)
930 Authorizes purchase of playground equipment (Special)
931 Authorizes purchase of real property for municipal building complex (Special)
932 Graffiti abatement (9.44)
933 Authorizes purchase of utility truck (Special)
934 Authorizes purchase of three police cars (Special)
935 Authorizes rehabilitation of pumping station (Special)
936 Authorizes contract for street and sidewalk improvements (Special)
937 Noise control procedures (9.48)
938 Authorizes contract for expansion and new roof for adult center (Special)
939 Authorizes contract for cemetery maintenance service (Special)
940 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
941 Police duties to inventory property (9.50)
942 Authorizes purchase of HVAC equipment (Special)
943 Authorizes purchase of computer equipment (Special)
944 Authorizes contract for cemetery maintenance service (Special)
945 Authorizes contract for storm drainage improvements (Special)
946 Election to receive state revenues (Special)
947 Authorizes contract for sewer construction (Special)
948 Authorizes agreement for street improvements (Special)
949 Authorizes contract for odor control equipment (Special)
950 Authorizes contract for a screenings compactor (Special)
951 Amends Ord. 793, solid waste franchise (Special)
952 Authorizes purchase of street sweeper (Special)
953 Authorizes contract for wastewater collection system engineering services
    (Special)
954 Authorizes contract for curb realignment (Special)
    Amends §§ 16.04.550, 16.08.110, 16.10.070(A)(2), 16.10.070(B)(13), 16.16.030(C)
    (3), 16.18.030(C)(3), 16.20.030(C)(3), 16.22.010(31), 16.24.030(A), 16.42.105(A)
    and (B), 16.46.010, 16.49.080(7), 16.64.070(C)(2); reletters 16.32.010(V-X) to
    (W-Y), 16.42.015(F-H) to (G-I) and (I-N) to (K-P); adds 16.32.010(V), 16.32.030
955 (F)(4), 16.42.015(F) and (J), 16.42.028(16), 16.49.030(4), 16.49.040(1)(D) and
    (E), 16.58.060(D), 16.64.070(R), 16.76.030(L), 16.88.090(C) and 16.88.135;
    revises Table 16.42.100; and deletes 16.42.023(J), planning and zoning (16.04,
    16.08, 16.10, 16.16, 16.18, 16.20, 16.22, 16.24, 16.32, 16.42, 16.46, 16.49,
    16.58, 16.64, 16.76, 16.88) (Repealed by 1002)
956 Agricultural use protection (8.14)
957 Parental responsibility (9.54)
958 Adds §§ 9.24.060 and 9.24.070, miscellaneous offenses (9.24)
959 Rezone (Special)
960 Adds §§ 16.04.128, 16.32.020(A) and reletters 16.32.020(A-D), planning and zoning
    (16.04, 16.32)
961 Authorizes contract for engineering services (Special)
962 Authorizes contract for engineering services (Special)
963 Authorizes payment for installation of traffic signal (Special)
964 Authorizes lease/purchase of 66,000 CVW cab and chassis with drop axle (Special)
965 Establishes bicycle and pedestrian advisory committee (2.64)
966 Authorizes Hi-Ranger utility vehicle rebuild service (Special)
967 Authorizes contract for street signalization and road improvements (Special)
968 Authorizes contract for street construction (Special)
969 Authorizes contract for storm drainage improvements (Special)
970 Authorizes loan from special public works fund (Special)
    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
975          8-20-1997  8.04.120
—          11-4-1997  Charter,
                        Chapter 1
982          1-7-1997   4.24.010 -
                        4.24.080
984          2-18-1998  4.24.010
989          4-1-1998   2.32.010 -
                        2.32.030
                        2.48.020,
992          5-6-1998   2.48.030,
                        2.48.090
996          6-17-1998  T.S.O. I
1000         7-15-1998  T.S.O. I
1001         7-15-1998  T.S.O. I
1005         8-19-1998  4.12.080
1012         12-2-1998  T.S.O. I
1014         1-20-1999  T.S.O. I
1017         4-7-1999   T.S.O. I
1032         10-6-1999  2.68.010 -
                        2.68.050
1035         11-3-1999  12.08.010 -
                        12.08.200
1036         11-3-1999  12.36.010 -
                        12.36.090
1031         11-24-1999 4.28.010
1040         11-17-1999 T.S.O. I
1053         7-19-2000  T.S.O. I
1054         9-6-2000   12.20.010 -
                        12.20.070
1081         11-21-2001 3.24.010 -
                        3.24.250
1082         11-21-2001 12.40.010 -
                        12.40.080
1085         1-2-2002   15.04.010 -
                        15.04.050
1091         2-20-2002  4.04.110
1093         3-20-2002  2.36.010
1108         1-8-2003   15.20.010 -
                        15.20.280
1109         11-20-2002 2.70.010 -
                        2.70.050
1110         2-5-2003   12.24.060,
                        12.24.065
1113         2-19-2003  4.24.150 -
                        4.24.240
1133         2-18-2004  2.56.020 -
                        2.56.080
1136         4-21-2004  2.64.020,
                        2.64.030
1137         4-21-2004  2.20.030,
                        2.20.040
1151         8-18-2004  13.08.150
1160         10-20-2004 4.24.200,
                        4.24.220
1165         12-1-2004  4.32.010 -
                        4.32.090
                        9.44.010,
1166         1-5-2005   9.44.060 -
                        9.44.110
1169         2-2-2005   T.S.O. I
1170         2-16-2005  2.16.010 -
                        2.16.030
1200         2-15-2006  Adopting Ordinance
1208         6-7-2006   T.S.O. I
1219         9-6-2006   4.24.220
1261         1-2-2008   3.40.020 -
                        3.40.270
1262         1-16-2008  3.30.010 -
                        3.30.110
1268         8-6-2008   16.40.014
1279         6-18-2008  15.12.010 -
                        15.12.190
1296         10-15-2008 12.12.010 -
                        12.12.040
1299         12-17-2008 16.04.561-16.04.563, 16.35.050, 16.42.010-16.42.140,
                        16.52.025, 16.53.015, 16.53.030, 16.89.020
1303         2-4-2009   2.05.010,
                        2.05.020
1304         3-18-2009  16.10.010
1312         7-15-2009  2.10.010
1313         7-15-2009  12.08.010,
                        12.08.030
1315         9-16-2009  16.08.140,
                        16.49.030
                        9.24.060,
1316         8-19-2009  12.13.010 -
                        12.13.120
1319         11-18-2009 8.04.010,
                        8.04.020
                        3.20.070,
                        4.12.030,
                        5.04.210,
                        5.16.030,
                        6.04.060,
1327         5-19-2010  6.08.070,
                        9.08.030,
                        10.04.090,
                        10.04.095,
                        10.12.010,
                        10.12.020,
                        15.08.060
1328         6-16-2010  T.S.O. I
1333         7-21-2010  5.12.020,
                        5.12.030
1336         11-3-2010  12.36.3030
                        16.04.212, 16.04.253, 16.04.257, 16.04.383, 16.04.570,
                        16.08.110, 16.10.030, 16.10.050, 16.10.070, 16.16.030,
                        16.18.030, 16.20.030, 16.21.010, 16.21.070, 16.43.010 -
1338         10-20-2010 16.43.110, 16.49.010, 16.49.040, 16.49.065, 16.49.080,
                        16.49.110, 16.49.120, 16.62.020, 16.64.010 - 16.64.040,
                        16.64.070, 16.64.080, 16.70.020, 16.76.010, 16.86.010 -
                        16.86.040
1339         11-3-2010  16.42.010 - 16.42.140
1341         3-2-2011   2.80.010-
                        2.80.050
1342         5-18-2011  T.S.O. I
1347         10-19-2011 T.S.O. I
1349         10-19-2011 T.S.O. I
1355         5-2-2012   2.10.020
1356         5-16-2012  13.12.065
1370         3-6-2013   T.S.O. I
1372         3-20-2013  2.64.050
1373         5-1-2013   9.48.050
                        12.32.010 ,
                        12.32.020 ,
1385         10-16-2013 12.32.040  -
                        12.32.070 ,
                        12.32.090
1386         11-6-2013  5.06.010  -
                        5.06.150
1387         11-20-2013 12.36.020  -
                        12.36.080
1388         11-20-2013 T.S.O. I
1389         11-20-2013 T.S.O. I
                        3.24.010 ,
                        3.24.020 ,
                        3.24.040  -
                        3.24.080 ,
1391         12-4-2013  3.24.100  -
                        3.24.190 ,
                        3.24.210 ,
                        3.24.220 ,
                        3.24.250 ,
                        3.24.260
1393         2-5-2014   2.90.010 - 2.90.060
                        12.28.010  -
                        12.28.040 ,
1395         3-5-2014   12.28.060 ,
                        12.28.070 ,
                        12.28.090
1396         3-5-2014   5.04.190
                        5.04.150 ,
1399         6-4-2014   5.04.230 ,
                        8.04.100 , Repeals Ch. 3.16
1402         6-18-2014  13.12.065
1413 § 1.1  4-1-2015   13.16.001
1413 § 1.2  4-1-2015   13.16.002
1413 § 1.3  4-1-2015   13.16.003
1413 § 1.4  4-1-2015   13.16.004
1413 § 2.1  4-1-2015   13.16.015
1413 § 2.2  4-1-2015   13.16.016
1413 § 2.3  4-1-2015   13.16.017
1413 § 2.4  4-1-2015   13.16.018
1413 § 2.5  4-1-2015   13.16.019
1413 § 2.6  4-1-2015   13.16.020
1413 § 2.7  4-1-2015   13.16.021
1413 § 2.8  4-1-2015   13.16.022
1413 § 2.9  4-1-2015   13.16.023
1413 § 3.1  4-1-2015   13.16.035
1413 § 3.2  4-1-2015   13.16.036
1413 § 3.3  4-1-2015   13.16.037
1413 § 3.4  4-1-2015   13.16.038
1413 § 3.5  4-1-2015   13.16.039
1413 § 3.6  4-1-2015   13.16.040
1413 § 3.7  4-1-2015   13.16.041
1413 § 3.8  4-1-2015   13.16.042
1413 § 4.1  4-1-2015   13.16.055
1413 § 4.2  4-1-2015   13.16.056
1413 § 4.3  4-1-2015   13.16.057
1413 § 4.4  4-1-2015   13.16.058
1413 § 4.5  4-1-2015   13.16.059
1413 § 4.6  4-1-2015   13.16.060
1413 § 4.7  4-1-2015   13.16.061
1413 § 4.8  4-1-2015   13.16.062
1413 § 5.1  4-1-2015   13.16.075
1413 § 5.2  4-1-2015   13.16.076
1413 § 5.3  4-1-2015   13.16.077
1413 § 5.4  4-1-2015   13.16.078
1413 § 5.5  4-1-2015   13.16.079
1413 § 5.6  4-1-2015   13.16.080
1413 § 5.7  4-1-2015   13.16.081
1413 § 5.8  4-1-2015   13.16.082
1413 § 6.1  4-1-2015   13.16.090
1413 § 6.2  4-1-2015   13.16.091
1413 § 6.3  4-1-2015   13.16.092
1413 § 6.4  4-1-2015   13.16.093
1413 § 6.5  4-1-2015   13.16.094
1413 § 6.6  4-1-2015   13.16.095
1413 § 6.7  4-1-2015   13.16.096
1413 § 6.8  4-1-2015   13.16.097
1413 § 6.9  4-1-2015   13.16.098
1413 § 6.10 4-1-2015   13.16.099
1413 § 6.11 4-1-2015   13.16.100
1413 § 6.12 4-1-2015   13.16.101
1413 § 6.13 4-1-2015   13.16.102
1413 § 6.14 4-1-2015   13.16.103
1413 § 6.15 4-1-2015   13.16.104
1413 § 7.1  4-1-2015   13.16.115
1413 § 7.2  4-1-2015   13.16.116
1413 § 8    4-1-2015   13.16.130
1413 § 9    4-1-2015   13.16.140
1413 § 10   4-1-2015   13.16.150
1413 § 10.1 4-1-2015   13.16.151
1413 § 10.2 4-1-2015   13.16.152
1413 § 10.3 4-1-2015   13.16.153
1413 § 10.4 4-1-2015   13.16.154
1413 § 10.5 4-1-2015   13.16.155
1413 § 10.6 4-1-2015   13.16.156
1413 § 10.7 4-1-2015   13.16.157
1413 § 10.8 4-1-2015   13.16.158
1413 § 10.9 4-1-2015   13.16.159
1413 § 10.104-1-2015   13.16.160
1413 § 10.114-1-2015   13.16.161
1413 § 10.124-1-2015   13.16.162
1413 § 11.1 4-1-2015   13.16.175
1413 § 11.2 4-1-2015   13.16.176
1413 § 11.3 4-1-2015   13.16.177
1413 § 11.4 4-1-2015   13.16.178
1413 § 12.1 4-1-2015   13.16.190
1413 § 12.2 4-1-2015   13.16.191
1413 § 12.3 4-1-2015   13.16.192
1413 § 12.4 4-1-2015   13.16.193
1413 § 12.5 4-1-2015   13.16.194
1413 § 13.1 4-1-2015   13.16.210
1413 § 13.2 4-1-2015   13.16.211
1413 § 13.3 4-1-2015   13.16.212
1413 § 13.4 4-1-2015   13.16.213
1413 § 14.1 4-1-2015   13.16.230
1413 § 14.2 4-1-2015   13.16.231
1413 § 14.3 4-1-2015   13.16.232
1413 § 14.4 4-1-2015   13.16.233
1413 § 14.5 4-1-2015   13.16.234
1413 § 14.6 4-1-2015   13.16.235
1419         6-17-2015  9.32.040 ,
                        9.32.060
1425         11-4-2015  T.S.O. I
1426         11-4-2015  2.64.020
1428         11-4-2015  3.60.010 -
                        3.60.030
                        2.20.010,
                        2.20.040,
1433         3-2-2016   2.20.050,
                        2.20.070, 
                        2.20.080,
                        2.20.100
1434         3-2-2016   2.10.010
1437         4-20-2016  2.20.070
1447         9-6-2016   5.04.190
1450         11-16-2016 9.48.010
1454         12-7-2016  5.16.030,
                        5.16.060
1464         9-6-2017   5.04.190
1465         9-6-2017   9.48.050
1466         9-6-2017   3.35.010  -
                        3.35.140
1467         9-20-2017  Repeals Ch. 2.90
1471         3-21-2018  2.56.030 ,
                        2.56.050
1474         4-4-2018   2.04.010
                        3.50.010  -
1477         5-16-2018  3.50.150 ,
                        3.50.170 ,
                        3.50.180
1479         5-16-2018  8.20.010  -
                        8.20.190
1485         7-18-2018  10.04.100
1489         8-15-2018  9.48.050
1497         1-2-2019   10.04.020,
                        10.04.145
1498         12-5-2018  2.20.030,
                        2.20.040
1503         2-20-2019  T.S.O. I
1505         4-3-2019   3.35.050,
                        3.35.090
1523         5-6-2020   8.16.010,
                        8.16.080
                       
 
 
