


CITY OF FAIRVIEW CHARTER

CONTENTS

Chapter I Names and Boundaries

Section 1.    Title of Enactment.

Section 2.    Name of City.

Section 3.    Boundaries.

Chapter II Powers

Section 4.    Powers of the City.

Section 5.    Construction of Powers.

Section 6.    Distribution of Powers.

Chapter III Form of Government

Section 7.    Council.

Section 8.    Councilors.

Section 9.    Mayor.

Section 10.    Terms of Office.

Section 11.    Appointive Officers.

Chapter IV Council

Section 12.    Rules.

Section 13.    Meetings.

Section 14.    Quorum.

Section 15.    Record of Proceedings.

Section 16.    Meetings to be Public.

Section 17.    Mayor’s Functions at Council Meeting.

Section 18.    President of the Council.

Section 19.    Vote Required.

Section 20.    Vacancies: Occurrence.

Section 21.    Vacancies: Filling.

Chapter V Powers and Duties of Officers

Section 22.    Mayor.

Section 23.    City Administrator.

Section 24.    City Recorder.

Section 25.    Municipal Court and Judge.

Chapter VI Elections

Section 26.    Regulation of Elections.

Section 27.    Tie Votes.

Section 28.    Commencement of Terms of Office.

Section 29.    Oath of Office.

Section 30.    Nominations.

Chapter VII Ordinances

Section 31.    Enacting Clause.

Section 32.    Adoption by Council.

Section 33.    Effective Date.

Chapter VIII Public Improvements

Section 34.    Condemnation.

Section 35.    Improvements.

Section 36.    Special Assessments.

Chapter IX Miscellaneous Provisions

Section 37.    Debt.

Section 38.    Continuation of Ordinances.

Section 39.    Repeal.

Section 40.    Severability.

Section 41.    Time of Effect.

To provide for the government of the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon; and to repeal all Charter provisions of the City enacted prior to the time that this Charter takes effect, except those set forth in Section 40.

Be it enacted by the people of the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon:


CHAPTER I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES


Section 1. Title of Enactment.

This enactment may be referred to as the City of Fairview Charter of 1992.


Section 2. Name of City.

The City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon shall continue to be a municipal corporation with the name: CITY OF FAIRVIEW.


Section 3. Boundaries.

The City includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified pursuant to state law. The custodian of the City’s records shall keep an accurate, current description of the boundaries and make a copy of it available for public inspection in the City during regular City office hours.


CHAPTER II POWERS


Section 4. Powers of the City.

The City has all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and of this state now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant or allow the City, as fully as though this Charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 5. Construction of Powers.

In this Charter, no specification of a power is exclusive or restricts authority that the City would have if the power were not specified. The Charter shall be liberally construed, so that the City may exercise fully all its powers possible under this Charter and under United States and Oregon law. All powers are continuing unless a specific grant of power clearly indicates the contrary.


Section 6. Distribution of Powers.

Except as this Charter prescribes otherwise or the Oregon Constitution reserves Municipal legislative power to the voters of the City, all powers of the City are vested in the Council.


CHAPTER III FORM OF GOVERNMENT


Section 7. Council.

The Council consists of a Mayor and six Councilors nominated and elected from the City at large.


Section 8. Councilors.

The term of office of a councilor in office when this Charter is adopted is the term of office for which the councilor has been elected before adoption of the Charter (or is elected at the time of the adoption). At each general election after the adoption, three Councilors shall be elected, each for a four-year term.


Section 9. Mayor.

The term of office of the Mayor in office when this Charter is adopted is the term of office for which the Mayor has been elected before adoption of the Charter (or is elected at the time of the adoption). Thereafter, a Mayor shall be elected every four years.


Section 10. Terms of Office.

The term of office of an elected official who is elected at a general election begins at the first Council meeting of the year immediately after the election and continues until the successor to the office assumes the office and is sworn in.


Section 11. Appointive Officers.

Additional Officers of the City shall be a City Administrator, City Attorney, and such other Officers as the Council deems necessary. Each of these Officers shall be nominated by the Mayor and appointed and removed by the vote of a minimum of four Council members. The Council may designate any appointive Officer to supervise or train any other appointive Officer except for the Municipal Court Judge serving in such capacity. (Amended by 9/17/02 special election)


CHAPTER IV COUNCIL


Section 12. Rules.

The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe rules to govern its meetings and proceedings, provided that such rules shall require that the vote of each member on any issue or matter voted on by the Council be entered into the Council minutes. (Amended by 11/6/12 general election, effective 1/1/13)


Section 13. Meetings.

The Council shall meet in the City regularly at least once a month at a time and place designated by Council’s rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by request of three members of the Council.


Section 14. Quorum.

A majority of the entire Council constitutes a quorum for its business, but a smaller number of the Council may meet and compel attendance of absent Councilors as prescribed by Council rules.


Section 15. Record of Proceedings.

Council shall cause a record of its proceedings to be kept in the manner provided by state law.


Section 16. Meetings to be Public.

All deliberations and proceedings of the Council shall be public except as otherwise authorized by state law.


Section 17. Mayor’s Functions at Council Meeting.

The Mayor shall preside over Council deliberations and shall have a vote on all questions before the Council. The Mayor shall preserve order, enforce the rules of the Council, and determine the order of business under the rules of the Council. The Mayor shall be the Executive Officer of the City.


Section 18. President of the Council.

At its first meeting after this Charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the Council shall elect a President from its membership. In the Mayor’s absence from a Council meeting, the President shall preside over it. Whenever the Mayor is unable to perform the functions of the office, the president shall act as Mayor.


Section 19. Vote Required.

Except as this Charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of members of the Council shall decide any questions before it. No Council member present at a Council meeting shall abstain from voting without first stating specific reasons at the meeting.


Section 20. Vacancies: Occurrence.

An office shall become vacant:

A.    Upon the incumbent’s:

(1)    Death,

(2)    Adjudicated incompetence, or

(3)    Recall from the office, or

B.    Upon declaration by the Council of the vacancy in case of the incumbent’s:

(1)    Failure, following election or appointment to the office, to qualify for the office within ten days after the time for his or her term of office to begin.

(2)    Absence from the City for 30 continuous days or from all meetings of the Council within a 60-day period, without the Council’s consent.

(3)    Ceasing to reside in the City.

(4)    Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law.

(5)    Conviction of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude.

(6)    Resignation from the office.


Section 21. Vacancies: Filling.

Vacancies in elective offices of the City shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining council members. The appointee’s term of office shall begin immediately upon appointment and qualification and shall continue until the first council meeting of the year immediately after the next general election; and if the term of office does not then expire, the remainder of the term shall be filled by election at such general election. During the temporary disability of any elected official or during his or her absence temporarily from the City for any cause, the office may be filled pro-tem in the manner provided for filling vacancies in office permanently. (Amended by 11/6/12 general election, effective 1/1/13)


CHAPTER V POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS


Section 22. Mayor.

The Mayor shall appoint the Council Committees provided by the rules of the Council; sign all records of proceedings approved by the Council; shall have no veto power; sign all ordinances passed by the Council within three days after their passage; and, after the Council approves a bond of a City Officer or a bond for a license, contract or proposal, shall endorse the bond.


Section 23. City Administrator.

The City Administrator shall perform day to day management responsibilities as specified by ordinance or other Council directive and shall serve as the administrative head of the City government.


Section 24. City Recorder.

The Recorder shall be ex officio secretary of the Council, attend all of the meetings of the Council unless excused and keep an accurate record of its proceedings. The Recorder shall authenticate by signature all ordinances, resolutions and minutes of the Council and be custodian of City records.


Section 25. Municipal Court & Judge.

A.    The Council may create the office of Municipal Judge and fill it by appointment. Appointment and removal shall be by majority of full Council. The appointee shall hold at the pleasure of Council, within the City at a place and times that the Council specifies, a Court known as the Municipal Court for the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon.

B.    Except as this Charter, City ordinance or state law prescribes, proceedings of the Court shall conform to general laws of this state governing Justices of the Peace and Justice Courts.

C.    All area within the City and outside of the City as provided by state law, is within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court.

D.    The Municipal Court has original jurisdiction over every offense that City ordinance makes punishable and of all actions brought to recover or enforce forfeitures or the penalties that such ordinances define or prescribe.

E.    The Municipal Judge has authority to:

(1)    Render judgments and, for enforcing them, impose sanctions on persons and property within the Court’s territorial jurisdiction;

(2)    Issue process for the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the ordinances of the City;

(3)    Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of such an offense, pending trial or hearing,

(4)    Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas’ of the court;

(5)    Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve in the trial of matters before the Court;

(6)    Penalize and punish witnesses and others for contempt of the Court;

(7)    Issue process necessary to effectuate judgments and orders of the Court;

(8)    Issue search warrants; and

(9)    Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions prescribed by ordinance or appropriate state statutes unless otherwise limited by law.

F.    The Council may authorize the Municipal Judge to appoint Municipal Judges pro tem for terms of office set by the Council.

G.    Notwithstanding this section, the Council may by Ordinance transfer some or all of the functions of the Municipal Court to an appropriate state Court.

H.    The City Council may by Ordinance adopt procedures for the operation of the Municipal Court including the right to trial by jury when appropriate.


CHAPTER VI ELECTIONS


Section 26. Regulation of Elections.

Regular City elections shall be held at the same time and place as general state elections in accordance with applicable state election laws.


Section 27. Tie Votes.

In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots as determined by the Council.


Section 28. Commencement of Terms of Office.

The term of office of a person elected at a regular City election shall commence the first Council meeting of the new year immediately following the election.


Section 29. Oath of Office.

Before entering upon the duties of office, each Officer shall take an oath, or shall affirm to support the constitutions and laws of the United States, the State of Oregon, the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to faithfully perform the duties of their office.


Section 30. Nominations.

A qualified elector shall have resided in the City during the 12 months immediately preceding a City election to be nominated for an elective City position. Nomination petitions shall be in the form and filed in the manner and within the time prescribed by ordinance and state law signed by not fewer than 25 electors. A fee of $25 may be substituted for the electors signatures. The City Recorder shall make a record of the exact time in which each petition is filed together with the name and address by whom it is filed. A City employee shall not be eligible to serve on the City Council. (Amended by 5/20/97 special election)


CHAPTER VII ORDINANCES


Section 31. Enacting Clause.

The enacting clause of an ordinance shall be “The City of Fairview ordains as follows:”


Section 32. Adoption by Council.

A.    All Ordinances shall be read by title or in full prior to enactment by the Council. An Ordinance may be read by title only if at least three days before the reading a copy of the Ordinance was provided to each Council member and a copy of the Ordinance was available for public inspection in the office of the custodian of City records.

B.    Except as authorized in subsection C, enactment of an Ordinance requires approval by a majority of the Council on a different day from the day the Ordinance is read by title or in full as required by subsection A.

C.    An Ordinance may be enacted on the same day and at the same meeting it is read by title or in full as required by subsection A if the Ordinance is approved by the unanimous vote of all Council members voting when a quorum is present.

D.    Any substantive amendment to a proposed Ordinance made between the reading required by subsection A and any approval under subsections B or C must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the Council enacts the Ordinance.

E.    The Council shall establish in its rules procedures to permit public comment before it enacts any Ordinance.

F.    After the adoption of an Ordinance, the vote of each member must be entered into the Council minutes.

G.    After adoption of an Ordinance, the recorder of City Records shall sign and endorse it with its date of adoption and the endorser’s name and title of office. The Ordinance shall also be signed by the Mayor who must do so within three (3) days of its adoption by Council. (Amended by 11/6/12 general election, effective 1/1/13)


Section 33. Effective Date.

An Ordinance takes effect on the thirtieth day after its adoption or on such date that the Ordinance prescribes. An Ordinance adopted to meet an emergency may take effect as soon as adopted.


CHAPTER VIII PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


Section 34. Condemnation.

Any necessity of taking property for the City by condemnation shall be determined by a majority of the entire Council and declared by a resolution of the Council describing the property, and stating the uses to which it shall be devoted.


Section 35. Improvements.

The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance to the extent not so governed by applicable state law. Action on any proposed public improvement shall be suspended for six months upon a remonstrance against the City’s proposed action by 60% of the number of owners and owners of 60% of the acreage of land to be specially assessed unless the improvement shall benefit the City as a whole or an emergency regarding the necessity for such shall exist and be so declared by the Council. In this section, “owner” shall mean the record holder of legal title or, where land is being purchased under a land sale contract, recorded or verified to the recorder in writing by the record holder of legal title to the land, the purchaser shall be deemed the “owner”.


Section 36. Special Assessments.

The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property shall be governed by general ordinance.


CHAPTER IX MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


Section 37. Debt.

The City’s indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A City official or employee who creates or officially approves indebtedness in excess of this limitation is jointly and severally liable for the excess. A Charter amendment is not required to authorize City indebtedness.


Section 38. Continuation of Ordinances.

All Ordinances in force and consistent with this Charter when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed.


Section 39. Repeal.

All Charter provisions of the City enacted prior to the time this Charter takes effect are hereby repealed unless included herein; provided, however, those amendments to the City of Fairview Charter of 1957 relating to authorized bonded indebtedness as approved by the City’s electorate as Chapters XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII and XIX, shall continue and remain in full force and effect stated as follows:

Chapter XIV: “BONDED INDEBTEDNESS AUTHORIZED FOR WATER FACILITIES: The City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon, shall issue and sell its general obligation bonds in the sum of Two-Hundred Seventy-Five-Thousand ($275,000.00) dollars for the purpose of providing funds with which to construct and equip, either within or without the statutory or corporate limits of said City, in whole or in part, an extension to, replacement of, and enlargement of the present water storage, supply and service facilities of the City of Fairview, including a new or enlarged water storage reservoir and pumping facilities, and new, replaced or enlarged mains and distribution facilities where required, with all appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for the operation of the Fairview water system, in-



cluding the acquisition of right-of-ways, payments of engineering, legal and administrative costs.”

Chapter XV: “EXCEEDING DEBT LIMITATION: The indebtedness hereby authorized shall exceed any debt limitations prescribed by the Charter of the City of Fairview of 1957 or other limitations thereon.”

Chapter XVI: “AUTHORIZING COMMON COUNCIL TO LEVY SPECIAL TAX ANNUALLY FOR PAYMENT OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST OF BONDS SET FORTH IN CHAPTER XIV: The Common Council of the City of Fairview is hereby authorized to levy a special tax annually in an amount sufficient to pay principal and interest of bonds as they mature and authorizing said Council, in its judgment, to apply net revenues, or any part thereof, received from the City water system to pay principal and interest, or any portion thereof, of said bonds as they mature.”

Chapter XVII: “BONDED INDEBTEDNESS AUTHORIZED FOR SANITARY SEWERS AND SEWAGE TREATMENT: The City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon, shall issue and sell its general obligation bonds in the sum of six hundred fifty thousand dollars $(650,000.00) for the purpose of providing funds with which to acquire, construct and equip, either within or without the statutory or corporate limits of said City, in whole or in part, sewers, sewer system, interceptor sewers, out fall sewers, force mains, pumping stations, ejector stations, and general extension to the City’s present sewage collection system and all appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for the treatment and disposal of sewage and including the acquisition of right-of-ways, payment of engineering, legal and administrative costs including the purchase from the City of Gresham, of additional sewage treatment capacity.”

Chapter XVIII: “EXCEEDING DEBT LIMITATION: The indebtedness hereby authorized shall exceed any debt limitations prescribed by the Charter of the City of Fairview or other limitations thereon and shall also be authorized to exceed any general or specific debt limitation adopted by the voters of the State of Oregon which may appear on ballot and at election held simultaneously with this special election on November 6, 1984 and approval of this authorization by the legal voters of the City of Fairview shall be taken to except this authorized bonded indebtedness from such limitations otherwise imposed by such proposal if so approved.”

Chapter XIX. “AUTHORIZING COMMON COUNCIL TO LEVY SPECIAL TAX ANNUALLY FOR PAYMENT OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST OF BONDS SET FORTH IN CHAPTER XVII: The Common Council of the City of Fairview is hereby authorized to levy a special tax annually in an amount sufficient to pay principal and interest of such bonds as they mature and such authorization here given by the legal voters of Fairview shall be taken to provide such authority regardless of whether any tax limitation measure is approved by the voters of the State of Oregon at general state election held simultaneously with this special City election, in spite of any language therein to the contrary. The Common Council shall also be authorized to apply sewer service revenues to pay said bond principal and interest.”


Section 40. Severability.

The terms of this Charter are severable. If any part of the Charter is held invalid, that invalidity does not affect any other part of the Charter.


Section 41. Time of Effect.

This Charter takes effect July 15, 1994.


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    Initiative and Referendum


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adopting the Fairview Municipal Code.

1.01.020    Code provisions as law.

1.01.030    Effective date of code.

1.01.040    General savings provision.

1.01.050    Continuity of existing provisions.

1.01.060    Designations and references.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Constitutionality.

1.01.090    Violations – Penalty.

1.01.100    Attorneys’ fees.

1.01.110    Interest on monies owed city.


1.01.010 Adopting the Fairview Municipal Code.

A. The provisions of the document marked and designated as “Fairview Municipal Code” (hereinafter referred to as “code”), and marked as Exhibit “A”, are hereby enacted as the general and permanent law of the city of Fairview.

B. All general ordinances of the city through Ordinance No. 14-1997 are hereby repealed, with the exception of the following ordinances in terms of subject and all their amendments thereto:

Annexations

Ordinance Nos. 08-1970, 05-1970, 02-1970, 01-1970, 02-1967, 11-1966, 9-1966, 04-1965, 03-1965, 02-1965, 01-1965, 09-1961, 08-1961, 07-1961, 06-1961, 04-1961, 03-1961, 02-1961, 04-1960, 01-1957, 04-1956, 02-1955, 01-1955

Contracts

Ordinance No. 01-1978

Revenue Sharing Program

Ordinance No. 01-1997

Zoning Map Amendments

Ordinance Nos. 08-1997, 07-1997, 05-1997, 04-1997, 03-1997, 10-1996, 06-1996, 05-1996, 02-1995, 15-1993, 10-1993, 04-1992, 10-1991, 06-1991, 18-1990, 18-1989, 17-1989, 13-1989, 11-1989, 9-1989

Comprehensive Plan Amendments

Ordinance Nos. 02-1995, 08-1994, 05-1991, 04-1991, 19-1989, 12-1989, 10-1989, 3-1987, 16-1986, 01-1983, 02-1982, 04-1981, 01-1981, 06-1980

Franchises

Ordinance Nos. 07-1995, 06-1994, 02-1994, 05-1993, 15-1990, 06-1990

Bonds/Assessments/Warrants

Ordinances Nos. 08-1987, 08-1974, 05-1974

Vacations

Ordinance Nos. 11-1996, 03-1996, 14-1993, 07-1991, 03-1991, 14-1990, 11-1987, 03-1979, 01-1977, 06-1970

(Ord. 6-1998 § 1)


1.01.020 Code provisions as law.

The provisions of the code adopted in FMC 1.01.010 are the laws in the city of Fairview and are not merely prima facie evidence of the law. (Ord. 6-1998 § 2)


1.01.030 Effective date of code.

The provisions of this chapter and the code take effect 30 days from the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 6-1998 § 3)


1.01.040 General savings provision.

This chapter and the code shall not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred and proceedings that were begun before the effective date provided in FMC 1.01.030. (Ord. 6-1998 § 4)


1.01.050 Continuity of existing provisions.

A. The provisions of the code that are the same in substance as code or ordinance provisions that are in effect immediately before this code becomes effective are construed as restatements and continuations of the prior provisions.

B. For purposes of adoption of the code, the members of all city boards, committees, or commissions created under a code or ordinance provision repealed by this chapter shall continue to hold office for the period of time specified in the repealed provision.

C. A person who holds a license, permit, right or privilege granted under a prior ordinance provision repealed by this chapter may continue to operate under and use such license, permit, right of privilege until expiration thereof according to the terms of the ordinance provision under which the license, permit, right or privilege was issued, unless the same is revoked sooner by the city. (Ord. 6-1998 § 5)


1.01.060 Designations and references.

A. In any prosecution for the violation of any provisions of the Fairview Municipal Code, or in any legal proceeding within the purview thereof, it shall be sufficient to refer to the applicable title, chapter, section or subsection of the Fairview Municipal Code, and all such references shall apply to the applicable numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the Fairview Municipal Code.

B. Any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any portion of a section of the code shall refer to and designate the applicable title, chapter, section or subsection of the Fairview Municipal Code, and, whenever reference is made to any portion of the code, the reference shall apply and be applicable to amendments, corrections or additions heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city of Fairview. (Ord. 6-1998 § 6)


1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 6-1998 § 7)


1.01.080 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 6-1998 § 8)


1.01.090 Violations – Penalty.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any requirement imposed by the Fairview City Code. Any person or entity violating any provision or failing to comply with any requirement imposed by this code, unless provision is made specifically otherwise in this code, is subject, upon a determination that such violation or failure has occurred, to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day for each day the violation or failure to comply has existed. Any act or omission made unlawful under the city code includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing such act or omission.

B. Any person, firm, association, or corporation violating any provision of the FMC where the penalty is deemed a Class 1 civil infraction should be subject to:

1. A civil fine of not less than $100.00 and no more than $999.00 for each violation.

C. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, a court (including the municipal court) should consider any of the following factors that the court deems relevant:

1. The actions taken by the person or entity to mitigate or correct the violation;

2. Whether the violation or the failure to comply is repeated or continuous in nature;

3. The magnitude or gravity of the violation or failure to comply;

4. The cooperativeness of the person or entity with the city;

5. The cost to the city of investigating, correcting, attempting to correct and/or prosecuting the violation or failure; and

6. Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-1999 § 1)


1.01.100 Attorneys’ fees.

In the event the city elects to enforce the terms of its ordinances or resolutions consistent with ORS 30.315 (1999), a court (including an appellate court) may, in its discretion, award attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party. (Ord. 14-1999 § 1)


1.01.110 Interest on monies owed city.

Unless specifically agreed to otherwise via a duly approved contract or agreement between the city and some third party or unless otherwise specifically set out in another provision of this code, any and all amount(s) due and owing the city of Fairview from and after July 1, 2004, shall accrue interest at the legal rate as the same is set forth in ORS Chapter 82 from the time it becomes due until fully paid. (Ord. 7-2004 § 1)


Chapter 1.05 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:

1.05.010    Initiative petition.

1.05.020    Referendum petition.

1.05.030    Verification of petition.

1.05.040    Form not mandatory.

1.05.050    Petition sheet requirements.

1.05.060    Filing of petition.

1.05.070    Number of signatures required.

1.05.080    Charter amendment submitted by council as resolution.

1.05.090    Election date stated on resolution.

1.05.100    Ballot title.

1.05.110    Notice.

1.05.120    Voter eligibility – Violation.

1.05.130    Manner of voting – Adoption of measure.

1.05.140    Votes counted when.

1.05.150    Proclamation of election results.

1.05.160    Time limit for referendum petition filing – Effective dates.


1.05.010 Initiative petition.

The following shall be substantially the form of a petition for any ordinance or amendment to the city Charter, proposed by the initiative:

WARNING

It is a felony for any one to sign any Initiative or Referendum petition with any other name other than his own, or to knowingly sign his name more than once for the same measure, or to sign such petition when he is not a legal voter.

INITIATIVE PETITION

To the Honorable _______________, Multnomah County, Oregon.

We, the undersigned, citizens and legal voters of the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon, respectfully demand that the following proposed Ordinance (or amendment to the City Charter) shall be submitted to the legal voters of the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon, for their approval or rejection at the regular (or special) city election to be held on the ____ day of __________, 19 __, and each for himself says: I have personally signed this petition; I am a legal voter of the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon, and my residence and street number are correctly written after my name.

Name    Residence	Street Number

(here follow 20 numbered lines for signatures)

(Ord. 3-1956 § 1)


1.05.020 Referendum petition.

The following shall be substantially the form of petition for referendum to the people on any ordinance passed by the city council:

WARNING

It is a felony for anyone to sign any Initiative or Referendum petition with any other name than his own, or to knowingly sign his name more than once for the same measure, or to sign such petition when he is not a legal voter

REFERENDUM PETITION

To the Honorable _______________, Recorder of the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon.

We, the undersigned, legal voters of the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon, respectfully demand that Ordinance No. ______ entitled (the title of the ordinance on which the referendum is sought), passed by the city council of the City of Fairview at its meeting on the ____ day of __________, 19 __, shall be submitted to the legal voters of the City of Fairview for their approval or rejection at the regular (or special) city election to be held on the ____ day of __________, 19 __, and each for himself says: I have personally signed this petition; I am a legal voter of the City of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon, and my residence and street number are correctly written after my name.

Name    Residence	Street Number

(here follow 20 numbered lines for signatures)

(Ord. 3-1956 § 2)


1.05.030 Verification of petition.

Each and every sheet of every petition for either initiative or referendum containing signatures shall be verified on the back thereof in substantially the following form by the person who circulated such sheet of said petition by affidavit thereon as follows:

STATE OF OREGON    )

    )

COUNTY OF MULTNOMAH    ) ss.

    )

CITY OF FAIRVIEW    )

I, _____________________, being first duly sworn, say that all of the persons who were the signers of this sheet signed the sheet of the foregoing petition, and each of them signed his name, residence and street number correctly and that each signed is a legal voter of the City of Fairview.

Subscribed and sworn to before me this ____ day of __________, 19 __.

    Signature & title of officer and his residence.

(Ord. 3-1956 § 3)


1.05.040 Form not mandatory.

The forms herein given are not mandatory and if substantially followed in any petition it shall be sufficient, discharging clerical and technical errors. (Ord. 3-1956 § 4)


1.05.050 Petition sheet requirements.

Not more than 20 signatures shall be signed to one sheet of a petition, and a full and correct copy of the title and text of the measure demanded for submission by the initiative or referendum petition, as the case may be, shall be attached to each sheet circulated for signature, and such full and correct copy of the title and text shall be shown to the voter before his signature is attached. (Ord. 3-1956 § 5)


1.05.060 Filing of petition.

The recorder of the city of Fairview shall accept for filing any petition for the initiative or for the referendum, subject to the verification of the number and genuineness of the signatures and voting qualifications of the persons signing the same by reference to the registration books in the office of the county clerk of Multnomah County, and if a sufficient number of qualified voters be found to have signed said petition, he shall file same within 10 days after presentation thereof to him. (Ord. 3-1956 § 6)


1.05.070 Number of signatures required.

Initiative petitions for any proposed ordinance, Charter amendment or measure shall be signed by a number of legal voters equal to 15 percent of the votes cast for mayor at the last preceding municipal election. Referendum petitions against any ordinance or measure proposed by the city council shall be signed by a number of legal voters equal to 10 percent of the votes cast for mayor at the last regular preceding municipal election. (Ord. 3-1956 § 7)


1.05.080 Charter amendment submitted by council as resolution.

An amendment to the Charter of the city of Fairview may be proposed and submitted to the legal voters by resolution of the council without an Initiative petition; said resolution shall be filed with the recorder for submission not later than 20 days before the election at which it is to be voted upon and no amendment to the Charter shall be effective until it is approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon by the legal voters of said city. (Ord. 3-1956 § 8)


1.05.090 Election date stated on resolution.

Where an amendment to the Charter of the city of Fairview may be proposed and submitted to the legal voters by resolution of the council, without an initiative petition, the said resolution shall therein state the date of the regular municipal election, or the day of a special election at which time said resolution will be submitted to be voted upon, and shall call and make provision for said election. (Ord. 3-1956 § 9)


1.05.100 Ballot title.

When any measure for initiative or referendum legislation shall be filed by the recorder after the number and genuineness of signatures thereto, as provided by FMC 1.05.060, shall have been ascertained, or when any resolution of the city council shall be filed with the recorder as provided in FMC 1.05.080, the recorder shall forthwith transmit to the attorney of said municipality a copy of such measure, who shall within five days provide and return to the recorder a ballot title for such measure. The ballot title shall be printed with the number of the measure on the official ballot. In making such ballot title said attorney shall to the best of his ability give a true and impartial statement of the purpose of the measure in such language that the ballot title shall not create argument for nor prejudice against such measure. Any person who is dissatisfied with the ballot title provided by the city attorney for any such measure may within five days after the title prepared by the said attorney is returned to the recorder, appeal to the city council, asking a different title and giving the reasons therefor, and stating why the title prepared by the said attorney is improper and the council shall by resolution approve the ballot title prepared by said attorney, or shall, by resolution, prescribe another ballot title therefor and the ballot title so approved or so prescribed by the council shall be the title placed upon the ballot. Such ballot title shall in no case exceed 100 words, and shall not resemble in so far as possible any other ballot title filed for any measure. The recorder of the city of Fairview shall number such measures and ballot title in the most convenient and consecutive manner. The affirmative of the first measure shall be numbered 100 and the negative 101 in numerals, and the succeeding measures shall be numbered 102, 103, 104, 105 and so on. It shall be the duty of the recorder to print said ballot titles and numbers upon the official ballot. Measures referred to the voters by petition shall be designated “referendum ordered by petition of the people”. Measures proposed by the initiative petition shall be designated “proposed by initiative petition”. Charter amendments submitted by the city council without initiative petition shall be designated “Charter amendment submitted to the voters by the city council”; provided, however, that when Charter amendments are to be submitted to the voters by resolution of the council as in this chapter provided, the council may in said resolution provide for a ballot title for the measure so to be submitted, and in the event of such provision being made by the council the hereinabove provisions of this section relative to the filing of the measure with the city attorney, the preparation by said attorney of a ballot title therefor and the appeal to the council from the ballot title so prepared shall not apply. (Ord. 3-1956 § 10)


1.05.110 Notice.

Where a special election is called either on petition for proposed ordinances or Charter amendments by the initiative, or for submitting ordinances by the referendum, or Charter amendments proposed by the council, the recorder shall publish such proposed ordinances, referendum measure or Charter amendment with the ballot title and number in full in a newspaper published in the city of Fairview to be designated by the council, once each week for two successive weeks, the first publication not to be less than 15 days before the special election at which said proposed ordinance, referendum, measure or Charter amendment is to be voted on, and if there be no newspaper so published, then the recorder shall post notice of election in four public places in the city at least 10 days prior to such election, which posted notice shall state the time, place and purposes of the election, but need not contain the full amendment or ordinance being submitted. A like rule as to publication or posting shall be observed where proposed ordinances, referendum measure or Charter amendment are to be submitted at the regular election. (Ord. 3-1956 § 11)


1.05.120 Voter eligibility – Violation.

The legal voters of the city of Fairview are qualified to sign a petition for the referendum or for the initiative for any measure which they are entitled to vote upon. Any person signing any name other than his own to a petition, or knowingly signing his name more than once for the same measure at one election, who is not at the time of signing the same a legal voter of the city of Fairview, or any officer or other person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or by imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding six months or by both fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the municipal court. (Ord. 3-1956 § 12)


1.05.130 Manner of voting – Adoption of measure.

The manner of voting upon measures submitted to the legal voters shall be the same as is, or may hereafter be, provided by law. No measure shall be adopted unless it shall receive the affirmative majority of the total number of legal votes cast on such measure and entitled to be counted thereon. If two or more laws on the same subject or containing provisions that are conflicting shall be approved by the voters at the same election the measure receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall be proclaimed to be the law adopted. (Ord. 3-1956 § 13)


1.05.140 Votes counted when.

The votes on measures and Charter amendments shall be counted, canvassed and returned as votes for candidates are counted, canvassed and returned. (Ord. 3-1956 § 14)


1.05.150 Proclamation of election results.

The mayor shall within 15 days from the time of such election proclaim by publication thereof in full, once in a newspaper in the city of Fairview, or by posting printed or typewritten copies of such proclamation in at least two conspicuous places in said municipality, the adoption of such measure and amendment which shall have received the affirmative majority of the total number of votes cast thereon, and upon such proclamation such measure and amendments shall become in full force and effect, except in cases provided for in FMC 1.05.130 with reference to two or more laws on the same subject or containing provisions which are conflicting. In cases of ordinances which have been passed by the city council and voted upon by referendum, proclamation of the result of such vote shall also be made, and such ordinance shall continue in effect or cease to be in effect, according to such result from the time of such proclamation. (Ord. 3-1956 § 15)


1.05.160 Time limit for referendum petition filing – Effective dates.

Where referendum petitions shall be signed by the required number of legal voters against any ordinances passed by the city council, same shall be filed with the recorder within 30 days after the passage and approval of the ordinance in question.

No ordinance shall take effect and become operative until 30 days after its passage by the city council and signing by the mayor, except emergency measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the city; and no such emergency measure shall become effective or immediately operative until the same is passed by the unanimous vote of all members of the council present at the meeting, and signing by the mayor. (Ord. 3-1956 § 16)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.05    City Council

2.10    City Administrator

2.14    Commissions, Committees and Task Forces – Council-Created Advisory Bodies

2.15    Planning Commission

2.16    Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee

2.17    Community Engagement Committee

2.18    Building Appeals Board

2.19    Public Safety Advisory Committee

2.20    Contract Review Board

2.21    Economic Development Advisory Committee

2.22    Urban Renewal Agency

2.25    Municipal Court

2.27    Municipal Court Procedures for Certain Code Enforcement Matters

2.30    City Records

2.35    Repealed

2.40    Emergency Powers

2.45    Criminal Background Check Policy


Chapter 2.05 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.05.010    Rules of the council adopted.

2.05.015    Charter interpretation.

2.05.020    –    

2.05.090    Repealed.


2.05.010 Rules of the council adopted.

The Fairview city council shall adopt and thereafter may modify its rules for the conduct of the council’s business and governing its members’ conduct as well as others involved with and in council meetings by resolution, the same to be known as the “Rules of the Fairview City Council.” (Ord. 3-2007 § 1; Ord. 7-1992 § 1)


2.05.015 Charter interpretation.

The phrase “next election” in Section 21 of the City of Fairview Charter of 1992 shall mean the next general election available under state law. (Ord. 2-2012 § 1)


2.05.020 Meeting of council.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2007. (Ord. 9-2003 § 1; Ord. 2-2003 § 1; Ord. 7-1992 § 1.I)


2.05.030 Minutes.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2007. (Ord. 7-1992 § 1.II)


2.05.040 Order of business.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2007. (Ord. 2-2003 § 2; Ord. 7-1992 § 1.III)


2.05.050 Discussion of business.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2007. (Ord. 9-2003 § 2; Ord. 7-1992 § 1.IV)


2.05.060 Conduct of business.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2007. (Ord. 7-1992 § 1.V)


2.05.070 Conduct of hearings.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2007. (Ord. 7-1992 § 1.VI)


2.05.080 Voting.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2007. (Ord. 2-2003 § 3; Ord. 7-1992 § 1.VII)


2.05.090 Ethics code.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2007. (Ord. 7-1992 § 1.VIII)


Chapter 2.10 CITY ADMINISTRATOR

Sections:

2.10.010    Powers – Duties.

2.10.020    Salary.

2.10.030    Performance evaluations.

2.10.040    Encompassed by personnel policies.


2.10.010 Powers – Duties.

The city administrator shall be the principal management position as the appointed administrative officer, responsible to the mayor and council for all city functions. The administrator shall be appointed by the council upon the recommendation of the mayor and shall perform day-to-day management responsibilities. The administrator shall serve at the discretion and pleasure of the city council. The administrator shall be specifically responsible for: the development and control of the annual budget within guidelines defined by Oregon Budget Law; personnel administration, hiring and firing; purchasing; community and intergovernmental relations. The administrator shall supervise the city’s department heads and the other such departmental arrangements as adopted by council excepting that the administrator shall have no line authority over the municipal judge or city attorney. The administrator may be required to perform such other related administrative duties as the council may deem appropriate. Apart from these general management and administrative responsibilities, the administrator will act as the personnel officer, budget officer and purchasing agent. The city administrator may delegate such duties as required to fulfill these responsibilities but shall remain responsible for these functions as the council appointed officer of the city.

A. Personnel Officer. The duties and authorities of personnel officer shall be as prescribed in the personnel policies, procedures and rules, wherein the city council has delegated the authority for the administration of the personnel policies, procedures and rules. The personnel officer of the city is responsible for the specific administration of these rules. The city administrator, as personnel officer, shall approve all increases within a position class; demotions, promotions, suspensions, layoffs, terminations or other personnel actions. The personnel officer shall develop and make recommendations as to job descriptions within job titles as established by council. These job descriptions shall be approved by the city council. The personnel officer shall be responsible for the development and maintenance of a uniform and equitable pay plan which shall consist of the classes of positions, minimum and maximum ranges of pay and intermediate steps as deemed necessary for the efficient administration of a pay and classification plan, each fiscal year, preferably in conjunction with the budget. The city administrator shall compare the current city pay plan, compensation policies and personnel programs with those of other public and private employers. Recommendations for adjustments in these pay and classification plans shall be submitted to the city council for their adoption. The city administrator also shall have the authority to make temporary appointments for an employee as an “acting” employee in a position of a higher range. The administrator shall exercise the authority over the discipline of all city employees and take final action as appropriate.

The appointing authority for all department heads and other employees of the city is hereby delegated to the city administrator. The city administrator shall be the supervising authority for all department heads. The city administrator shall have authority to award merit pay increases within established pay ranges to all employees pursuant to personnel rules.

B. Budget Officer. The city administrator shall act as the budget officer or may delegate the authority to a budget director pursuant to Oregon State Law for the preparation and recommendation of an annual budget. The city administrator shall have the authority to freeze or to administratively reduce appropriations within any department as deemed necessary for the proper fiscal management of the city.

C. Purchasing Officer. The city administrator shall act as the purchasing officer or may delegate this authority to a purchasing agent to purchase and to enter into contracts on behalf of the city as consistent with the council adopted budget or policy.

D. Other General Duties. The city administrator shall organize and compile the council agenda; shall attend city meetings as appropriate; shall see to the enforcement of all ordinances and policies of the city; shall make policy recommendations and advice to the mayor and council; shall review and examine the departmental organization and operating procedures so as to effect greater economy and efficiency in departmental management and shall report periodically on such performance to the council; shall make or direct such studies as necessary to the internal operations and efficiency of the city; shall from time to time represent the city in an intergovernmental and public relations context. The city administrator shall keep the community informed on municipal affairs; encourage communication between the citizens and all municipal officers; develop such administrative rules as consistent with council policy, ordinances and resolutions as necessary to the efficient operation of city programs; assist the council in an annual development of community goals and priorities; provide quarterly reports to the council regarding implementation of council policy as established through goals and priorities; furnish the council with such information as it may require or request and to provide for the proper administration of all ordinances, resolutions and actions of the council. (Ord. 6-1995 § 2)


2.10.020 Salary.

Initial compensation for the city administrator shall be determined by the city council, generally through negotiations of an initial employment agreement. Salary increases beyond general increases to city employees shall be based upon satisfactory performance evaluations. The city administrator shall, however, not receive less than any increases granted to general employees of the city. (Ord. 6-1995 § 3)


2.10.030 Performance evaluations.

The city council and the city administrator shall establish performance standards that shall be the basis of annual reviews by the city council of the city administrator. These annual reviews shall be the basis for yearly salary increases and shall be used as the standard for continued employment. (Ord. 6-1995 § 4)


2.10.040 Encompassed by personnel policies.

The city administrator position, as herein described, shall become a part and be encompassed by the city of Fairview’s personnel policies. (Ord. 6-1995 § 5)


Chapter 2.14 COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND TASK FORCES – COUNCIL-CREATED ADVISORY BODIES

Sections:

2.14.010    Purpose.

2.14.020    Creation.

2.14.030    Structure.

2.14.040    Appointment and removal.

2.14.050    Member participation and attendance.

2.14.060    Residency requirements.

2.14.070    Dissolution.

2.14.080    Term of membership.

2.14.090    Term limits.

2.14.110    Vacancies.

2.14.120    Officers – Terms of office.

2.14.130    Council and staff support.

2.14.140    Advisory body purpose – Meetings – Reporting – Other responsibilities.


2.14.010 Purpose.

The city council recognizes the importance of the public deliberative process and the contributions citizens may offer the city through a structured citizen involvement process. As the recipients of government services, citizens may best be able to identify where efficiencies and improvements may benefit the city. To that end, council has created a system of advisory bodies designed to foster the relationship between the city and its citizens and ensure that the city considers and appropriately weighs the needs and interests of all city citizens. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.020 Creation.

A. Unless expressly stated to the contrary, all commissions, committees, task forces and other advisory bodies created under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and the council-adopted policies, rules and guidelines. The commissions, committees, task forces, and other advisory bodies policies, rules and guidelines will be adopted by resolution. Changes to the adopted operating policies, rules and guidelines shall require formal council action.

B. For the purpose of this chapter, a permanent standing council citizen advisory commission, or committee (CCAC), shall be defined as any commission, committee, or other advisory body that is created by council through an ordinance to address functional areas of policy, operation and interest to the council which ordinance is codified in the Fairview Municipal Code.

C. All other council advisory bodies including task forces and focus groups that are temporary in nature and formed for a specific purpose, for a limited, stated duration shall be created by council resolution and must be dissolved upon completion of the stated purpose. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.030 Structure.

A. Every commission, committee, task force, or other advisory body created under FMC 2.14.020 shall have a specific statement of purpose in the creating ordinance or resolution that identifies the general mission, charge and responsibility of each commission, committee, task force or other advisory body. The structure and purpose of advisory bodies will be reexamined periodically by the council to determine need and effectiveness. The city council will meet annually with each CCAC to present the CCAC with an annual work plan for the fiscal year.

B. Every commission, committee, task force, or other advisory body member appointed under the authority of this chapter shall be subject to the ethics code adopted by and applicable to members of the city council.

C. CCACs may recommend to council the creation of citizen advisory subcommittees (CCAC subcommittees) as well as task forces and/or focus groups as needed to complete the work plan of the CCAC or otherwise advise and assist the CCAC or council. Any such advisory body recommended by a CCAC shall be created as set forth in FMC 2.14.020(C).

D. CCAC may create a work group, without council approval, of less than a quorum of the CCAC members, to complete work tasks provided to the CCAC by the council. The work group shall serve for a specific purpose and targeted time frame, and be dissolved upon completion of the stated work project or work purpose. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.040 Appointment and removal.

A. Members of all commissions, committees, task forces, and all other advisory bodies created under this chapter shall be appointed by a majority vote of the council. Members of all commissions, committees, task forces and advisory bodies serve as volunteers and shall not be monetarily compensated for their participation.

B. Members of CCACs shall be recruited and selected through an open, well-publicized public process.

C. Except as may be required by law or written agreement, individuals appointed to any commission, committee, task force or other advisory body may be removed by a majority vote of the council for any reason and at any time during the member’s term of appointment. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.050 Member participation and attendance.

Unless expressly stated to the contrary elsewhere in the Fairview Municipal Code or Oregon law, failure of any advisory body member, of any advisory body, to attend three consecutive meetings of the commission, committee, task force, or other advisory body to which he/she has been appointed, will result in automatic termination of the member’s appointment; provided, however, that a majority vote of the council may waive automatic termination if expressly requested by the advisory body and is, in the discretion of council, warranted by individual circumstances. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.060 Residency requirements.

A. Unless otherwise approved by council or required by state law, all members of CCACs, committees, task forces, or other advisory bodies created under this chapter must reside within the Fairview city limits.

B. Members of CCACs, committees, task forces, or other advisory bodies created under this chapter may reside outside the Fairview city limits only by approval of the council if the member has a vested interest or specific skill related to the task of the advisory body. In making appointments for any advisory body, council may give preference to Fairview residents. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.070 Dissolution.

The mayor and city council may, through the appropriate legislative action, dissolve any commission, committee, task force or other advisory body created under this chapter, except those required by state law. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.080 Term of membership.

A. Unless otherwise expressly provided or required by state law, the term of appointment to any CCAC created under this chapter shall be for a period of three years. 

B. The term of appointment to any other committee, task force or other advisory body created under this chapter shall run until the work of the committee, task force or other advisory group has been completed or a period of one year, whichever is shorter; unless otherwise approved by council. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.090 Term limits.

A. Unless otherwise expressly approved by council, no individual shall serve on the same CCAC for more than two consecutive membership terms.

B. No individual shall serve on more than two CCACs at a time unless approved by a majority of the council. This provision shall not apply to subcommittees, task forces or other advisory bodies that are created by council for a specific purpose or that are of a temporary nature. 

C. Unless otherwise expressly approved by council, no individual shall serve on both the budget committee and the planning commission at the same time. (Ord. 1-2020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.110 Vacancies.

Vacancies created due to the mid-term resignation or removal of a member shall be filled in accordance with the process set forth in the adopted by resolution commissions, committees, task forces, and other advisory bodies policies, rules and guidelines operating rules, policies and guidelines adopted by the council, including appointment by a majority vote of the council, and shall be for the remainder of the vacant term. Appointment to a vacancy mid-term shall not be considered in calculating maximum membership term limits unless the term appointment exceeds two years, in which case appointment to the vacancy will be considered in calculating maximum membership terms. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.120 Officers – Terms of office.

A. Unless otherwise directed by council, in January of each year, every commission, committee, subcommittee, task force, or focus group created under this chapter, for which the term of chair or 

vice-chair is expired, shall elect a new chair or vice-chair each of whom shall hold a one-year term of office. In the event a vacant officer position is not filled within a reasonable time, the council will appoint an individual to fill the vacancy subject to a majority vote of the council.

B. Unless otherwise approved by the council, no officer position may serve more than two successive terms in any one office. Election to a vacant term of office set forth in this section shall not be considered in calculating office term unless the remainder of the term of the vacant office is greater than nine months. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.130 Council and staff support.

A. At least one member of the council will be appointed, as “council liaison,” by the mayor to each CCAC.

1. Council liaisons will attend CCAC meetings and act as a resource of information for the CCAC members and communicate council direction to the CCAC in an effort to maintain alignment with council goals, work plans, and specific project objectives. Council liaisons will review the council work plan specific to the CCAC and inform the CCAC of council meeting agenda items and of council decisions that may be of interest to the CCAC. Council liaisons will also encourage CCAC members to attend council meetings to keep abreast of council action, policy matters, and the activities of the council. 

2. A council liaison shall not attempt to direct debate, lobby, or otherwise influence the direction or decisions of any advisory body. 

3. Council liaisons shall not be eligible to vote on any CCAC agenda items.

B. The city administrator shall assign a staff person, as “staff liaison,” to provide technical information, guidance and clerical support for each CCAC as well as any CCAC subcommittee, task force or focus group created under the provisions of this chapter. 

1. The primary staff person(s) assigned to a CCAC will be designated as the staff liaison(s) and will be responsible to ensure compliance with public meetings laws. 

2. Staff liaisons may actively participate in discussions of a CCAC where appropriate and/or necessary or when requested by the CCAC.

3. Staff liaisons shall not be eligible to vote on any CCAC or CCAC subcommittee, task force or focus group agenda items. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.14.140 Advisory body purpose – Meetings – Reporting – Other responsibilities.

A. Unless otherwise required by law or written agreement, every commission, committee, subcommittee, task force, focus group or other advisory body created under this chapter shall have provided to them by council expressed statements of purpose, powers, and duties that identify the general mission, charge, and responsibilities by which its activities are to be governed. Projects or activities beyond these expressed statements or annual work plans must be submitted to and approved by a majority vote of the council.

B. Unless otherwise expressly provided or required by law, meeting schedules shall be established by the relevant committee as needed to address the relevant annual work plans and to conduct the business of the commission, committee, task force, focus group or other advisory body.

C. A majority of voting members of an advisory body shall constitute a quorum one of whom must be the chair or vice-chair of the committee.

1. Vacant positions will not be counted in determining the existence of a quorum; provided, however, in no event shall a quorum be established and/or official business be conducted by a commission, committee, task force, or focus group created under this chapter that has vacant positions:

a. With less than three voting members present, one of whom must be the chair or vice-chair, for standing committees with membership codified at seven members or less; and

b. With less than five voting members present, one of whom must be the chair or vice-chair, for standing committees with membership codified at more than seven members.

D. Minutes shall be kept and maintained for all meetings.

E. The chair of each commission, committee, task force, or other advisory group will present a status report to the city council on a quarterly basis.

F. Within the first year of appointment as a member to a commission, committee, task force or focus group created under this chapter, all members shall participate in a city law orientation for volunteers or otherwise demonstrate knowledge and familiarity with state and local law and rules governing the conduct of public officials. (Ord. 7-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 2.15 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.15.010    Established.

2.15.020    Membership and compensation.

2.15.030    Terms of office and vacancies.

2.15.040    Officers.

2.15.050    Meetings – Quorum – Offices.

2.15.060    Interest limitations.

2.15.070    Conflict of interest.

2.15.080    Powers and duties.

2.15.090    Coordination with other governmental agencies.

2.15.100    Report to the council.

2.15.110    Expenses.


2.15.010 Established.

There is hereby established a planning commission for the city of Fairview, Oregon, and the name of this commission shall be and so referred to as the planning commission of the city of Fairview. (Ord. 1-1974 § 1)


2.15.020 Membership and compensation.

The membership of this commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the city council. All appointed members shall reside within the city of Fairview city limits. Commission members shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses. (Ord. 1-1989 § 1; Ord. 1-1974 § 2)


2.15.030 Terms of office and vacancies.

At the first meeting of the commission the members thereof, except the ex officio members, shall choose their terms of office by lot as follows: one for one year, two for two years, two for three years, and two for four years. Immediately thereafter, the members shall notify the council in writing of such a lot. Their successors shall hold office for four years; vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired portion of the vacant term. A member may be removed by the city council after hearing for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. (Ord. 1-1974 § 3)


2.15.040 Officers.

The commission shall elect from among its members appointed by the city council, a president and vice president; these officers shall hold office at the pleasure of the commission; a secretary shall also be elected by the commission but need not be a member thereof; the commission may from time to time employ a secretary and such other clerks as may be necessary and employ consulting advisors on municipal problems, out of funds at the disposal of the commission, as authorized by the city council. (Ord. 1-1974 § 4)


2.15.050 Meetings – Quorum – Offices.

The commission may make and establish such rules and regulations as prove necessary for its government and procedure, consistent with the laws of the state, the city Charter and ordinances; a majority of the members of the commission constitute a quorum; meetings shall be held once monthly. The city council shall assign to the commission an office or headquarters in which to hold its meetings, transact its business and keep its records. (Ord. 1-1974 § 5)


2.15.060 Interest limitations.

No more than two voting members of the commission shall be engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation that is engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two voting members shall be engaged in the same kind of business, trade or profession. (Ord. 1-1974 § 6)


2.15.070 Conflict of interest.

A member of a planning commission shall not participate in any commission proceeding or action in which any of the following has a direct or substantial financial interest: a member or his spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which he is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which he is negotiating for, has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the commission where the action is being taken. (Ord. 1-1974 § 7)


2.15.080 Powers and duties.

The commission is charged with the express duty of administering and enforcing the Zoning Ordinance of the city of Fairview and shall have the powers and duties set forth therein and govern themselves accordingly; in addition, the commission is charged with the duties and given the powers as set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 227, as may be applicable to planning commissions so formed, and in particular those enumerated in Oregon Revised Statutes 227.090. At all times, said commission shall act in a manner consistent with the laws of the state of Oregon, the Charter and ordinances of the city of Fairview. (Ord. 1-1974 § 8)


2.15.090 Coordination with other governmental agencies.

In those instances in which other governmental agencies, including those agencies of other cities, Multnomah County, a regional or state agency, may be involved by their duties in the processes of determining over-all area planning or land use guidelines, directives or requirements which could or may relate to the planning and land use function of the city of Fairview, this agency shall, upon directive given by resolution of the city council, have the responsibility to coordinate the planning functions of the city with those of the other agency or agencies concerned, consistent with the goals and objectives set forth by this commission and adopted by the city council and consistent with the ordinances and resolutions and policies of this city pertaining thereto. This commission may, upon directive of the city council, appoint one of its members to serve as a “coordinating” member of such other agency or commission to serve as representative of this commission and the city of Fairview thereupon. (Ord. 1-1974 § 9)


2.15.100 Report to the council.

The commission shall, on the first day of February of every year, make and file with the city council a report of all its transactions for the year; the city council may further require such reports on such matters and at such other times as the council may determine. (Ord. 1-1974 § 10)


2.15.110 Expenses.

Such expenses as the commission may lawfully incur, including the necessary disbursements incurred by its members in the performance of their duties as members of the commission, shall be paid out of funds placed at the disposal of the commission as authorized by the city council; complete records shall be kept of all expenses, disbursements and income of the commission; all such records shall be open to council inspection at all times and shall be audited annually by the city treasurer. (Ord. 1-1974 § 11)


Chapter 2.16 PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.16.010    Creation and duties.

2.16.020    Membership and rules.

2.16.030    Officers.

2.16.040    Meeting and quorum.

2.16.050    Expenditure of funds.

2.16.060    Report to city council.


2.16.010 Creation and duties.

The parks and recreation advisory committee (PRAC) is established for the purpose of advising and making recommendations to the city council regarding Fairview’s parks facilities, natural areas, and open spaces and recreation resources and activities. The committee shall be responsible for, but is not limited to, the following:

A. Assist city staff and parks department with:

1. Maintaining current information about park and natural resource conditions and recreation activities and programs.

2. Making recommendations on funding capital projects identified in a special request, park master plan, adopted park improvement list, or the adopted city-wide parks and recreation master plan consistent with and subject to the approved annual municipal budget for parks spending.

3. Ongoing parks and recreation planning for both individual parks and periodic master planning and developing and implementing policies and plans to protect, restore and enhance these resources.

4. The creation, establishment and maintenance of relations with park neighbors, area parks providers, school districts, community organizations, governmental agencies, and others.

B. Advise the city council on:

1. Use and management of city parks and playing fields for the sporting, cultural, and social enjoyment of the citizens of Fairview.

2. Identifying desirable future park locations.

3. Park funding, use planning, acquisition, development and maintenance. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2012 § 1 (Att. 1))


2.16.020 Membership and rules.

A. The committee shall consist of seven regular members and one ex officio member of the city council, who shall be a nonvoting member. All members shall be appointed by the city council. Members shall reside, work in, own property, or own a business within Fairview. No less than a majority of members shall reside in the city of Fairview. Whenever possible, the committee shall consist of at least one representative from Reynolds School District, and persons will be appointed who have demonstrated interest, experience, or expertise in some area of parks, recreation or related services. All appointments in existence at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall expire on December 31, 2012. Beginning January 1, 2013, two appointments shall be made for a term of one year; two appointments shall be made for a period of two years; and two appointments shall be made for a period of three years. After each initial term described in the preceding sentence has expired, all successive terms shall be for a period of three years.

B. Each committee member serves at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed before the end of the committee member’s term for any reason.

C. The city council shall fill any vacancy on the committee for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2012 § 1 (Att. 1))


2.16.030 Officers.

A. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the committee shall elect a chair and vice chair who shall hold office for one year. The chair or vice chair from the previous year shall preside over the elections for chair and vice chair.

B. When the chair is absent, the vice chair shall assume the responsibilities of the chair as chair pro tem. If the office of chair becomes vacant, the vice chair shall become the chair and shall call an election to fill the remaining term of vice chair. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2012 § 1 (Att. 1))


2.16.040 Meeting and quorum.

A majority of the voting committee members shall constitute a quorum. Not less than a quorum of the committee may transact any business or conduct proceedings before the committee. The committee may adopt rules and regulations to govern policy and procedures to implement this chapter. The committee shall convene when necessary to discharge its duties but not less than four times in a calendar year. The committee shall establish regular meeting dates and meeting locations at the first meeting in January of each year. All meetings are open to the public and shall be subject to the requirements of Oregon Public Meetings Law. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2012 § 1 (Att. 1))


2.16.050 Expenditure of funds.

The committee shall obtain approval of the city administrator or designee before expending or obligating funds on behalf of the city. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2012 § 1 (Att. 1))


2.16.060 Report to city council.

No later than the first of February of each year, the committee shall file its annual report with the city council. The annual report shall include sufficient details of the committee’s activities during the preceding year and other matters and recommendations the committee deems appropriate for the city council. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2012 § 1 (Att. 1))


Chapter 2.17 COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.17.010    Established.

2.17.020    Definitions.

2.17.030    Membership.

2.17.040    Officers.

2.17.050    Meetings and quorum.

2.17.060    Powers and duties.

2.17.070    Expenditure of funds.

2.17.080    Report to city council.


2.17.010 Established.

The community engagement committee is created within the city of Fairview to encourage greater opportunities for and recognition of arts and community events in Fairview and to stimulate private and public initiatives and financial support for programs and activities in the arts and community events. (Ord. 2-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2010 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.17.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A. “Arts” includes, but is not limited to, on-site art such as sculpture, paintings, murals, earthworks, tapestry and fiber arts, crafts, photography, and graphics; performance arts such as dance, music, and drama; educational arts such as lectures and public presentations, “artist in residence” programs; literary arts such as creative writing, storytelling, and poetry; and media arts such as film, video, and audio recording; and the history, theory, criticism, and practice of each of these arts.

B. “Arts professional” means a person trained and practicing as a visual or performing artist, an arts critic, an arts educator, an arts administrator, or a curator.

C. “Committee” means the community engagement committee.

D. “Community events” includes, but is not limited to, events such as fairs and festivals, celebrations, parades, neighborhood picnics, athletic activities, and other events of general interest to the community. (Ord. 2-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2010 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.17.030 Membership.

A. The committee shall consist of seven citizen members with an additional nonvoting member from the city council who serves as a liaison. The city council shall appoint the committee members, who shall receive no compensation for their services. The seven citizen members shall be appointed for three-year terms or until their successors are appointed; however, of the initial seven citizen members who are appointed, two shall be appointed for one-year terms, two shall be appointed for two-year terms, and three shall be appointed for three-year terms.

B. Whenever possible, persons will be appointed who have demonstrated interest, experience, and expertise in this area, and it is preferred that two members have arts professional backgrounds.

C. Each committee member serves at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed before the end of the committee member’s term.

D. The city council shall fill any vacancy on the committee for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. (Ord. 2-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2-2014 § 1 (Att. 1))


2.17.040 Officers.

A. At its first meeting, the committee shall elect a chair and a vice-chair who shall hold office for one year, except that the first chair and vice-chair shall serve until the end of the calendar year. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the chair or vice-chair from the previous year shall preside over the elections for chair and vice-chair.

B. When the chair is absent, the vice-chair shall assume the responsibilities of the chair as chair pro tem. If the office of chair becomes vacant, the vice-chair shall become the chair and shall call an election to fill the remaining term of the vice-chair. (Ord. 2-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2010 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.17.050 Meetings and quorum.

A majority of the committee shall constitute a quorum. Not less than a quorum of the committee may transact any business or conduct. The committee may adopt and amend rules and regulations to govern policy and procedures to implement this chapter. The committee shall convene when necessary to discharge its duties but not less than six times in a calendar year. The committee shall establish regular meeting dates and meeting locations at the first meeting in January of each year. All meetings are open to the public and shall be subject to the requirements of Oregon Public Meetings Law (ORS 192.610 through 192.690). (Ord. 2-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2010 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.17.060 Powers and duties.

In addition to those powers specially granted by resolution of the city council from time to time, the committee shall:

A. Ensure that arts and community events continue to be of value as an integral part of the quality of life within Fairview;

B. Encourage opportunities for recognition of arts and community events within Fairview;

C. Provide coordination and communication among groups and individuals engaged in arts and community event activities within Fairview;

D. Identify funding sources and help to secure such funding as necessary to promote arts and community events within Fairview;

E. Provide assistance to activities and organizations in the community that provide arts programs and community events;

F. Encourage, sponsor, co-sponsor or conduct public programs to further the development and public awareness of the arts and community events; and

G. Work cooperatively with other community groups including, but not restricted to, the Fairview parks and recreation advisory committee, Fairview community and arts council, West Columbia Gorge Chamber of Commerce, Reynolds school district and other groups already existing, or that may hereafter be established, to promote the arts and community events within Fairview. (Ord. 2-2018 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 5-2010 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.17.070 Expenditure of funds.

The committee shall obtain approval of the city administrator or designee before expending or obligating funds on behalf of the city. (Ord. 2-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2010 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.17.080 Report to city council.

No later than the first of February of each year, the committee shall file its annual report with the city council. The annual report shall include a survey and report of the committee’s activities during the preceding year and other matters and recommendations the committee deems appropriate for the city council. (Ord. 2-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2010 § 1 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 2.18 BUILDING APPEALS BOARD

Sections:

2.18.010    Established.

2.18.020    Purpose.

2.18.030    Appointment – Membership – Compensation.

2.18.040    Terms of office – Vacancies.

2.18.050    Board removal.

2.18.060    Officers.

2.18.070    Meetings – Quorum – Voting.

2.18.080    Board member conflict of interest.

2.18.090    Disclosure of pre-hearing contact.

2.18.100    Powers and duties of board.

2.18.110    Rules and procedures.


2.18.010 Established.

A building appeals board is established for the city. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.020 Purpose.

The purpose of the appeals board is to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building inspector relative to FMC Title 15. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.030 Appointment – Membership – Compensation.

The appeals board will consist of five members who are not city councilors, planning commissioners, officers or employees of the city. The members of the appeals board will be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. Appeals board members need not reside within the city. Appeals board members will receive no compensation but will be reimbursed for official expenses. The building inspector will be an ex officio member and act as secretary to the appeals board, but has no vote on any matter before the appeals board. The building inspector shall not be present when the appeals board discusses and makes its final decision. The discussion will be recorded by tape device. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.040 Terms of office – Vacancies.

At the first meeting of the appeals board, members will choose their terms of office by lot as follows: one for one year, two for two years, two for three years. Immediately thereafter, the members will notify the council of their terms. Successors will hold office for three years. Vacancies will be filled by the city council for the unexpired portion of a vacant term. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.050 Board removal.

A member of the appeals board may be removed by the city council for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.060 Officers.

At its first meeting the appeals board will elect from among its members a chairperson and vice chairperson. The positions will be occupied for the remainder of the current calendar year and for the following calendar year. Subsequent officers will be elected by the appeals board at its first meeting of each calendar year for the entire calendar year. The chairperson will preside over meetings of the appeals board, and in the absence of the chairperson the vice chairperson will preside. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.070 Meetings – Quorum – Voting.

The appeals board will meet as necessary at City Hall. Three members constitute a quorum. All decisions of the appeals board will be by a majority vote of those members present. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.080 Board member conflict of interest. 

An appeals board member may not participate in any proceeding in which any of the following has a personal or pecuniary interest: the appeals board member or spouse, sibling, child, parent, parent-in-law, any business in which the appeals board member is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business that the appeals board member is negotiating for, has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment or pecuniary interest, or that any of the persons listed above has any such similar interest. Any actual or potential interest must be disclosed at the meeting of the appeals board where the proceeding is considered. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.090 Disclosure of pre-hearing contact.

Prior to any proceeding a member of the appeals board must disclose to the board any pre-hearing or ex parte contacts with an applicant, applicant’s officers, agents or employees. A member of the appeals board must disqualify himself or be disqualified by the remaining members of the appeals board, when it appears that the impartiality or objectivity of the member is compromised. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.100 Powers and duties of board.

A. The appeals board has authority to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building inspector under FMC Title 15 and any other authority granted by statute or rule. The building inspector will not take enforcement measures during the appeal period. The appeals board does not have authority to interpret the administrative provisions of that chapter or to waive its requirements.

B. Whenever the appeals board modifies the requirements of FMC Title 15, it must first find that a specific reason makes compliance with strict compliance impractical. The modification must conform with the intent and purpose of FMC Title 15, and not lessen fire protection requirements or structural integrity.

C. Whenever the appeals board allows an alternate material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by FMC Title 15, it must first find that the proposed design, material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed by that title in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation. The appeals board must require evidence sufficient to substantiate any such alternates.

D. The appeals board must prepare a record that includes detailed findings for each decision it makes. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


2.18.110 Rules and procedures.

The appeals board must adopt rules for its governance and procedures consistent with the state law and the FMC, subject to approval by the city council. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1)


Chapter 2.19 PUBLIC SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.19.010    Creation and duties.

2.19.020    Membership and rules.

2.19.030    Officers.

2.19.040    Meetings and quorum.

2.19.050    Expenditure of funds.

2.19.060    Report to city council.


2.19.010 Creation and duties.

A. The public safety advisory committee (PSAC) is established for the purpose of advising and making recommendations to the chief of police and the city council regarding public safety needs in the city of Fairview. The committee shall be responsible for, but not limited to, the following activities:

1. Review and make recommendations on community livability concerns related to crime prevention and traffic safety that affects public safety in Fairview;

2. Review and make recommendations on police-community partnerships to mitigate the negative influence of crime on the community;

3. Promote public education and awareness of the effects of crime and the fear of crime on the community;

4. Collaborate with local, county, and state government agencies to develop strategies to mitigate negative community livability concerns by focusing partnership agency resources to reduce or eliminate specific crime, problem areas, or concerns;

5. Provide policy guidance to the council on matters of public safety and to act as a liaison between the public, interest groups and the city’s elected and appointed officials; and

6. Any other duties or functions assigned by motion or resolution of the council.

B. The public safety advisory committee is not charged with and shall not engage in reviewing use of force complaints or citizen’s complaints against public safety personnel.

C. The public safety advisory committee shall meet at times deemed necessary by the committee; however, they will meet at least once per quarter. (Ord. 6-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.19.020 Membership and rules.

A. The committee shall consist of a total of eight members, seven of whom are regular members and one member of the city council who shall be a nonvoting member. No less than a majority of the regular members shall be residents of the city, and all members shall reside, work in, own property, or own a business within the city. Whenever possible, the committee shall consist of at least one representative from the business community, one employee from Reynolds School District, one representative from the faith community, and one representative from multifamily housing. All members shall be appointed by the city council. Terms shall be for a period of three years or until a successors is appointed; however, of the initial seven members who are appointed, two shall be appointed for one-year terms, two shall be appointed for two-year terms, and three shall be appointed for three-year terms.

B. Each committee member serves at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed before the end of the committee member’s term. The city council may add other nonvoting city council members to the committee at their discretion.

C. The city council shall fill any vacancy on the committee for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. (Ord. 6-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.19.030 Officers.

A. At its first meeting, the committee shall elect a chair and a vice-chair who shall hold office for one year, except that the first chair and vice-chair shall serve until the end of the calendar year. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the chair or vice-chair from the previous year shall preside over the elections for chair and vice-chair.

B. When the chair is absent, the vice-chair shall assume the responsibilities of the chair as chair pro tem. If the office of chair becomes vacant, the vice-chair shall become the chair and shall call an election to fill the remaining term of the vice-chair. (Ord. 6-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.19.040 Meetings and quorum.

A majority of the committee shall constitute a quorum. Not less than a quorum of the committee may transact any business or conduct proceedings before the committee. The committee may adopt and amend rules and regulations to govern policy and procedures to implement this chapter. The committee shall convene when necessary to discharge its duties but not less than four times in a calendar year. The committee shall establish regular meeting dates and meeting locations at the first meeting in January of each year. All meetings are open to the public and shall be subject to the requirements of Oregon Public Meetings Law (ORS 192.610 to 192.690). (Ord. 6-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.19.050 Expenditure of funds.

The committee shall obtain approval of the city administrator or designee before expending or obligating funds on behalf of the city. (Ord. 6-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.19.060 Report to city council.

No later than the first of February of each year, the committee shall file its annual report with the city council. The annual report shall include sufficient details of the committee’s activities during the preceding year and other matters and recommendations the committee deems appropriate for the city council. (Ord. 6-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 2.20 CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD

Sections:

2.20.010    Definitions.

2.20.020    Local contract review board – Powers of the board – Authority to adopt rules.

2.20.030    Organization of the board.

2.20.040    Authority to obligate city.

2.20.050    Delegation of authority to obligate city.

2.20.060    Limitation to expenditures.

2.20.070    Purchasing from city employees.


2.20.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Board” means the city of Fairview local contract review board.

B. “Public contract” means a sale or other disposal, or a purchase, lease, rental or other acquisition, by the city of personal property, services, including personal services, public improvements, public works, minor alterations, or ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a public improvement. (Ord. 3-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1999 § 1)


2.20.020 Local contract review board – Powers of the board – Authority to adopt rules.

A. The city council is hereby designated as Fairview’s local contract review board for contractual matters relating to the city.

B. The board shall have all the powers granted by state law.

C. The board shall adopt rules by way of resolution governing the awarding of public contracts. (Ord. 3-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1999 § 1)


2.20.030 Organization of the board.

A. The mayor shall act as the chair of the board and the president of the council shall act as vice-chair.

B. The chair shall preside over the meetings, and in their absence or a vacancy occurs, the line of succession shall be the same as the line of succession which applies to the council.

C. Meetings of the board may be scheduled at any time, including before, after or during a regularly scheduled city council meeting.

D. Meetings shall be called in the same manner as a city council meeting.

E. Notice of the meeting shall be given as provided by state law.

F. The meeting agenda shall be prepared by the city administrator or designee.

G. Quorum requirements for the board shall be the same as those established for city council.

H. The city administrator or designee shall be present at all meetings of the board and shall provide for the recordation of all meetings and shall maintain minutes of all meetings as required by law.

I. The city administrator or designee shall maintain the records and prepare findings and reports as required by the board and the rules adopted by the board. (Ord. 3-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1999 § 1)


2.20.040 Authority to obligate city.

The city council shall approve all public contracts except as otherwise provided in FMC 2.20.050. (Ord. 3-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1999 § 1)


2.20.050 Delegation of authority to obligate city.

The city administrator or designee may enter into a public contract which does not exceed $50,000 without specific council approval. This delegation of authority is provided that the obligation is part of an adopted budget, the rules of the board are satisfied by written findings and a record is made of the transaction which shows compliance with the rules. This delegation of authority shall be subject to the limitation of FMC 2.20.060. (Ord. 3-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1999 § 1)


2.20.060 Limitation to expenditures.

The delegated authority to obligate the city shall be subject to the following limitations when making a purchase:

A. The expenditure shall be for a single complete item or contract. (Ord. 3-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1999 § 1)


2.20.070 Purchasing from city employees.

The purchase of any supplies, materials, equipment, labor or services, including personal, professional, technical and expert services from any city employee, or any business with which a city employee is associated shall be subject to prior written approval by the city administrator and approval shall be based upon findings that:

A. The purchase will result in the most efficient method to accomplish the city’s purpose;

B. The purchase could not lead to any alleged violations of the personnel rules;

C. The approval of the purchase could not lead to an adverse employer-employee relationship should the contract be unsatisfactorily performed;

D. All rules adopted by the board have been satisfied.

For the purposes of this section “any business with which a city employee is associated” means any business of which the employee is a director, officer, owner or employee, or any business association in which the employee owns or has owned more than 10 percent of the business within the preceding year. (Ord. 3-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1999 § 1)


Chapter 2.21 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.21.010    Creation and duties.

2.21.020    Membership and rules.

2.21.030    Officers.

2.21.040    Meetings and quorum.

2.21.050    Expenditure of funds.

2.21.060    Report to city council.


2.21.010 Creation and duties.

A. The economic development advisory committee (EDAC) is established for the purpose of advising and making recommendations to the city council regarding economic development needs in the city of Fairview. The committee shall be responsible for, but not limited to, the following activities:

1. Review and make recommendations on promoting the economic interests of existing business enterprises;

2. Review and make recommendations on promoting the city of Fairview for new business;

3. Review and make recommendations on encouraging private sector job growth by enhancing the city’s business climate;

4. Provide policy guidance to the council on matters of economic development and to act as a liaison between the public, interest groups and the city’s elected and appointed officials; and

5. Any other duties or functions assigned by motion or resolution of the council.

B. The economic development advisory committee shall meet at times deemed necessary by the committee; however, they will meet at least once per quarter. (Ord. 13-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.21.020 Membership and rules.

A. The committee shall consist of a total of eight members, seven of whom are regular members and one member of the city council who shall be a nonvoting member. No less than a majority of the regular members shall be residents of the city, and all members shall reside, work in, own property, or own a business within the city. All members shall be appointed by the city council. Terms shall be for a period of three years or until a successor is appointed; however, of the initial seven members who are appointed, two shall be appointed for one-year terms, two shall be appointed for two-year terms, and three shall be appointed for three-year terms.

B. Each committee member serves at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed before the end of the committee member’s term. The city council may add other nonvoting city council members to the committee at their discretion.

C. The city council shall fill any vacancy on the committee for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. (Ord. 13-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.21.030 Officers.

A. At its first meeting, the committee shall elect a chair and a vice-chair who shall hold office for one year, except that the first chair and vice-chair shall serve until the end of the calendar year. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the chair or vice-chair from the previous year shall preside over the elections for chair and vice-chair.

B. When the chair is absent, the vice-chair shall assume the responsibilities of the chair as chair pro tem. If the office of chair becomes vacant, the vice-chair shall become the chair and shall call an election to fill the remaining term of the vice-chair. (Ord. 13-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.21.040 Meetings and quorum.

A majority of the committee shall constitute a quorum. Not less than a quorum of the committee may transact any business or conduct proceedings before the committee. The committee may adopt and amend rules and regulations to govern policy and procedures to implement this chapter. The committee shall convene when necessary to discharge its duties but not less than four times in a calendar year. The committee shall establish regular meeting dates and meeting locations at the first meeting in January of each year. All meetings are open to the public and shall be subject to the requirements of Oregon Public Meetings Law (ORS 192.610 to 192.690). (Ord. 13-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.21.050 Expenditure of funds.

The committee shall obtain approval of the city administrator or designee before expending or obligating funds on behalf of the city. (Ord. 13-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


2.21.060 Report to city council.

No later than the first of February of each year, the committee shall file its annual report with the city council. The annual report shall include sufficient details of the committee’s activities during the preceding year and other matters and recommendations the committee deems appropriate for the city council. (Ord. 13-2011 § 1 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 2.22 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Sections:

2.22.010    Establishment and need for urban renewal agency.

2.22.020    Board of directors.

2.22.030    Term of office.

2.22.040    Powers and limitations.

2.22.050    Rules and procedures.

2.22.060    Chairperson.

2.22.070    Staff services.

2.22.080    Termination of urban renewal agency.


2.22.010 Establishment and need for urban renewal agency.

There exist within the city blighted areas and such areas impair economic values and property tax revenues. The urban renewal agency of the city of Fairview is established to carry out those duties as may be allowed under this chapter or as established in an urban renewal plan to reduce the presence of blight and improve property values and tax revenues within the city. The corporate name of the agency shall be known as the “Fairview urban renewal agency.” (Ord. 5-2018 § 5 (Exh. A))


2.22.020 Board of directors.

The method of exercising the agency’s power shall be through a board of directors. The membership of the board of directors of the agency shall consist of the city council members. (Ord. 5-2018 § 5 (Exh. A))


2.22.030 Term of office.

The term of office for each board member of the agency shall be the same as that of each member of the city council. (Ord. 5-2018 § 5 (Exh. A))


2.22.040 Powers and limitations.

The agency shall have all powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted to and vested in an urban renewal agency by the laws of the state of Oregon; provided, however, that any act of the governing body acting as the agency board of directors shall be considered an act of the agency board of directors only and not the city council. (Ord. 5-2018 § 5 (Exh. A))


2.22.050 Rules and procedures.

The agency board of directors may make and alter rules and regulations for its governance and procedures consistent with the laws of Oregon, the city charter and applicable ordinances. A majority of appointed agency board of directors shall constitute a quorum. The agency shall meet at least once a year. (Ord. 5-2018 § 5 (Exh. A))


2.22.060 Chairperson.

The mayor shall serve as the chairperson of the agency board of directors. The chairperson shall be a voting member. A vice-chairperson will be the council president. (Ord. 5-2018 § 5 (Exh. A))


2.22.070 Staff services.

The city administrator shall serve as the executive director of the agency. The executive director shall provide for such staff and consultation services to the agency as deemed appropriate. A record shall be kept of agency proceedings. The official minutes of the agency shall be maintained by the city recorder. (Ord. 5-2018 § 5 (Exh. A))


2.22.080 Termination of urban renewal agency.

If the city council finds that a need for an urban renewal agency no longer exists, the city council shall provide, by ordinance, for a termination of the agency and a transfer of the agency facilities, files and personnel, if any, to the city. The termination of the agency shall not affect any outstanding legal actions, contracts or obligations of the agency and the city shall be substituted for the agency in these matters. The agency shall not be terminated unless all indebtedness to which a portion of taxes is irrevocably pledged for repayment of indebtedness is satisfied. (Ord. 5-2018 § 5 (Exh. A))


Chapter 2.25 MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

Article I. Judge

2.25.010    Appointment – Compensation.

2.25.020    Powers and duties.

Article II. Judge Pro Tempore

2.25.030    Office created.

2.25.040    Appointment – Compensation.

2.25.050    Serves when.

2.25.060    Powers and duties.

Article I. Judge


2.25.010 Appointment – Compensation.

The office of municipal judge for the municipal court of the city of Fairview shall be appointed by and hold office at the pleasure of the Fairview city council. The city council shall be the sole judge of the qualifications necessary for the appointment of such office. The amount and manner of compensation payable for the services of said judge shall be provided by the council. (Ord. 8-1986 § 1)


2.25.020 Powers and duties.

When serving in this capacity, the municipal judge shall have and exercise all the inherent and statutory powers and duties granted to the municipal judge of the city of Fairview in accordance with Chapter 5, Section 25, of the amended Charter of the city of Fairview and as provided by applicable city ordinance and state law. (Ord. 8-1986 § 2)

Article II. Judge Pro Tempore


2.25.030 Office created.

The office of pro tempore municipal judge of the municipal court of the city of Fairview, Multnomah County, Oregon, is hereby created. (Ord. 1-1969 § 1)


2.25.040 Appointment – Compensation.

The municipal judge pro tempore of the municipal court of the city of Fairview shall be appointed by and hold office at the pleasure of the Fairview city council. The city council shall be the sole judge of the qualifications necessary for the appointment of such office. The amount and manner of compensation payable for the services of said judge pro tempore shall be provided by the council. (Ord. 1-1969 § 2)


2.25.050 Serves when.

The municipal judge pro tempore of the municipal court of the city of Fairview shall serve and act only when the chief municipal judge of the city is unable to perform his duties by reason of absence from the city, illness, vacations, or disqualification by reason of knowledge or relationship to the cause before him, or in case of disqualification due to potential or actual conflicts relating to the matters at hand. (Ord. 1-1969 § 3)


2.25.060 Powers and duties.

When serving in the capacity as municipal judge of the city, the municipal judge pro tempore shall have and exercise all the inherent and statutory powers and duties granted to the municipal judge of the city of Fairview in accordance with Chapter 5, Section 25, of the amended Charter of the city of Fairview and as provided by applicable city ordinances and state law. (Ord. 1-1969 § 4)


Chapter 2.27 MUNICIPAL COURT PROCEDURES FOR CERTAIN CODE ENFORCEMENT MATTERS

Sections:

2.27.010    Purpose.

2.27.020    Jurisdiction – Limitation.

2.27.030    Definitions.

2.27.040    Authority of the municipal court.

2.27.050    Initiation of code enforcement proceedings.

2.27.060    Setting of hearing.

2.27.070    Notice of hearing.

2.27.080    Notice – Rights – Procedure.

2.27.090    Depositions.

2.27.100    Subpoenas.

2.27.110    Discovery.

2.27.120    Evidence.

2.27.130    Proposed and final orders.

2.27.140    Orders.

2.27.150    Authority of the municipal court.

2.27.160    Assessments.

2.27.170    Judicial review.

2.27.180    Enforcement.


2.27.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the prompt, effective, and efficient enforcement and adjudication of the Fairview Municipal Code so as to carry out the policies of the city as those policies are embodied elsewhere in this code other than traffic violations or traffic crimes as defined by ORS 801.545 (2007). (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.020 Jurisdiction – Limitation.

A. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction over all cases submitted in accordance with the procedures and conditions set forth in this chapter; however, the municipal court shall not use the procedures and conditions set out herein for:

1. Any offense(s) both treated by the city and described as “violations” by the terms of ORS 153.008 (2007);

2. Traffic violations or traffic crimes as defined by ORS 801.545 (2007); or

3. Parking offenses.

B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city reserves to itself the right to exercise the authority granted it pursuant to ORS 30.310 and 30.315 (2007) in situations deemed by the city council, city administrator and/or city attorney to be appropriate. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.030 Definitions.

A. “Municipal court” means the Fairview municipal court (including judge(s) sitting therein) and any other person designated and appointed by the council or municipal judge to act in a judicial capacity in a particular proceeding(s) in the municipal court.

B. “Party” means:

1. The city of Fairview.

2. Any person named by the city as a respondent in the complaint.

3. Any person requesting participation in a hearing as a party or a limited party which the municipal court determines has an interest in the result of the proceeding.

C. “Respondent” means the party(ies) whom the city alleges in the complaint to have committed a violation of city code or to be responsible for such violation. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.040 Authority of the municipal court.

A. In addition to any procedures set forth elsewhere in the code, code enforcement proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

B. The municipal court may promulgate rules not inconsistent with this chapter concerning procedure and the conduct of hearings under this chapter, and the municipal court is authorized to adopt rules, procedures and forms to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.050 Initiation of code enforcement proceedings.

A. A proceeding before the municipal court using the procedures set out in this chapter may be initiated only as specifically authorized elsewhere in the code, except for enforcement of violations of FMC Title 19 for which enforcement in municipal court shall be done consistent with this chapter.

B. A proceeding before the municipal court shall be initiated only by the city filing a complaint with the municipal court on forms approved by the municipal court. A complaint shall contain:

1. The name(s) of the respondent(s);

2. The address or location at which the violation is alleged to have occurred;

3. A short and plain statement of the alleged violations, including a reference to the particular city code provision(s), resolution(s), rule(s) or regulation(s) involved;

4. The nature of the relief sought by the city;

5. The city department(s) initiating the proceeding;

6. The name, title, and signature of the person initiating the proceeding on behalf of the city; and

7. Such other information as the municipal court may require. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.060 Setting of hearing.

A. Upon filing of a complaint, the municipal court shall specify a time, date and place for a hearing on the complaint and the matters alleged therein.

B. The date set for the hearing shall be not less than 14 nor more than 30 days after the date the complaint is first filed, except:

1. That the municipal court may specify a date for hearing less than 14 days after the complaint is filed where it reasonably appears the alleged violation poses an immediate and serious hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the life, health, safety, welfare, or property of any person; or

2. By agreement of the parties.

C. The municipal court may postpone, continue, set over or reschedule any hearing:

1. With the consent of all parties;

2. On the motion of any party for good cause shown; or

3. On the court’s own motion in the interest of justice. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.070 Notice of hearing.

A. The city shall give notice of the hearing (together with a copy of the complaint) to the respondent(s) and all other parties not less than five calendar days prior to the date set for hearing except:

1. The municipal court may set a shorter period when it reasonably appears the alleged violation poses an immediate and serious hazard to the public health, safety or welfare or the life, health, safety, welfare or property of any person; or

2. By written agreement of all parties.

B. The notice of hearing shall specify the time, date and place for the hearing.

C. Notice may be given by any method or combination of methods which, under the circumstances, is reasonably likely to apprise the parties of the hearing. Notice may be given by:

1. Personally delivering the notice to the party(ies);

2. Mailing the notice by United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the residence or business address of the party(ies); or

3. Any method authorized by the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure for the service of a summons.

If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed given and received three days (Sundays and holidays not included) after the notice is deposited in the United States mail.

D. Notice of the hearing and a copy of the complaint shall also be given to:

1. The tenants, residents and lessees of any building, property, or structure if the city has requested in the complaint the vacation, closure or demolition of the building, property or structure or if the municipal court determines such vacation, closure or demolition is a reasonably possible outcome.

2. Any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the property involved or who reasonably appears may be adversely affected by any determination, decision, or order of the municipal court.

3. Any person who has requested such notification.

E. The failure of any person to receive actual notice of the proceeding shall not invalidate the hearing or any determination, decision or order of the municipal court. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.080 Notice – Rights – Procedure.

A. Prior to the commencement of any contested hearing, the municipal court shall inform each party to the hearing of the following:

1. A general description of the hearing procedure including:

a. The order of presentation of evidence;

b. What kinds of evidence are admissible;

c. Whether any objections be made to the introduction of evidence and what kind of objections may be made; and

d. An explanation of the burdens of proof or burdens going forward with the evidence.

2. That a record will be made of the proceedings and the manner of making the record and its availability to the parties.

3. The function of the record-making with respect to the perpetuation of the testimony and evidence and with respect to any appeal from the determination or order of the municipal court.

4. Whether an attorney will represent the city in the matters to be heard and whether the parties ordinarily and customarily are represented by attorneys.

5. The function of the municipal court including the effect and authority of the municipal court’s determination.

6. In the event a party is not represented by an attorney, whether the party may, during the course of proceedings, request a recess if at that point the party determines that representation by an attorney is necessary to the protection of the party’s rights.

7. Whether there exists an opportunity for an adjournment at the end if the party then determines that additional evidence should be brought to the attention of the municipal court and the hearing is reopened.

8. Whether there exists an opportunity after the hearing and prior to the final determination or order of the municipal court to review and object to any proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, summary of evidence, or order of the municipal court.

9. A description of the judicial review process from the determination or order of the municipal court.

B. The information required to be given under subsection A of this section may be given in writing or orally prior to commencement of the hearing. The failure to give said notice (or of any item specified) shall not invalidate any determination or order of the municipal court unless on appeal from or review of the determination or order a reviewing court finds that the failure affects the substantive rights of the complaining party. In the event of such a finding, the reviewing court shall remand the matter to the municipal court for a reopening of the hearing, directing the municipal court as to what steps shall be taken to remedy the prejudice to the rights of the complaining party. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.090 Depositions.

On petition of any party, the municipal court may order that the testimony of any material witness be taken by deposition in the manner prescribed by law for depositions in civil actions. Depositions may also be taken via audio or audio-visual recordings. The petition shall set forth the name and address of the witness whose testimony is desired, a showing of the materiality of the witness’s testimony and a request for an order that the testimony of such witness be taken before an officer named in the petition for that purpose. If the witness resides in this state and is unwilling to appear, the municipal court may issue a subpoena to require the witness to appear for deposition. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.100 Subpoenas.

A. The municipal court shall issue subpoenas to any party upon showing of general relevance and reasonable scope of the evidence sought. Witnesses appearing pursuant to subpoena, other than the parties or officers or employees of the city, shall receive fees and mileage as prescribed by Oregon law for witnesses in civil actions.

B. If any person fails to comply with any subpoena so issued or any party or witness refuses to testify on any matters on which he may be lawfully interrogated, a judge of the circuit court upon the application of the municipal court (or of a designated representative of the municipal court or of the party requesting the issuance of the subpoena) shall compel obedience by proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of subpoena issued from such court or a refusal to testify therein. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.110 Discovery.

A. On petition of any party and a showing of the general relevance of the documents or things sought, the municipal court may enter an order directing any party to produce and make available to the petitioning party to inspect and copy any documents or to inspect and copy, test, or sample any things which are in the possession of a party.

B. The order directing a party to produce and make available documents or things may require the petitioning party to pay the party producing documents and things that party’s reasonable costs associated with such production.

C. The municipal court shall not enter an order requiring a party to produce any document or thing which is privileged under the rules of privilege recognized by law or which is exempt from disclosure under the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.120 Evidence.

A. Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. Erroneous rulings on evidence shall not preclude action by the municipal court on the record unless shown to have substantially prejudiced the rights of a party. All other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their serious affairs shall be admissible. The municipal court shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law.

B. Objections to evidence may be received in written form.

C. All evidence shall be offered and made a part of the record in the case and except for matters stipulated to and, except as provided in subsection D of this section, no other factual information or evidence shall be considered in the determination of the case. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies of excerpts or by incorporation by reference. The burden of presenting evidence to support a fact or position in a contested case rests on the proponent of the fact or position.

D. Every party shall have the right of cross-examination of witnesses who testify and shall have the right to submit rebuttal evidence.

E. The municipal court may take notice of judicially recognizable facts and the municipal court may take official notice of general, technical or scientific facts within the specialized knowledge of city employees. Parties shall be notified at any time during the proceeding (but, in any event, prior to the final decision) of material officially noticed, and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the facts so noticed.

F. No sanction shall be imposed or final order issued except upon consideration of the whole record as supported by, and in accordance with, reliable, probative and substantial evidence. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.130 Proposed and final orders.

The municipal court shall prepare and mail to all parties a proposed order including findings of fact and conclusions of law. The proposed order shall become final on the date specified in the order, which date shall not be less than 14 days after such mailing, unless the municipal court finds that an existing violation is imminently dangerous to the health, safety or property of any person or of the public, in which case the order may specify an earlier date. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.140 Orders.

A. Every order adverse to a party to the proceeding shall be in writing or stated in the record and may be accompanied by an opinion.

B. Unless otherwise stipulated, a final order shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law. The findings of fact shall consist of a concise statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings as to each contested issue of fact and as to each ultimate fact required to support the municipal court’s order. The findings of fact and conclusions of law may be orally stated on the record by the municipal court and those findings and conclusions incorporated in the written order by reference.

C. The municipal court shall notify the parties to a proceeding of a final order by delivering or mailing a copy of the order and any accompanying findings and conclusions to each party or, if applicable, the party’s attorney of record.

D. Every final order shall include a reference to the fact that the order may be judicially reviewed pursuant to ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.150 Authority of the municipal court.

A. The municipal court may order a party found in violation of the city code to comply with the provisions of the code or the applicable rule or regulation within such time as the municipal court may by order allow. The order may require such party to do any and all of the following:

1. Make any and all necessary repairs, modifications, and/or improvements to the structure, real property, or equipment involved;

2. Abate or remove any nuisance;

3. Change the use of the building, structure, or real property involved;

4. Install any equipment necessary to achieve compliance;

5. Pay the city a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day or such greater amount as may be authorized by this code; or

6. Undertake any other action reasonably necessary to correct the violation or mitigate the effects thereof.

B. In the event any party fails to comply with any provision of an order of the municipal court (except a provision requiring payment of a civil penalty only), the municipal court may authorize the city to undertake such actions as the municipal court may determine are reasonably necessary to correct the violation and/or eliminate or mitigate the effects thereof. The city’s reasonable costs of such actions may be made a lien against the affected real property. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.160 Assessments.

A. Costs incurred by the city for any action(s) authorized by the municipal court shall be an assessment lien upon the property subject to the order.

B. The city shall furnish a statement of such costs on the owner, in person or by United States mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner(s) at the owner(s’) residence or place of business, and shall file a copy of such statement with the municipal court with proof of service attached.

1. If no objection to such statement is filed with the municipal court within 15 days from the date of service or mailing, the municipal court shall certify such statement and forward the same to the finance director who shall forthwith enter the same in the city lien docket.

2. If an objection to the statement is received within the 15-day period, the municipal court shall schedule and hold a hearing to consider the objections and after the hearing shall certify such statement (or so much of it as he determines is correct and proper) and forward it to the finance director who shall enter it into the city lien docket.

C. The municipal court shall certify to the finance director the amount of any civil penalty imposed under any order of the municipal court, and the finance director shall enter it into the city’s lien docket. The lien imposed for the civil penalty shall be in addition to any lien imposed for costs actually incurred by the city.

D. In addition to the lien imposed under this section, any person found by the municipal court to be in violation of the city code shall be personally liable for costs incurred by the city and for any civil penalty imposed by order of the municipal court. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.170 Judicial review.

Review of the final order of the municipal court by any aggrieved party (including the city) shall be by writ of review as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100 and not otherwise. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


2.27.180 Enforcement.

A. The city may institute appropriate suit or legal action (in law or equity) in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of any order of the municipal court, including, but not limited to, a suit or action to obtain judgment for any civil penalty imposed by an order of the municipal court and/or any assessment for costs or penalties.

B. Unless authorized by the municipal court, it is unlawful for any person to knowingly enter or remain in any building or structure that the municipal court has ordered vacated. (Ord. 8-2007 § 1)


Chapter 2.30 CITY RECORDS

Sections:

2.30.010    Records management program.

2.30.020    Records officer designated – Duties.

2.30.030    Adoption of Records Management Manual.

2.30.040    Adoption of Records Retention Schedule.


2.30.010 Records management program.

The Fairview city council, meeting in duly and regularly constituted session, does hereby find and determine that it is in the best interests of the city to have a records officer and records management program, and does hereby, by this section, state such intent and election to so participate in the records management program as defined by the State Archivist. (Ord. 12-1991 § 3)


2.30.020 Records officer designated – Duties.

Among the conditions set forth in ORS 192.105, each state agency and political subdivision shall designate a records officer to coordinate its records management program and to serve as liaison with the State Archivist, the city recorder is hereby designated as the records officer for the city of Fairview. The records officer shall have the duty:

A. To create, maintain, monitor and update the city-wide records retention schedule through coordination with the State Archivist and department supervisors;

B. To create a records management manual providing for proper records handling, retention and storage for all city departments;

C. To review requests for new records equipment;

D. To assist in establishing storage facilities;

E. To keep updated on records law and procedures in order to implement required procedures and/or educate staff regarding records retention; and

F. To report to the State Archivist regarding the records management program as required. (Ord. 12-1991 § 2)


2.30.030 Adoption of Records Management Manual.

The Fairview city council, meeting in duly and regularly constituted session, does hereby find and determine that it is in the best interests of the city to adopt the City Records Management Manual as determined and updated by the Oregon Association of Municipal Recorders as the official city Records Management Manual in its entirety and continue participation in the records management program as defined by the State Archivist. (Ord. 7-2015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2-1992 § 3)


2.30.040 Adoption of Records Retention Schedule.

The Fairview city council, meeting in duly and regularly constituted session, does hereby find and determine that it is in the best interests of the city to adopt the City General Records Retention Schedule as set forth under OAR Chapter 166, Division 200 and subsequent amendments as the official city Records Retention Schedule in its entirety and continue participation in the records management program as defined by the State Archivist. (Ord. 7-2015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1992 § 4)


Chapter 2.35 CITY HALL

(Repealed by Ord. 2-2000)


Chapter 2.40 EMERGENCY POWERS

Sections:

2.40.010    Purpose.

2.40.020    Emergency.

2.40.030    Executive responsibilities and line of succession.

2.40.040    Adoption of an incident command system.

2.40.050    Emergency program manager.

2.40.060    Declaration and ratification of emergency.

2.40.070    Regulation of persons and property.

2.40.080    Price gouging prohibited.

2.40.090    Penalties.


2.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a plan to minimize injury to persons and property, and to preserve the established civil authority in the event that a state of emergency exists within the city. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1; Ord. 11-1991 § 1)


2.40.020 Emergency.

A state of emergency includes any manmade or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, human suffering or financial loss, and includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or release of oil or hazardous materials as defined in ORS 466.605, contamination utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight infestation, civil disturbance, unrest, sabotage and war. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1; Ord. 11-1991 § 2)


2.40.030 Executive responsibilities and line of succession.

The city council is responsible for setting policy direction for emergency management through the adoption of an Emergency Management and Operations Plan. Emergency management functions assigned under the plan are authorized under the direction of the council and the supervision of the city administrator.

The city administrator is responsible for implementation of policies assigned under the Emergency Management and Operations Plan. If the city administrator, for any reason, is unable or unavailable to perform the duties under this chapter during a declared emergency, the duties shall be performed in the following order of succession: (1) chief of police and (2) director of public works.

The powers of the successor to the city administrator shall be limited to those granted under this chapter and the duration of succession shall be until such time as the city administrator is able and available to perform the duties. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1; Ord. 11-1991 § 3)


2.40.040 Adoption of an incident command system.

Whereas the Oregon Occupational Safety and Health Division (OSHA) has adopted rules governing emergency response and hazardous waste operations which require local government to take certain actions and OSHA rules require that emergencies be responded to in a specified manner, and since confusion may occur if response is not consistent for all emergencies and there is a need to identify and use a standard response system and common terminology with other jurisdictions who may respond within the city. By this chapter the city adopts the Incident Command System (ICS) component of the National Interagency Incident Management System (NIIMS) as a model for managing emergencies within city jurisdiction. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1; Ord. 11-1991 § 4)


2.40.050 Emergency program manager.

ORS 401.305 states each county of this state shall, and each city may, establish an emergency management program. Although the city of Fairview will rely on support from the Multnomah County Department of Emergency Management, the city shall establish, for the protection of our citizens, an emergency management program administered by the chief of police who will also serve as the emergency program manager. The chief of police may establish an emergency management team to assist in the planning and implementation of the city’s emergency management plan. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1)


2.40.060 Declaration and ratification of emergency.

When the city administrator determines that a state of emergency exists, the city administrator shall make a declaration to that effect and request that the mayor call a special meeting of the city council in order to ratify the declaration of emergency. In the event that a quorum of council members is unable to assemble, the declaration of emergency remains in effect.

A. The declaration by the city administrator of a state of emergency shall:

1. State the nature of the emergency; and

2. Designate the geographic boundaries of the area which is subject to the emergency controls; and

3. State any special regulations imposed as a result of the state of emergency.

B. In addition to the statements enumerated in subsection A of this section, the ratification by the city council of a state of emergency shall:

1. State the duration of time during which the area so designated shall remain an emergency area;

2. Authorize specific emergency powers for the duration of the emergency period set forth in the declaration. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1; Ord. 11-1991 § 6)


2.40.070 Regulation of persons and property.

Whenever a state of emergency is declared to exist within the city, the city administrator is empowered to order the following measures in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare, in the area designated as an emergency area:

A. Redirect city funds available for emergency use and suspend standard city procurement procedures; and

B. Establish a curfew which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may be upon the public streets or other public places; and

C. Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public place, or any outdoor place; and

D. Barricade streets and prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or regulate the same on any public street leading to the emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances; and

E. Evacuate persons; and

F. Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages; and

G. Prohibit or restrict the sale of gasoline or other flammable liquids; and

H. Prohibit the sale, carrying, or possession of any weapons or explosives of any kind on public streets, public places, or any outdoor place; and

I. Curtail or suspend commercial activity; and

J. Turn off water, gas or electricity; and

K. Order such other measures as are necessary for the protection of life or property, or for the recovery from the emergency. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1; Ord. 11-1991 § 7)


2.40.080 Price gouging prohibited.

A. Whenever a state of emergency is declared to exist, no person or business may sell or attempt to sell any goods or services for a price in excess of the normal market price which existed for a good or service prior to the state of emergency. “Normal market price” shall mean the person’s or business’s average of the regular price of the goods or services for the 30 days preceding the state of emergency.

B. When a person starts a business or acquires inventory after the commencement of a state of emergency, the price of any goods or services during the state of emergency shall be consistent with the normal market price of the industry for such goods or services, with consideration given to demonstrated higher costs associated with the new business or inventory. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1)


2.40.090 Penalties.

Any person who knowingly violates emergency measures issued by the city administrator under authority of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1; Ord. 11-1991 § 8. Formerly 2.40.080.)


Chapter 2.45 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK POLICY

Sections:

2.45.010    Policy established – Procedure.


2.45.010 Policy established – Procedure.

A. Certain applicants for employment and appointed volunteers with the city will be required to authorize the city to conduct a criminal offender information check through the OSP LEDS system, including the Oregon CCH system. The city administrator is authorized to designate the types of employees and volunteers subject to this background check. In making these designations, the city administrator shall consider whether the employee or volunteer is involved with the administration of criminal justice, provides care or services to children, elderly persons or dependent persons, or may obtain confidential information where the public interest would be advanced by a criminal background check.

B. When authorized by the chief of police, and as warranted for qualified entities, under state regulations, who work with vulnerable individuals, the Fairview police department may run a criminal offender information check in order to provide information relevant to safety concerns. The requestor will then be referred to OSP to obtain the record. The Fairview police department shall confirm only if a criminal record exists, without any detail of such record. The organization may request criminal record history directly with the Oregon State Police pursuant to state statute and administrative rule.

C. A member of the Fairview police department trained and authorized to perform criminal history checks through the LEDS system will conduct the check on a prospective city employee or volunteer and report to the requesting city department that the applicant’s records indicate “no criminal record” or “criminal record.” If the applicant’s record is reported as “criminal record,” the city will, under OAR 257-010-0025, request a written criminal history report from the OSP Identification Services Section. The city will make the written criminal history record available to the appropriate official for his or her consideration in making the selection.

D. The written criminal history record on persons that are not hired or appointed as volunteers will be retained in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166-200-0090 for a period of three years and thereafter will be destroyed. The criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history that are hired or appointed will become a part of the confidential personnel files of the employee or volunteer. Access to confidential personnel files is limited to only authorized persons who have an official need to access such files that is sanctioned by law or regulation. All criminal offender information records shall be maintained in secure files.

E. Criminal history checks of liquor license applicants shall be performed by the Fairview police department. The information shall be considered by the city council in making any recommendation of the OLCC.

F. When criminal offender information is sought, the city must obtain prior written consent by the individual or documentation of the notice required under ORS 181-557(2) (notice of procedures for challenging inaccurate information and of rights under federal civil rights laws). (Ord. 3‑2008 §§ 1 – 6)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE*

Chapters:

3.05    Hotel and Motel Tax

3.10    New Construction Excise Charge

3.20    Public Utility Fee

3.22    Marijuana Tax

3.30    Measure 37 Claims Procedure

*Code reviser’s note: For provisions on the storm drainage utility fund, see FMC 13.30.060. For provisions on systems development charges that are collectible, see Chapter 15.30 FMC.


Chapter 3.05 HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX

Sections:

3.05.010    Definitions.

3.05.020    Tax imposed.

3.05.030    Collection of tax by operator.

3.05.040    Responsibility of hotel operator.

3.05.050    Exemptions.

3.05.060    Registration of operator, form and certification.

3.05.070    Due date – Returns and payments.

3.05.080    Penalties and interest.

3.05.090    Deficiency determinations – Fraud, evasion, operator delay.

3.05.100    Redeterminations.

3.05.110    Security for collection of tax.

3.05.120    Refunds.

3.05.130    Administration.

3.05.140    Appeals from city recorder determination.

3.05.150    Appeal to city council.

3.05.160    Violations.

3.05.170    Grammatical interpretation.


3.05.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for 30 days or less for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes but is not limited to any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, public or private dormitory, public or private club or fraternal organization, and space in RV parks, trailer parks or similar structure(s) or spaces or portions thereof so occupied.

B. “Council” means the city council of Fairview, Oregon.

C. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a hotel, or space in a mobile home park, trailer park or RV park or portion thereof.

D. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel in any capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.

E. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

F. “Cash accounting” means the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on his records until the rent is paid.

G. “Accrual accounting” means the operator enters the rent due from a transient on his records when rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

H. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction.

I. “Rent package plan” means the consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this chapter shall be the same charge made for rent when not a part of a package plan.

J. “Tax” means either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which he is required to report his collections.

K. “City recorder” means the city recorder of the city of Fairview, or duly appointed deputy.

L. “Transient” means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days, except persons occupying a space in an RV park. An individual occupying a space in an RV park shall be deemed a transient for purposes of the tax imposed by this chapter for whatever period of time they occupy a space in an RV park. The day a transient (including an individual occupying a space in an RV park) checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining occupancy if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. (Ord. 7-2000 § 1; Ord. 1-1990 § 1; Ord. 5-1986 § 1)


3.05.020 Tax imposed.

A. For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel (except an RV park which is covered by the terms of subsection (C) of this section) in the city of Fairview, Oregon, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on his records when rent is collected if the operator keeps his records on the cash accounting basis and when earned if the operator keeps his records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases “rent” shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of rooms and accommodations.      

B. In order to defray the costs associated with the duties imposed by the terms of this chapter on him or her, an operator may add to the tax imposed on each transient, a charge or fee of not more than 10 percent of the tax collected by the operator.

C. For the privilege of occupancy in any RV park in the city of Fairview, Oregon each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator for the first 30 days of said occupancy. In the event the occupancy extends beyond 30 days, then each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of 1.8 percent of the rent charged for that period beyond the 30 days. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator at the time rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on his records when rent is collected if the operator keeps his records on the cash accounting basis and when earned if the operator keeps his records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases, “rent” excludes the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of space occupancy in mobile home parks, RV parks and trailer parks. (Ord. 7-2000 § 2; Ord. 5-1986 § 2)


3.05.030 Collection of tax by operator.

A. Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes in the city of Fairview, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect a tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city.

B. In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for uncollectibles.

C. The city recorder shall enforce provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement.

D. For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be remitted. (Ord. 5-1986 § 3)


3.05.040 Responsibility of hotel operator.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records, and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 5-1986 § 4)


3.05.050 Exemptions.

No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon:

A. Except for occupants of RV parks, any occupant for more than 30 days;

B. Except for occupants of RV parks, any occupant whose rent is of value less than $2.00 per day;

C. Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who rents such facilities incidentally to his own use thereof. (Ord. 7-2000 § 3; Ord. 1-1990 § 1; Ord. 5-1986 § 5)


3.05.060 Registration of operator, form and certification.

Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city of Fairview shall register with the city recorder on a form provided by him. Operators engaged in business at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register not later than 20 calendar days after passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Operators starting business after the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register within 15 calendar days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration. Registration shall set forth the name under which an operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the city recorder may require. The registration shall be signed by the operator. The city recorder shall, within 10 days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the city recorder upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.

Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A. The name of the operator;

B. The address of the hotel;

C. The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D. The following statement:

This TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the TRANSIENT LODGINGS TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FAIRVIEW, OREGON, by registration with the City Recorder for the purpose of collecting from transients the lodgings tax imposed by said City and remitting said tax to the City Recorder. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 

(Ord. 5-1986 § 6)


3.05.070 Due date – Returns and payments.

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the city recorder on a quarterly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding three months, and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due. The city recorder has authority to classify the operators for determination of applicable tax periods, and shall notify each operator of the due and delinquent dates for the operator’s returns. The initial return under this chapter may be for less than the three months preceding the due date; thereafter, returns shall be made for the applicable quarterly period.

B. On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each quarter of collection, a return for the preceding quarter’s tax collections shall be filed with the city recorder. The return shall be filed in such form as the city recorder may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax.

C. Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The city recorder may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of operator for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, and the amount of rents exempt, if any.

D. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the city recorder at his office, either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.

E. For good cause, the city recorder may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the city council. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this chapter.

F. The city recorder, if he deems it necessary in order to insure payment or facilitate collection by the city of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods. (Ord. 5-1986 § 7)


3.05.080 Penalties and interest.

A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed.

C. Fraud. If the city recorder determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

F. Petition for Waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time herein stated shall pay the penalties herein stated; provided, however, the operator may petition the city council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the city council may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof. (Ord. 5-1986 § 8)


3.05.090 Deficiency determinations – Fraud, evasion, operator delay.

A. Deficiency Determinations. If the city recorder determines that the returns are incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns, or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one, period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in FMC 3.05.080.

1. In making a determination the city recorder may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in FMC 3.05.080.

2. The city recorder shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears on the records of the city recorder. In case of service by mail or any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.

3. Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires the later.

4. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 10 days after the city recorder has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

B. Fraud – Refusal to Collect – Evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make within the time provided in this chapter any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, or make a fraudulent return or otherwise wilfully attempt to evade this chapter, the city recorder shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the city recorder has determined the tax due that is imposed by this chapter from any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit said tax, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the city recorder shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the city recorder of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 10 days after the city recorder has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

C. Operator Delay. If the city recorder believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay such determination to the city recorder after service of notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of such determination, if the petition is filed within 10 days from the date of service of notice by the city recorder. (Ord. 5-1986 § 9)


3.05.100 Redeterminations.

A. Any person against whom a determination is made under FMC 3.05.090 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in FMC 3.05.090. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in FMC 3.05.090, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.

B. If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the city recorder shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him 10 days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The city recorder may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

C. The city recorder may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.

D. The order or decision of the city recorder upon a petition for redetermination of redemption and refund becomes final 10 days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the city council within the 10 days after service of such notice.

E. No petition for redetermination of redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof. (Ord. 5-1986 § 10)


3.05.110 Security for collection of tax.

A. The city recorder, whenever he deems it necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, may require any operator subject thereto to deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond, or other security as the city recorder may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the city recorder but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average quarterly liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such manner as the city recorder deems proper, or $5,000, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the city recorder subject to the limitations herein provided.

B. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the city recorder may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city of Fairview to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. (Ord. 5-1986 § 11)


3.05.120 Refunds.

A. Refunds by City to Operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city recorder under this chapter, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city recorder within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the city recorder. If the claim is approved by the city recorder, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such operator, his administrators, executors or assigns.

B. Refunds by City to Transient. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator, and deposited by the operator with the city recorder, and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city recorder, it may be refunded by the city recorder to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with the city recorder within three years from the date of payment.

C. Refunds by Operator to Tenant. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator and it is later determined that the tenant (other than one occupying a space in an RV park), occupies the hotel for a period exceeding 30 days without interruption, the operator shall refund to such tenant the tax previously collected by the operator from that tenant as a transient. The operator shall account for such collection and refund to the city recorder. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to refund or credit to the tenant, he shall be entitled to a corresponding refund under this section. (Ord. 7-2000 § 4; Ord. 5-1986 § 12)


3.05.130 Administration.

A. Records Required from Operators, Etc. – Form. Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being.

B. Examination of Records – Investigations. The city recorder, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine during normal business hours the books, papers and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator, after notification to the operator liable for the tax, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.

C. Confidential Character of Information Obtained – Disclosure Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the city recorder or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate, or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:

1. The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment to another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder.

2. The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the city recorder may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby.

3. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued.

4. The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 5-1986 § 13)


3.05.140 Appeals from city recorder determination.

A. The city council of the city of Fairview is hereby designated as a committee to hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the city recorder made upon petitions for redetermination of tax or other pertinent matters for which the city recorder is herein designated or directed to perform. The city council, in such capacity, shall act as a committee to hear and determine such appeals and may affirm, modify or reverse such orders or decisions or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as may be just, and shall prescribe such forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of the city recorder’s decision or order, the council committee may take such evidence and make such investigation as it may deem necessary. It shall give notice of its determinations in the manner prescribed for service of notice of the city recorder’s decision and shall file a copy of each such determination with the city recorder with certification thereon of the date of service thereof. Such determination shall become final 10 days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and payable, subject to interest and penalties, and enforceable by the city recorder in like manner as an order or decision of the city recorder.

B. The city council, sitting as a committee as hereinabove provided, shall have the authority:

1. To approve, modify, or disapprove all forms, rules and regulations prescribed by the city recorder in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

2. To hear and determine in such manner as shall be just, any protest which may be made by any person who may be interested, to any form, rule or regulation.

3. To grant for good cause, applications for extensions of time in excess of one month, for making any return or payment of tax, and to prescribe rules therefor.

4. To make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the transient lodgings tax and to propose the adoption, amendment or repeal of legislation pertaining thereto. With respect to this function, the city council may appoint a separate committee not composed of council members to advise and report such findings and recommendations to the council. (Ord. 5-1986 § 14)


3.05.150 Appeal to city council.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city recorder may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city recorder within 10 days of the serving or mailing of the notice of a decision given by the city recorder. The city recorder shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal as prescribed by the city council in its rules and regulations and shall give the appellant 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing. (Ord. 5-1986 § 15)


3.05.160 Violations.

Any operator or other person who shall fail or refuse to register as required herein, or who shall fail or refuse to furnish any return, supplemental return or other data required herein or by the city recorder, or, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due hereunder, shall make, render, sign or verify any false or fraudulent report, commits an offense which constitutes a violation of this chapter punishable by fine in an amount to be fixed by the cognizant court, not exceeding $250.00. (Ord. 5-1986 § 16)


3.05.170 Grammatical interpretation.

In construing this chapter, if the context so requires, the singular pronoun shall be taken to mean and include the plural, the masculine to mean and include the feminine and the neuter and that generally all grammatical changes shall be made, assumed and implied to make the provisions hereof apply equally to all individuals, corporations or associations. (Ord. 5-1986 § 17)


Chapter 3.10 NEW CONSTRUCTION EXCISE CHARGE

Sections:

3.10.010    Established – Title.

3.10.020    Definitions.

3.10.030    Administrative excise charge (AEC) payment.

3.10.040    AEC charge determination.

3.10.050    AEC rules and regulations.

3.10.060    AEC application requirement.

3.10.070    Administration and enforcement authority.

3.10.080    AEC exemptions.

3.10.090    Rebates and refunds.

3.10.100    Enforcement of AEC.

3.10.110    Appeal from ordinance administration.

3.10.120    Violation – Penalty.

3.10.130    Legal review.


3.10.010 Established – Title.

The city does hereby establish an excise charge upon all new construction within the city, unless otherwise exempted by law or as herein provided, which shall be entitled “an administrative excise charge (AEC)”. This chapter may be referred to as the “Construction Excise Charge or AEC Ordinance”. (Ord. 3-1995 § 1)


3.10.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Building official” means any person charged by the city with responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the city’s Building Code.

B. “Building permit” means a permit issued by the city in accordance with applicable state and/or city requirements for construction.

C. “Construction”, as herein set forth, means any activity for which a building permit is required for new construction, including the installation of a manufactured structure or dwelling.

D. “Contractor” means any person who performs, engages in or directs such construction activity.

E. “Manufactured dwelling” means any building or structure designed to be used as a residence that is subject to the regulations of ORS Chapter 446 as defined in ORS 446.003(26).

F. “Person” means and includes individuals, domestic and foreign corporations, societies, joint ventures, associations, firms, partnerships, joint stock companies, clubs, or any other legal entity.

G. “Total combined floor area” means the sum of the floor areas of each floor created by the construction or structure installation. (Ord. 3-1995 § 2)


3.10.030 Administrative excise charge (AEC) payment.

An administrative excise charge is imposed on every person who engages in construction or installs a manufactured structure or dwelling in the city. The AEC shall be measured by the total combined floor area constructed (by square footage calculation of the construction or installation designated in the building or installation permit as defined by the “floor area” definition in the Uniform Building Code).

The AEC shall be due and payable at the time of the issuance of any building or installation permit. Liability for the AEC is imposed upon any contractor or person who engages in construction or installation, as the case may be, as well as the owner of property on which the same is located or placed; provided, however, that the AEC must be paid only once thereupon. (Ord. 3-1995 § 3)


3.10.040 AEC charge determination.

The AEC charge to be paid as indicated above shall be determined as follows:

A. The AEC to be paid for construction shall be $0.50 for each square foot of total combined floor area constructed for new residential or manufactured home dwellings.

B. The AEC to be paid for new commercial/industrial construction shall be $0.25 for each square foot of total combined floor area. (Ord. 3-1995 § 4)


3.10.050 AEC rules and regulations.

The city council shall by resolution adopt such rules and regulations necessary or advisable for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 3-1995 § 5)


3.10.060 AEC application requirement.

Each person who shall engage in construction/installation as provided by this chapter within the city shall complete application therefor, providing the information set forth therein, including a statement of the entire floor area of such construction or the installation for the purpose of computing the AEC. In the event such information shall not be provided by the responsible person(s), the AEC charge shall be determined by a designated city building official and the AEC charge computed thereupon. Failure to complete the required application shall be grounds for denial of the city installation/construction permit and subject any construction or installation in progress to a stop work order. (Ord. 3-1995 § 6)


3.10.070 Administration and enforcement authority.

A. The city administrator shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; in exercising such responsibilities the city administrator may act through a designated representative.

B. In performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, the city administrator or her or his designee shall have the authority to do, but not limited to the following acts: administer oaths, certify to all official acts, subpoena and require attendance of witnesses before Fairview municipal court or state court of general jurisdiction; determine compliance with this chapter and its rules and regulations and require production of relevant documentation at court or administrative hearings, and take testimony of any party by deposition or written interrogatory. (Ord. 3-1995 § 7)


3.10.080 AEC exemptions.

No AEC rate obligation shall be imposed by this chapter on any government entity whether federal, state or local with the exception of federal and state housing programs. (Ord. 3-1995 § 8)


3.10.090 Rebates and refunds.

A. Upon written request the city shall refund an AEC to the party paying the same upon determination that the concerned construction/installation was not commenced and that any building or installation permit therefor has been cancelled according to law.

B. Rebates or refunds shall also be made in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted hereunder in accordance with FMC 3.10.050. (Ord. 3-1995 § 9)


3.10.100 Enforcement of AEC.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay all or any portion of the AEC imposed by this chapter in the manner required.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any construction/installation project as herein defined unless payment of the AEC imposed hereby has been made as herein required.

C. The AEC imposed by this chapter constitutes a debt of the person liable therefor and may be collected by the city in an action at law. If litigation is necessary to collect said AEC, including any costs or penalties, the prevailing party shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys fees at trial or on appeal.

D. The Fairview city attorney is authorized to prosecute any action required to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 3-1995 § 10)


3.10.110 Appeal from ordinance administration.

Any person who is aggrieved by any determination of the city administrator or designee regarding liability for payment of the AEC as herein set forth or the amount thereof or the amount of any refund rebate may appeal such determination to the Fairview city council. All appeals must be in writing and must be filed within 10 days of the determination by the city administrator or designee. No appeal may be made unless a person has first paid the AEC due as herein determined. (Ord. 3-1995 § 11)


3.10.120 Violation – Penalty.

Failure to pay the AEC within 15 days of the date of issuance of any building/installation permit for any construction, improvement or installation of manufactured dwelling shall result in a penalty equal to the amount of such charge due or $100.00, whichever is greater. In addition to any other civil enforcement provided herein, the violation of this chapter shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $500.00. (Ord. 3-1995 § 12)


3.10.130 Legal review.

The legal or constitutional review of this chapter or any portion thereof or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be taken solely and exclusively by writ of review in the manner set forth in ORS 34.010 through 34.100 by any allegedly aggrieved person. (Ord. 3-1995 § 14)


Chapter 3.20 PUBLIC UTILITY FEE

Sections:

3.20.010    Fee established.

3.20.020    Definitions.

3.20.030    Fee and payment.

3.20.040    Report of gross revenue.


3.20.010 Fee established.

There is hereby established a public utility fee upon municipally and publicly owned and operated water, sanitary sewer, and storm water service providers operating within the public rights-of-way in the city. For purposes of ORS 221.450, the fee imposed by this chapter is deemed, for all relevant entities, a privilege tax. (Ord. 14-2000 § 1; Ord. 9-2000 § 1)


3.20.020 Definitions.

A. Gross Revenue. As used in this chapter, “gross revenue” includes any revenue earned within the city (after adjustment for the write-off of uncollectable accounts) from the sale of water, sanitary or storm water disposal and/or treatment services and for use, rental, or lease of operating facilities of the utility engaged in such enterprise. The term “gross revenues” does not include proceeds from the sale of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness, interest earnings, connection fees, and other related fund activities.

B. Public Utility. As used in this chapter, “public utility” includes the municipally owned and/or operated suppliers of water, sewage and storm water disposal and treatment, the Rockwood Peoples Utility District, and any other publicly owned supplier of these services operating within the city. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1)


3.20.030 Fee and payment.

A. Basis for Fee Calculation. Those entities or city departments charged with the responsibility of operating a public utility as defined herein shall pay a fee to the city for the privilege of operating within city-owned rights-of-way measured by a percentage of the gross revenues received by the public utility. The percentage for each public utility shall be set forth in a separate resolution adopted by the city council. 

B. Calculation of Fee. The utility shall compute the fee by multiplying the applicable percentage by the gross revenues received during the reporting period.

C. Payment of Fee. Fees payable by city departments shall be paid monthly, at the end of each calendar month of operations, by the water, sanitary sewer and storm water funds. Other public utilities not operated by city departments shall calculate and pay the fee on a quarterly basis. The fee shall be paid to the city finance director on the following schedule:

1. On or before April 15th, the fee for the period extending from January 1st through March 31st, inclusive, of the same calendar year; 

2. On or before July 15th, the fee for the period extending from April 1st through June 30th, inclusive, of the same calendar year; 

3. On or before October 15th, the fee for the period extending from July 1st through September 30th, inclusive, of the same calendar year; 

4. On or before January 15th, the fee for the period extending from October 1st through December 31st, inclusive, of the preceding calendar year. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1)


3.20.040 Report of gross revenue.

Concurrent with payment of the fee, the public utility shall file with the city finance director a report of the gross revenues of the utility setting forth the revenues according to their accounting subdivisions and any deductions claimed for the period upon which the fee is computed. The city finance director or designee may investigate the report and determine the accuracy of the amount reported. For purposes of such investigation, the public utility shall make available all records and books for verification of the reports and fees paid. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1)


Chapter 3.22 MARIJUANA TAX

Sections:

3.22.010    Purpose.

3.22.020    Definitions.

3.22.030    Levy of tax.

3.22.040    Deductions.

3.22.050    Seller responsible for payment of tax.

3.22.060    Penalties and interest.

3.22.070    Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by director.

3.22.080    Appeal.

3.22.090    Refunds.

3.22.100    Actions to collect.

3.22.110    Violation infractions.

3.22.120    Confidentiality.

3.22.130    Audit of books, records or persons.

3.22.140    Forms and regulations.


3.22.010 Purpose.

For the purposes of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana, medical marijuana or marijuana-infused products in the city of Fairview is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana, medical marijuana, and marijuana-infused products. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.020 Definitions.

When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter have the following meanings:

“Administrator” means the city administrator of the city of Fairview.

“Director” means the deputy finance director for the city of Fairview or his/her designee.

“Gross taxable sales” means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from sales of marijuana, medical marijuana and marijuana-infused products that is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter.

“Marijuana” means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted there from), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

“Oregon Medical Marijuana Program” means the office within the Oregon Health Authority that administers the provisions of ORS 475.300 through 475.346, the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act, and all policies and procedures pertaining thereto.

“Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

“Purchase or sale” means the retail acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any person of marijuana within the city and does not include the acquisition or furnishing of marijuana by a grower or processor to a seller.

“Registry identification cardholder” means a person who has been diagnosed by an attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use of medical marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person’s debilitating medical condition, and who has been issued a registry identification card by the Oregon Health Authority.

“Retail sale” means the transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable consideration and does not include the transfer or exchange of goods or services between a grower or processor and a seller.

“Seller” means any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by the state of Oregon to provide marijuana or marijuana-infused products to purchasers for money, credit, property or other consideration.

“Tax” means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this chapter.

“Taxpayer” means any person obligated to account to the director for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.030 Levy of tax.

A. Every seller exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana and marijuana-infused products as defined in this chapter is subject to and must pay a tax for exercising that privilege.

B. The amount of tax levied is as follows:

1. Fifteen percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products by a person who is a registry identification cardholder.

2. Forty percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products by persons who are purchasing marijuana and marijuana-infused products but are not doing so under the provisions of the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.040 Deductions.

The following deductions are allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana:

A. Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser;

B. Any adjustments in sales that amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products and does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.050 Seller responsible for payment of tax.

A. Every seller must, on or before the last day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January), make a return to the director, on forms provided by the city, specifying the total sales subject to this chapter and the amount of tax collected under this chapter. The seller may request or the director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or director deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax. The director may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return is not considered filed until it is actually received by the director.

B. At the time the return is filed, the seller must remit to the director the full amount of the tax collected. Payments received by the director for application against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions that are not prejudicial to the interest of the city. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods.

C. The city will apply nondesignated payments in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax until the payment is exhausted. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax.

D. If the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the director may order such a change. The director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the director deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax. The director also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest will be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Sellers must hold in trust all taxes collected pursuant to this chapter for the city’s account until the seller makes payment to the director. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.

E. Every seller required to remit the tax imposed by this chapter is entitled to retain five percent of all taxes due to the city to defray the costs of bookkeeping and remittance.

F. Every seller must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the director records of all sales made by the seller and such other books or accounts as the director may require. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records. The director has the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.060 Penalties and interest.

A. Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required must pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. If any seller fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 60 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, the seller must pay a second delinquency penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed.

C. If the director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax will be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D. In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter must pay interest at the rate one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Every penalty imposed, and any interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, becomes a part of the tax required to be paid.

F. All sums collected pursuant to the penalty provisions in subsections A through C of this section will be distributed to the city’s general fund.

G. Waiver of Penalties. Penalties for certain late tax payments may be waived or reduced pursuant to policies and processes adopted by the finance department. However, the finance department is not required to create a penalty waiver or reduction policy. If the finance department does not create a policy for waivers or reductions, no waivers or reductions are allowed. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.070 Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by director.

A. If any seller fails to make any report of the tax required by this chapter within the time provided in this chapter, the director will proceed to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. As soon as the director procures such facts and information upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any seller, the director will determine and assess against such seller the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this chapter.

B. If the director makes a determination as outlined in subsection A of this section, the director must give notice to the seller of the amount assessed. The notice must be personally served on the seller or deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the seller at the last known place of address.

C. The seller may appeal the determination as provided in FMC 3.22.080. If no appeal is timely filed, the director’s determination is final and the amount assessed is immediately due and payable. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.080 Appeal.

A. Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the director with respect to the amount of the tax owed along with interest and penalties, if any, may appeal the decision to the city administrator or his or her designee.

B. The seller must file the appeal within 30 days of the city’s serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The seller must file using forms provided by the city.

C. Upon receipt of the appeal form, the city administrator will schedule a hearing to occur within 20 business days. The administrator will give the seller notice of the time and date for the hearing no less than seven days before the hearing date. At the hearing the city administrator or his or her designee will hear and consider any records and evidence presented bearing upon the director’s determination of amount due and make findings affirming, reversing or modifying the determination. The finance director (or his or her designee) and the appellant may both provide written and oral testimony during the hearing. The findings of the city administrator or his or her designee are final and conclusive. The city will serve the findings upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due is immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.090 Refunds.

A. The city may refund to the seller any tax, interest or penalty amount under any of the following circumstances:

1. The seller has overpaid the correct amount of tax, interest or penalty; or

2. The seller has paid more than once for the correct amount owed; or

3. The city has erroneously collected or received any tax, interest or penalties.

B. The city may not issue a refund under this subsection unless the seller provides to the director a written claim under penalty of perjury stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded and on forms furnished by the director. The seller must file the claim within one year from the date of the alleged incorrect payment to be eligible for a refund.

C. The director has 20 calendar days from the date of the claim’s receipt to review the claim and make a written determination as to its validity. After making the determination, the director will notify the claimant in writing of the determination by mailing notice to the claimant at the address provided on the claim form.

D. If the director determines the claim is valid, the claimant may either claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount that was overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously received or collected by the city. The claimant must notify the director of the claimant’s choice no later than 15 days following the date the director mailed the determination and the claimant must do so in a manner prescribed by the director.

E. If the claimant does not notify the director of claimant’s choice within the 15-day period and the claimant is still in business, the city will grant a credit against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the claimant is no longer in business, the city will mail a refund check to claimant at the address provided in the claim form.

F. The city will not pay a refund unless the claimant establishes by written records the right to a refund and the director acknowledges the claim’s validity. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.100 Actions to collect.

Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this chapter is a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any tax collected by a seller that has not been paid to the city is a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter is liable to an action brought in the name of the city of Fairview for the recovery of the amount owing. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the city, when taxes due are more than 30 days delinquent, may submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the city has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105, if the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of $50.00 or 50 percent of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.110 Violation infractions.

A. All violations of this chapter are punishable as set forth in FMC 1.01.090. It is a violation of this chapter for any seller or other person to:

1. Fail or refuse to comply as required herein;

2. Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made;

3. Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records;

4. Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director;

5. Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or

6. Fail, refuse or neglect to remit the tax to the city by the due date.

B. The remedies provided by this section are not exclusive and do not prevent the city from exercising any other remedy available under the law.

C. The remedies provided by this section do not prohibit or restrict the city or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges under state law or city ordinance. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.120 Confidentiality.

Except as otherwise required by law, it is unlawful for the city, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section prohibits any of the following:

A. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana is sold or provided; or

B. The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller’s financial information; or

C. Presentation of evidence to the court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the director or an appeal from the director for amount due the city under this chapter; or

D. The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or

E. The disclosure of records related to a business’s failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or when the tax exceeds $5,000. The city council expressly finds that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5). (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.130 Audit of books, records or persons.

The city may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller’s state and federal income tax return, bearing upon the matter of the seller’s tax return for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return, or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due. All books, invoices, accounts and other records must be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the director or an authorized agent of the director. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the director may immediately seek a subpoena from the Fairview municipal court to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


3.22.140 Forms and regulations.

A. The director is authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the marijuana tax and to provide for:

1. A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors;

2. The records that sellers providing marijuana and marijuana-infused products must keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1)


Chapter 3.30 MEASURE 37 CLAIMS PROCEDURE

Sections:

3.30.010    Purpose.

3.30.020    Definitions.

3.30.030    Pre-filing conference.

3.30.040    Claim requirements.

3.30.050    Claim review process.

3.30.060    Conditions, revocation and transfer.

3.30.070    Waiver of claims.

3.30.080    Costs and attorneys’ fees.

3.30.090    Availability of funds to pay claims.

3.30.100    Review of a decision.

3.30.110    Private cause of action.

3.30.120    Compensation by other.

3.30.130    Severability.


3.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish the following regarding claims for compensation under ORS Chapter 197, as amended by Ballot Measure 37, adopted November 2, 2004: 

Process claims for compensation quickly, openly, thoroughly, and consistently with the law; enable present real property owners making claims for compensation to have an adequate and fair opportunity to present their claims to the city; provide the city with the factual and analytical information necessary to adequately and fairly consider claims for compensation, and take appropriate action under the alternatives provided by law; preserve and protect limited public funds; preserve and protect the interests of the community by providing for public input into the process of reviewing claims; and establish a record of decisions capable of withstanding legal review. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:

A. “Appraisal” means a written statement prepared by an appraiser licensed by the Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board of the State of Oregon under Chapter 674 ORS. For commercial or industrial property, the term “appraisal” also means a written statement prepared by an appraiser holding the MAI qualification and evidenced by written certificate.

B. “Ballot Measure 37” means the provisions added to ORS Chapter 197 by Ballot Measure 37 as approved by Oregon voters on November 2, 2004.

C. “Claim” means the written demand for compensation made by an owner of real property in accordance with Ballot Measure 37 and this chapter. 

D. Exceptions to Land Use Regulation. The following land use regulations are excluded from the application of this chapter: 

1. A regulation restricting or prohibiting activities commonly and historically recognized as public nuisances under common law, and the criminal laws of Oregon and the city; 

2. A regulation restricting or prohibiting activities for the protection of public health and safety such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation regulations, solid or hazardous waste regulations, and pollution control regulations; 

3. A regulation required for compliance with federal law; 

4. A regulation restricting or prohibiting the use of a property for the purpose of selling pornography or performing nude dancing; or 

5. A regulation enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the real property by the owner or a family member of the owner who owned the subject property prior to acquisition or inheritance by the owner, whichever occurred first.

E. “Family member” means the wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father, brother, brother-in- law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent, stepchild, grandparent, or grandchild of the owner of the real property, an estate of any of the foregoing family members, or a legal entity owned by any one or combination of these family members or the owner of the real property.

F. “Land use regulation” means any city comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, land division ordinance or transportation ordinance. A land use regulation does not include any land use regulation excepted from this chapter, any city system development charge, or any other city development fees or charges.

G. “Administrator” means the city administrator or designee.

H. “Owner” means the present owner of real property that is the subject of the claim for compensation, or any interest therein. The owner must be a person who is the sole fee simple owner of the real property or all joint owners whose interests add up to a fee simple interest in property including all persons who represent all recorded interests in property, such as co-owners, holders of less than fee simple interests, leasehold owners, and parties to land sale contracts affecting the real property, but excluding security interest holders with no other interest in the real property.

I. “Property” means any private real property or interest therein. It includes only a single parcel or contiguous parcels in single ownership. It does not include any parcels that are under different ownerships, regardless of contiguity.

J. “Reduction in value” means the difference in the fair market value of the property before and after enactment, enforcement or application of a land use regulation as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.030 Pre-filing conference.

The purpose of the pre-filing conference is to provide an opportunity to discuss potential claims in an effort to resolve them cooperatively, resulting in cost savings to both the owner and the city.

A. Before submitting a claim for compensation, the city strongly encourages the owner to schedule and attend a pre-filing conference with the administrator to discuss the claim. The pre-filing conference will follow the procedure set forth by the     administrator. There is no filing fee for a pre-filing conference.

B. To schedule a pre-filing conference, the owner should contact the administrator. The pre-filing conference is for the owner to provide a summary of the owner’s claim to the administrator, and for the administrator to provide information to the owner about regulations that may affect the claim. The administrator may provide the owner with a written summary of the pre-filing conference within 10 days after it is held.

C. The administrator may enter into a tentative settlement subject to city council approval. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.040 Claim requirements.

The purpose of the following claim requirements is to allow for the expeditious, full and fair evaluation and resolution of claims.

A. Form, Completeness and Review.

1. A claim must be submitted for filing using the forms provided by the administrator. 

2. The administrator will conduct a completeness review within 15 days after submittal of the claim and will advise the owner in writing of any material remaining to be submitted. The owner must submit the material needed for completeness within 30 days of the written notice that additional material is required. 

3. The owner may request an extension for filing a complete claim. A request for an extension or continuance will be deemed a waiver of the beginning of the 180-day period required before accrual of a cause of action for compensation.

B. Claim Requirements. A claim shall include all of the following information:

1. Deposit. A deposit must be paid at the time of filing to cover the costs of completeness review and claim processing. The amount of the deposit will be established by city council resolution.

2. Claim Form. A completed claim on a form provided by the city administrator. 

3. Identification of Owner and Other Interest Holders. The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of all owners, and a description of the ownership interest of each.

4. Property Description. The address and tax lot number of the real property that is the subject of the claim.

5. Title Report. A title report demonstrating the legal description, the title history, the date the owner acquired ownership of the property, and the ownership interests of all owners. The title report must also specify any restrictions on use of the property unrelated to the land use regulation including, but not limited to, any restrictions established by covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), other private restrictions, or other regulations, easements or contracts.

6. Existing Regulation. Identification of the land use regulation that the owner making the claim believes restricts the use of the property, or interest therein, and that the owner believes has had the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property, including the approximate date the owner claims the land use regulation was first enacted, enforced or applied to the property. 

7. Prior Regulations. Identification of the land use regulation in existence, and applicable to the property, when the owner became the owner of the property, and identification of the land use regulation in existence immediately before the regulation that was enacted or enforced or applied to the property, that the owner claims restricts the use of the property and, the owner claims, caused a reduction in fair market value due to the regulation described in subsection (B)(6) of this section being more restrictive.

8. Evidence of Value. Some evidence of the claimed reduction in value of the property. A written appraisal is the preferred form of evidence. The city administrator may request a written appraisal by an appraiser, qualified as such in the state of Oregon, stating the amount of the alleged reduction in the fair market value of the property by showing the difference in the fair market value of the property before and after enactment, enforcement or application of the land use regulation described in subsection (B)(6) of this section, and explaining the rationale and factors leading to that conclusion. The city also reserves the right to request a second or review appraisal on behalf of the city.

9. Narrative. The owner must provide a narrative describing the history of the owner and any family member’s ownership of the property, the history of land use regulations applicable to the claim, and how the enactment, enforcement or application of the land use regulation restricts the use of the property, or any interest therein, and has the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property, or any interest herein. The narrative must further describe the effect a modification, removal or non-application of the land use regulation would have on the potential development of the property, and state the most extensive development the owner believes would be permitted on the property if the identified land use regulation were modified, removed or not applied.

10. Land Use Applications and Permits. Identification of any land use actions, development applications or other applications for permits previously filed in connection with the property and the action taken.

11. Statement of Relief Sought. A statement of the relief sought by the owner. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.050 Claim review process.

A. The administrator will assess any claim for compensation and make a recommendation to the city council on the disposition of the claim.

B. The city council will conduct a public hearing before taking final action on a recommendation from the administrator.

C. Notice of the public hearing will be provided to the claimant and to all record owners of the subject property, and to all owners of property within 250 feet of the subject property. Additional notice may be sent to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development, Metro and such others as required by law. 

D. The notice will state the date, time and location of the hearing and will be sent no later than 10 days before the hearing. The notice will describe the hearing process, and will state how evidence may be submitted.

E. After the conclusion of the public hearing, and no later than 180 days from the date the claim was filed, the city council will:

1. Determine that the claim does not meet the requirements of this chapter and Ballot Measure 37, and deny the claim; or

2. Adopt an order with appropriate findings that supports a determination that the claim is valid and directs that the claimant be compensated in an amount set forth in the order, or remove, waive or modify the challenged land use regulation as applied to the subject property. 

F. The city council’s decision to remove, waive or modify a land use regulation or to compensate the claimant will be based on whether the public interest would be better served by compensating the owner, or by removing, waiving or modifying a land use regulation with respect to the subject property; or any other factors deemed relevant by the city council.

G. If the city council removes, waives or modifies a land use regulation, it may apply the land use regulations in effect at the time the claimant acquired the property.

H. The owner will bear the burden of proof relating to the claim, the devaluation of the owner’s property and the owner’s entitlement to just compensation. The standard of proof will be by a preponderance of the evidence.

I. A copy of the city council order will be sent by mail to the owner and to each individual or entity that participated in the city council review process if the city was provided with a mailing address.

J. The city council may establish by resolution additional procedures related to the processing of Ballot Measure 37 claims. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.060 Conditions, revocation and transfer.

A. The city council may establish any relevant conditions of approval for compensation, should compensation be granted, or for any other action taken under this chapter. 

B. Failure to comply with any condition of approval is grounds for revocation of the approval of the compensation for the claim, grounds for recovering any compensation paid and grounds for revocation of any other action taken under this chapter. 

C. If the owner, or the owner’s successor in interest, fails to fully comply with all conditions of approval, the city may institute a revocation or modification proceeding before the city council under the same process for city council review of a claim under this chapter.

D. Unless otherwise stated in the city’s decision, any action taken under this chapter runs with the property and is transferred with ownership of the property. All conditions, time limits or other restrictions imposed with approval of a claim will bind all subsequent owners of the subject property.

E. A land use regulation waived under this chapter will result in designation of the affected property as a Measure 37 property. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.070 Waiver of claims.

All potential claims that an owner knew or should have known to exist as of the date a claim is submitted must be included in that claim if they are to be preserved. Any potential claim not included is waived by the property owner. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.080 Costs and attorneys’ fees.

If an owner commences an action to collect compensation and the city prevails, the city is entitled to all fees and costs it incurred, as well as any sum that a court, including any appellate court, may deem reasonable as attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.090 Availability of funds to pay claims.

Compensation can only be paid based on the availability and appropriation of funds for this purpose. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.100 Review of a decision.

A writ of review under ORS 34.010 to 34.102 is the exclusive means to contest a final decision of the city council under FMC 3.30.050, and must be filed within 60 days of the notice provided under FMC 3.30.050. The owner of the real property that is the subject of the claim under this chapter is a necessary party in such a proceeding. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.110 Private cause of action.

If the city council’s removal, modification, or waiver of a land use regulation reduces the value of other property adjacent to a property that is the subject of a claim under this chapter, the adjacent property owner(s) are granted a cause of action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the claimant the amount of the reduction. In any such action, the adjacent property owner(s) are entitled to all fees and costs incurred, as well as any sum that a court, including any appellate court, may deem reasonable as attorneys’ fees. This section does not create a cause of action against the city. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.120 Compensation by other.

An individual or entity other than the city may compensate the claimant for any diminution in value established under this chapter, in lieu of the city removing, modifying or waiving the land use regulation causing the diminution. A contract between the city, the claimant and the individual or entity providing the compensation is a condition precedent to compensating a claimant under this subsection, and must be approved by the city attorney and city council. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


3.30.130 Severability.

If any phrase, clause, or other part or parts of this chapter are found invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining phrases, clauses and other part or parts will remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1)


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

Article I.

5.05    Business Licenses

5.10    Social Games

5.15    Repealed

5.20    Liquor Licenses

5.25    Repealed

5.30    Repealed

5.35    Repealed

5.40    Repealed

Article II.

5.45    County Business Income Tax – Revenue Sharing Agreement

5.50    Adult Care Homes

5.55    Repealed

5.60    Garage Sales


Chapter 5.05 BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.05.010    Purpose and scope.

5.05.020    Definitions.

5.05.030    License and payment required.

5.05.040    License year.

5.05.050    License fee.

5.05.060    Businesses not operating from a facility within the city.

5.05.070    Application procedure – License transfer.

5.05.080    Falsifying application information – Penalty for delinquent filing.

5.05.082    Posting license.

5.05.090    Attorneys’ fees.

5.05.100    Violation does not exempt payment of fee.

5.05.110    Failure to obtain license.


5.05.010 Purpose and scope.

A. The license fees authorized by this chapter shall be independent and separate from any license or permit fees now or hereafter required of any person to engage in any business by Fairview or other governmental or regulatory body. All such businesses remain subject to the regulatory provisions of any city ordinances or other regulations now or hereafter in effect, and the business engaged therein is liable to the payment of any license or other fees therein established or authorized.

B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business within the city which is exempt from taxation or regulation by virtue of the Constitutions or laws either of the United States or Oregon.

C. The levy or collection of a license fee upon any business shall not be construed to be a license or permit to the person or business engaged therein to engage in activity or business to the extent it is deemed to be unlawful, by the laws of the state of Oregon, the United States or the city. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.020 Definitions.

A. As used in this chapter:

1. “Business” means profession, trade, occupation, and every other kind of calling carried on for profit or livelihood.

2. “Employee” means any person working for, within or under the auspices of a business, other than a bona fide independent contractor or leased employee, including common law and statutory wage earning, commission and salaried employees; executive and common employees, agents; sales representatives; sole proprietors; partners; corporate officers and any and all persons associated directly with the business, whether full or part time.

3. “Exemption certificate” means the document issued by the city in lieu of a business license to businesses, occupations and activities qualifying under the provisions of FMC 5.05.030.

4. “License” or “business license” means the document issued by the city granting the privilege to carry on a particular business or pursue a certain occupation within the city.

5. “Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, partnerships of every kind, joint ventures, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city.

6. “Transfer” means to transfer the name or ownership of a business, but does not include a change in business location.

B. No person whose income is based solely on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly or annual wage or salary shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be deemed a “person transacting and carrying on any business in the city.”

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the agent or agents of a nonresident person engaged in a business for which a license is required shall be liable for the payment of the license fee on the business and for the penalties for failure to pay the fee or to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent and with the like effect as if such agent or agents were themselves persons engaged in business for which a license is required. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.030 License and payment required.

A. No person shall engage in any business within the city, or transact any business specified in this chapter, without first obtaining a license and paying the license fee prescribed unless otherwise exempt under this chapter.

B. Each business location of every business within the city of Fairview is required to obtain a business license. 

C. No business license shall be issued to any person to engage in a business that does not comply with Chapter 9.21 FMC and Ordinance 10-2014. 

D. In lieu of the business license fee described in this chapter, an exemption certificate shall be issued without charge to the businesses and activities described below. All exempt businesses or activities must complete and file an annual renewal exemption certificate application with the city. Businesses and activities qualified under this provision include:

1. Religious, educational and charitable organizations specifically exempt from taxation under the Federal Internal Revenue Code;

2. Businesses franchised by and paying a franchise fee to the city;

3. Businesses otherwise exempt from the payment of municipal license fees pursuant to Oregon or federal law. (Ord. 10-2014 § 7 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.040 License year.

A. For businesses licensed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the license year shall commence on January 1, 2000, and shall be renewable on or before that date annually thereafter. For businesses applying for an initial business license or certificate after said date, the license year shall commence on the date the license is approved by the city and shall be renewed annually on or before January 1st of each succeeding year thereafter.

B. The license fee shall be due and payable on the first day of January and shall be deemed to be delinquent if not paid by February 1st of that year. License fees are not refundable nor subject to proration. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.050 License fee.

Each business operating within the city shall pay to the city on or before the fifteenth of January of each calendar year, a business license fee as the same is established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.060 Businesses not operating from a facility within the city.

A. Except as provided in FMC 5.05.030, all persons doing business within the city are subject to the business license provisions of this code regardless of the location of the facility used as the basis for conducting such business.

B. The annual business fee for persons doing business within the city from locations outside the city is the same as for persons who do business from locations within the city.

C. If more than one business takes place at the same location and is operated under the same ownership, but is operated under more than one business name, one application may be filed provided each business is clearly identified and all relevant information is included in the unified application. However, each business shall be liable for and pay a separate business license fee.

D. Each branch establishment of a business or location of a business conducted by any person shall, for the purposes hereof, be treated as a separate business subject to the license provided for in this chapter. However, warehouses used incidentally with a duly licensed business shall not be deemed to be a separate place of business or branch establishment. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.070 Application procedure – License transfer.

A. All licenses shall be issued by the city recorder upon written application and not otherwise.

B. The application for such license, or renewal thereof, shall contain information as the city deems appropriate to determine the ownership, location, management of the business.

C. No transfer of a license shall be made without written application for the transfer being made to the city recorder. An entry of such transfer shall be made by the recorder in the record of licenses for which the city shall charge and receive $25.00.

D. An application for an initial business license or a change in address due to the physical relocation of a currently licensed business shall be accompanied by the payment of an application fee of $50.00. This fee shall be in addition to the business license fee provided for by FMC 5.05.050. No such application shall be accepted unless all information contained therein is provided and the full fee is paid. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.080 Falsifying application information – Penalty for delinquent filing.

A. It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

B. In the event a business fails or neglects to obtain a license and pay the appropriate fee(s) before they become delinquent, the city recorder shall collect in addition thereto, an additional charge of $15.00 for each month (or fraction thereof) the license is delinquent.

C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be or construed as vesting any right to the amount of any license or other/additional taxes or fees, and the fees provided for in this chapter, may be increased or decreased and additional or other fees provided for and levied in any and all instances at any time by the city. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.082 Posting license.

A business shall post the license required by this chapter on the business premises. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B))


5.05.090 Attorneys’ fees.

The city shall be entitled to the award of a reasonable attorneys’ fees in the event the city administrator deems it necessary to enforce the requirements imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.100 Violation does not exempt payment of fee.

The conviction of any person for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall not operate to relieve such person from paying any fee or penalty on any fee for which such person is liable, nor shall the payment of any such fee be a bar to, or prevent, any prosecution in the city court of any complaint for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-1999 § 2)


5.05.110 Failure to obtain license.

Failure to obtain a license required by this chapter is a violation of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.01 FMC. (Ord. 5-2014 § 2 (Exh. B))


Chapter 5.10 SOCIAL GAMES

Sections:

5.10.010    Social games allowed.

5.10.020    License required.

5.10.030    Application.

5.10.040    License fees.

5.10.050    License issuance.

5.10.060    Social game regulations.

5.10.070    Revocation or suspension of license.

5.10.080    Appeal.

5.10.090    Penalties.


5.10.010 Social games allowed.

Pursuant to ORS 167.121, the city authorizes the playing or conducting of social games in a private business, private club or in a place of public accommodation. For purposes of this chapter, “social games” shall mean a game, other than a lottery, between players in a private business, private club or place of public accommodation where no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no house income from the operation of the social game. “Player” shall have the meaning set forth in ORS 167.117. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-1999 § 3; Ord. 6-1987 § 4.A. Formerly 5.20.010)


5.10.020 License required.

No person shall conduct or permit the playing of social games without having a license issued by the city. A license granted under this chapter is not transferable and is valid only at the premises described therein. All licenses are valid for one year from the first day of the month the license is granted unless revoked pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-1999 § 3; Ord. 6-1987 § 4.B. Formerly 5.20.020)


5.10.030 Application.

Application for a social games license shall be made annually to the city administrator on the form provided by the city. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-1999 § 3; Ord. 6-1987 § 4.C. Formerly 5.20.030)


5.10.040 License fees.

A nonrefundable annual fee established by council resolution shall accompany the application. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-1999 § 3; Ord. 6-1987 § 4.D. Formerly 5.20.040)


5.10.050 License issuance.

A. The city administrator will issue the license unless the city administrator or designee finds that:

1. Within five years of the present application date, the applicant, the applicant’s officers or managers, or any person having a financial interest in the private business, private club, or place of public accommodation (a) has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor under federal or state law or this code relating to theft, fraud, gambling, controlled substances, or prostitution activities; or (b) has had a social game license revoked pursuant to FMC 5.10.070; or

2. The applicant, the applicant’s officers or managers, or any person having a financial interest in the private business, private club, or place of public accommodation has falsified any statement in the license application; or

3. Any violation of federal or state law or this code relating to gambling has occurred on the premises described in the application. It shall be prima facie evidence of such violation if any person has forfeited bail on, pleaded nolo contendere to, or been convicted of any offense in violation of federal or state law or this code relating to gambling or gambling devices where the act charged occurred on the premises described in the license application; or

4. The applicant has permitted the commission of any criminal act on the premises described in the application or has failed to maintain the premises in conformance with all the requirements of this code; or

5. The applicant did not pay the license fee required in this chapter; or

6. The applicant did not submit a signed application that includes all required information or failed to provide other information related to the application as requested by the city administrator.

B. If the city administrator or designee finds that any of the grounds for denial set forth in subsection A of this section exist, the city administrator will promptly inform the applicant in writing of the basis for the denial of the application.

C. There is no automatic renewal of a license issued under this chapter. A person seeking a license renewal must submit a new application each year. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.10.060 Social game regulations.

A. A private business, private club or public place of accommodation with a valid social games license (“licensed business”) may only allow card games to be played.

B. While participating in social games, no more than 10 players may sit at each table at any one time.

C. Social games may only be played during legal liquor dispensing hours.

D. Licensees may not allow patrons to engage in disorderly conduct.

E. A licensed business shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. Licenses shall be available for inspection during all hours of operation.

F. No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed to participate in any social game or to enter or remain upon such licensed premises.

G. Each licensee shall assign a person whose duty shall be to supervise the games and see to it that they are played strictly in accordance with this chapter, other applicable city ordinances and regulations and Oregon law. The licensed business shall be vicariously liable for any conduct of any employee in regard to any gambling activity or social game conducted in or upon the licensed premises. (Ord. 8-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.10.070 Revocation or suspension of license.

A. The city administrator may revoke or temporarily suspend for 30 days a social games license when the city administrator or designee finds:

1. Any information that would be grounds for denial of a license application; or

2. That conducting of social games in the location authorized by the license causes disorderly or violent acts, litter, noise, vandalism, vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion, or other similar problems in the area around the licensed premises.

B. Revocation or suspension becomes effective 10 days after the city administrator or designee makes reasonable attempts to notify the licensee in writing of the grounds for revocation or suspension. If the licensee gives notice of appeal to the city administrator prior to the effective date of the revocation or suspension, revocation or suspension shall not become effective until the appeal is finally determined pursuant to FMC 5.10.080. If the licensee cannot be found after a reasonable effort to locate him or her has been made, then such notice may be sent by certified mail to the license address, or posted at the same, and shall be deemed actual notice to the licensee.

C. On a case-by-case basis, depending upon the severity of the violation and the likelihood of continued unlawful activity on such premises, in lieu of suspending or revoking a license or to reduce the penalty period involved, with the concurrence of the licensee, the city administrator may order a civil penalty of up to $500.00 per violation of this code. Failure to pay the civil penalty within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the social games license. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.10.080 Appeal.

The sole method of appeal of a denial, revocation or suspension of a social games license shall be as follows:

A. The applicant may appeal to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city administrator within 10 days of receipt of the notice of denial, revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the city administrator will schedule an appeal hearing before the city council. The hearing will be set no less than 10 days after the timely appeal is filed. The city council may take such action(s) as it deems appropriate concerning the appeal, consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.10.090 Penalties.

A. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements is subject to a civil penalty of not more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day or portion of a day such violation continues is deemed a separate violation.

B. If any person is found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter, such finding shall not operate to relieve such person from paying any fee or penalty on any fee for which such person is liable, nor shall the payment of any such fee be a bar to, or prevent, any action in a court of competent jurisdiction, including the municipal court, for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

C. In the event the city maintains an action in a court of competent jurisdiction, including the municipal court, to compel compliance with or restrain the violation of the provisions of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable attorney fees and any administrative costs associated with the enforcement of this chapter relative to the particular violation. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 5.15 CIVIC LEAGUES OR ORGANIZATIONS SOLICITATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 13-1999)    


Chapter 5.20 LIQUOR LICENSES

Sections:

5.20.010    Purpose.

5.20.020    Forms.

5.20.030    Temporary licenses.

5.20.040    Regular licenses.

5.20.050    Investigation.

5.20.060    City administrator recommendation.

5.20.065    City administrator review.

5.20.070    City council review.

5.20.080    Contents of public hearing notice.

5.20.090    Publication of public hearing notice.

5.20.100    Public hearing procedures.

5.20.110    Recommendation to OLCC.


5.20.010 Purpose.

These sections establish criteria for recommending to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) that it grant, deny, modify or renew liquor licenses for premises within the city. This process is intended to make fair, effective, and efficient recommendations. These sections are necessary to ensure that premises licensed to sell or dispense liquor meet community expectations, and that such businesses are conducted in a lawful manner that does not unreasonably disturb the peace and tranquility of the city and its neighborhoods. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.020 Forms.

Applicants for OLCC licenses shall provide the city administrator with the appropriate OLCC license application forms. The city administrator may require additional information appropriate for conducting the investigations required for city council recommendations. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.030 Temporary licenses.

The city administrator is authorized to approve applications for temporary OLCC licenses such as special events, special beer and special wine licenses. Such applications may be processed administratively after the fee established by city council has been paid. The city administrator may make an unfavorable recommendation to the OLCC if the city administrator finds that the applicant does not meet the criteria established by FMC 5.20.060. Either the applicant or city administrator may refer an application to the city council for a public hearing. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.040 Regular licenses.

The city administrator accepts applications for regular OLCC liquor licenses only when the following conditions are met: (A) all required forms are properly completed and in order; (B) the applicant has obtained a city business license; and (C) the processing fee established by city council resolution has been paid. For purposes of this chapter, a “regular license” means any license that the OLCC may issue for an annual period. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.050 Investigation.

The city administrator shall coordinate an investigation of each application to determine the appropriate recommendation to the OLCC. The city administrator shall provide a copy of each application to the appropriate city departments for investigation and report. Reports from these departments must be included with each manager’s unfavorable or conditionally favorable recommendation to the city council. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.060 City administrator recommendation.

A. The city administrator may make an unfavorable or conditionally favorable recommendation to the city council on any application based on any of the bases for an unfavorable recommendation set forth in applicable state laws and administrative rules.

B. The city administrator’s unfavorable or conditionally favorable recommendation to city council and any unfavorable recommendation to the OLCC must be supported by reliable factual information, which includes but is not limited to personal observations of activities in or around the proposed licensed locations, as opposed to opinion, hearsay, feelings, beliefs or speculation. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.065 City administrator review.

The city administrator is authorized to file a favorable recommendation with the OLCC for all regular OLCC liquor license original applications and renewals which receive a favorable city administrator’s recommendation. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.070 City council review.

City council shall be notified of all regular OLCC liquor license original applications and renewals. If the city administrator makes an unfavorable recommendation, a public hearing shall be held to allow all interested parties a reasonable opportunity to be heard by the city council. The city administrator shall file with the OLCC a written request for additional time to submit the recommendation and the hearing shall be scheduled so that a recommendation can be filed within the time limit of the extension. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.080 Contents of public hearing notice.

Before the city council recommends denial of a liquor license application, notice of the public hearing must be given to the applicant either personally or by certified mail postmarked not later than 10 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain: (A) the date, time and place of the hearing; (B) a copy of the recommendation of the city administrator together with all supporting reports and documents; and (C) a statement that information about procedures and rights of parties may be obtained from the city administrator. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.090 Publication of public hearing notice.

If a public hearing is scheduled, the city administrator shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice specifying a time, date and location of the hearing and business name and address of the applicant. The notice shall inform the public that testimony may be given for or against the application. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.100 Public hearing procedures.

When a public hearing before the city council is held: (A) the applicant and the city administrator may present written and oral evidence and may rebut opposing evidence; (B) the hearing shall be limited to production of evidence relevant to the recommendation of manager, unless the council decides to hear additional evidence; (C) after consideration of all relevant evidence, the city council shall make its recommendation. The recommendation shall be based on substantial evidence relative to the FMC 5.20.060 criteria and shall be final. In the case of an adverse recommendation, the city council shall make findings of fact which shall be forwarded to the OLCC along with the city council recommendation against the application. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.110 Recommendation to OLCC.

If the city council finds that an applicant does not meet the criteria established by FMC 5.20.060, it may make a favorable recommendation with a letter of warning to the applicant. The city administrator shall deliver to the applicant in person or by certified mail a summary of the reports relating to the application, and a notice to correct the problems cited. A copy of this notice and summary shall be sent to OLCC.

During the following license period, the city administrator shall monitor the progress of the applicant in correcting such problems and report to the city council. At the time of the next license renewal, city council shall review the application notwithstanding a favorable city administrator’s recommendation. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to establish that the license should receive a favorable recommendation for renewal. If the city council finds that the applicant has not made substantial progress in correcting the conditions which resulted in the letter of warning, then the city council may make an unfavorable recommendation to OLCC without further public hearing. (Ord. 7-2010 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 5.25 TAXICABS

(Repealed by Ord. 13-1999)    


Chapter 5.30 RENTALS

(Repealed by Ord. 13-1999)    


Chapter 5.35 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS

(Repealed by Ord. 13-1999)    


Chapter 5.40 VIOLATION – PENALTIES – REVOCATION

(Repealed by Ord. 13-1999)    


Chapter 5.45 COUNTY BUSINESS INCOME TAX –REVENUE SHARING AGREEMENT

Sections:

5.45.010    Intent to contract with county.

5.45.020    Ordinance No. 1-1975 made nonoperative.

5.45.030    Other license regulations not affected.


5.45.010 Intent to contract with county.

The city council does hereby express its intent to contract with Multnomah County, Oregon, to share in business income tax revenue collected by the county under the terms and provisions of Section 11 of Multnomah County Ordinance No. 121, as amended, and does here authorize the mayor and city recorder to execute such agreement or understanding as may be required to accomplish this purpose. (Ord. 3-1977 § 4)


5.45.020 Ordinance No. 1-1975 made nonoperative.

The city of Fairview does here further ordain that Ordinance No. 1-1975 of this city, which is an ordinance relating to the imposition of business licenses for revenue; providing for the procedures, issuance, administration and collection thereof and related matters as adopted by the city on February 15, 1975, be and it hereby is amended to provide that to the extent said ordinance is in conflict with the intent and understanding of the revenue sharing program between Multnomah County and this city, as set forth in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and accepted by this chapter; that said Ordinance No. 1-1975 shall be nonoperative and the provisions thereof shall not be in force or effect or administered so long as the revenue sharing agreement or understanding between Multnomah County and this city, as hereinabove set forth, or similar and successive or amendatory agreement shall be in effect. (Ord. 3-1977 § 5)


5.45.030 Other license regulations not affected.

The understanding and agreement between this city and Multnomah County concerning a sharing of revenue derived from the Multnomah County business income tax shall in no way limit, abridge or otherwise modify or amend any other ordinances of this city in effect for license regulatory provisions or otherwise. (Ord. 3-1977 § 6)


Chapter 5.50 ADULT CARE HOMES

Sections:

5.50.010    Enforcement of county ordinance.

5.50.020    City to furnish information.


5.50.010 Enforcement of county ordinance.

In accordance with the provisions of ORS 190.010 and 203.040, the city of Fairview does hereby authorize Multnomah County, its agents and representatives, to enforce within the city limits of Fairview, Multnomah County Ordinance No. 503, dated February 27, 1986, amending Ordinance No. 392 (MCC 8.90.005 through 8.90.260) entitled “The Multnomah County Adult Care Home Licensure Ordinance”, which is an ordinance providing for the licensure and inspection of adult care homes, the establishment of fees for licenses, requiring the posting of the Resident’s Bill of Rights, and establishing penalties and authorizing appropriate civil action, which Adult Care Home Licensure Ordinance is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, marked “Exhibit A”,* and by this reference made a part hereof at this point. (Ord. 13-1986 § 1)

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibit A is on file in the city clerk’s office.


5.50.020 City to furnish information.

The appropriate departments of the city are hereby authorized to furnish Multnomah County such information as may be pertinent to the application and enforcement of the Multnomah County Adult Care Home Licensure Ordinance within the city of Fairview to assure that optimum application thereof is obtained so as to promote the maintenance of the peace, health, safety and welfare of the residents and inhabitants of the city, and in particular the protection of those individuals to which such adult home care program may be applicable. (Ord. 13-1986 § 2)


Chapter 5.55 AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND VENDING MACHINES

(Repealed by Ord. 5-2002)    


Chapter 5.60 GARAGE SALES

Sections:

5.60.010    Definitions.

5.60.020    Limit on number and length of sales.

5.60.030    Advertisement.

5.60.040    Warning of violation.

5.60.050    Exemptions.

5.60.060    Permit not required.

5.60.070    Violation – Penalty.


5.60.010 Definitions.

A. For the purpose of this chapter, the term “garage sale” shall mean any sale, displaying goods for sale, or offering to sell used goods within the city limits by any individual or group of individuals from any private residential property, including but not limited to garages, porches, carports, yards, etc. 

B. “Calendar year quarters” as herein used are defined as: first, January 1st through March 31st; second, April 1st through June 30th; third, July 1st through September 30th; fourth, October 1st through December 31st. (Ord. 2-1988 §§ 1, 3)


5.60.020 Limit on number and length of sales.

No property owner or householder shall hold or conduct more than one household or garage sale on his or her property or at his or her residence in any one calendar year quarter, and such sale shall not be conducted for a period more than four days. (Ord. 2-1988 § 2)


5.60.030 Advertisement.

Such household and garage sales may be advertised only by signs on the property of the property owner or resident holding the sale and/or by radio, television and newspaper advertising. Any posted signs must be removed within three days following termination of the sale. (Ord. 2-1988 § 4)


5.60.040 Warning of violation.

Property owners or householders presumed to be in violation of this chapter shall be served with a copy of this chapter at least 96 hours before any enforcement action is commenced. Such property owner or householder, once so served, shall be presumed to be aware of the existence of this chapter; and any violations thereafter by such person may subject them to the enforcement action without further notice. (Ord. 2-1988 § 5)


5.60.050 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A. The offering for sale of one item by public display with a sign indicating the item is for sale, and the sale of more than one individual item not offered for sale by public display or by signs concerning a sale or place of sale; and

B. Sales commonly referred to as “rummage sales”, conducted by members of fraternal, civic, patriotic, religious, service, charitable or educational organizations. (Ord. 2-1988 § 6)


5.60.060 Permit not required.

No permit, permit fee or notice to the city shall be required for holding such activities as permitted herein. (Ord. 2-1988 § 7)


5.60.070 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm, organization, association or corporation found to be in violation hereof by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00 for each such violation. Each day such violation continues will be considered a separate violation. The municipal court of the city of Fairview shall be considered the court of competent jurisdiction hereunder. (Ord. 2-1988 § 8)


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.05    Animal Control


Chapter 6.05 ANIMAL CONTROL*

Sections:

6.05.010    Enforcement of county ordinance.

6.05.020    Ordinance Nos. 3-1954 and 3-1967 suspended.

6.05.030    City to furnish information.

6.05.040    Keeping of roosters.

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 15-1998 adopts the Multnomah County animal control ordinance as amended by Multnomah County Ordinance No. 909, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. 15-1998 and is available in the office of the city recorder.


6.05.010 Enforcement of county ordinance.

In accordance with the provisions of ORS 190.010 and 203.040, the city of Fairview does hereby authorize Multnomah County, its agents and representatives, to enforce within the city limits of Fairview, Multnomah County Ordinance No. 732, dated September 3, 1992. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1)


6.05.020 Ordinance Nos. 3-1954 and 3-1967 suspended.

The city council does hereby further direct that during such time as the application and enforcement of said Multnomah County Animal Control Ordinance (Ordinance No. 732 as amended to date) is authorized within the city limits of Fairview, that the provisions of Fairview Ordinance No. 3-1954, as amended by Ordinance No. 3-1967, and, except as set forth in FMC 6.05.040, other city ordinances and regulations dealing with the licensing, regulation and/or control of dogs, exotic, wild or dangerous animals or livestock, which may be in conflict with the said Multnomah County Animal Control Ordinance, are hereby suspended and shall not be in force unless and until such time as this city shall terminate its agreement and understanding with Multnomah County as hereinabove set forth. (Ord. 4-2010 § 1; Ord. 8-1993 § 2)


6.05.030 City to furnish information.

The appropriate departments of the city are hereby authorized to furnish to Multnomah County such information as may be pertinent to the application and enforcement of Multnomah County Animal Control Ordinance MCC 8.10 within Fairview to assure that optimum control and regulation of the various animals concerned therein is maintained so as to promote the maintenance of the peace, health, safety and welfare of the residents and inhabitants of the city and the protection of properties located therein. (Ord. 8-1993 § 3)


6.05.040 Keeping of roosters.

Notwithstanding the definition of nuisance in FMC 8.10.020, keeping or maintaining roosters within the city limits of Fairview shall be a nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.10 FMC. (Ord. 4-2010 § 1)


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05    Litter

8.10    Nuisances

8.12    Chronic Nuisance Property

8.15    Abandoned and Discarded Vehicles

8.20    Solid Waste Management

8.30    Private Property Impounds


Chapter 8.05 LITTER

Sections:

8.05.010    Title and area of application.

8.05.020    Refuse hauling regulations.

8.05.030    Penalty for violation of FMC 8.05.020.

8.05.040    Dumping and littering prohibited.

8.05.050    Penalty for violation of FMC 8.05.040.

8.05.060    Departmental enforcement.

8.05.070    Complaint.

8.05.080    Notice of hearing.

8.05.090    Answer – Default.

8.05.100    Hearing.

8.05.110    Review.

8.05.120    Enforcement of fines and costs.


8.05.010 Title and area of application.

This chapter shall be known as the “City of Fairview Illegal Dumping Ordinance”, and may be so pleaded and referred to as such and shall apply to all incorporated areas of the city. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.A)


8.05.020 Refuse hauling regulations.

No person, firm, association or corporation shall transport, carry, direct or hire another party to transport or carry, any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse, or recyclable material, in or on a motor vehicle or trailer, upon a public road in the city, unless contained in such a way as not to cause any part thereof to be deposited upon a public roadway or private property in the city other than that of the concerned party. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.B)


8.05.030 Penalty for violation of FMC 8.05.020.

Any person, firm, association or corporation violating FMC 8.05.020 shall be subject to a civil fine of not less than $100.00 and no more than $500.00 for each such violation. The city may prosecute any violation of FMC 8.05.020 before the municipal court or hearings officer, as provided herein. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.C)


8.05.040 Dumping and littering prohibited.

No person, firm, association or corporation shall throw, place, or direct another person, firm, association or corporation to throw or place upon the private land or waters of another person, firm or corporation, or upon public lands or waters, or upon any public place, any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse or material for recycling, other than in receptacles provided therefor, without such parties’ permission. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.D)


8.05.050 Penalty for violation of FMC 8.05.040.

Any person, firm, association or corporation violating FMC 8.05.040 shall be subject to:

A. A civil fine of not less than $500.00 and no more than $999.00 for each violation; and

B. An award of costs to reimburse the city for the actual expenses of cleanup and disposal caused by the violation, including legal expenses and fees if incurred.

The city may prosecute any violation of FMC 8.05.040 before the municipal court or hearings officer, pursuant to this chapter, or may otherwise prosecute such violation as a criminal or civil offense to the extent permitted under state law. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.E)


8.05.060 Departmental enforcement.

A. Enforcement of the regulatory enactments and policies set forth in this chapter shall be the responsibility of the department of public works.

B. The department shall:

1. Investigate refuse hauling, dumping and littering violations;

2. Issue complaints;

3. Reach settlements;

4. Represent the city before the municipal court judge or hearings officer, except where counsel is necessary; and

5. Collect fines and costs. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.F)


8.05.070 Complaint.

A. A proceeding before the municipal court judge or hearings officer may be initiated only as specifically authorized in this chapter.

B. A proceeding shall be initiated only by the department filing a complaint with the municipal court judge or hearings officer in substantially the following form:

Complaint Regarding City of Fairview Chapter 8.05 Litter

City of Fairview, Petitioner,

v.

___________________________ Respondent(s)

1.    Address of respondent(s):         

2.    Address or location of the alleged violation:         

3.    Nature of violation including section violated:         

4.    Relief sought:         

             Dated

             Signed

             Title & Department

(Ord. 6-1993 § 1.G)


8.05.080 Notice of hearing.

Municipal court judge or hearings officer shall cause notice of the hearing to be given to the respondent(s) either personally or by certified or registered United States mail. The notice shall contain a statement of the time, date, and place of the hearing. A copy of the complaint shall be attached to the notice. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.H)


8.05.090 Answer – Default.

A. A respondent who is served with a complaint and notice of hearing for a violation specified herein shall answer such complaint and notice of hearing by:

1. Personally appearing to answer at the time and place specified therein; or

2. Mailing or otherwise delivering to the place specified on or before the assigned appearance date, a signed copy of the complaint and notice of hearing, together with a check or money order in the amount of the scheduled fine listed therein. If the violation is denied, a hearing will be held on the date assigned in the notice of hearing.

B. If the respondent alleged to have committed the violation fails to answer the complaint and notice of hearing by the appearance date indicated thereon, which shall be no sooner than seven days from the date of the notice of hearing, or appear at a hearing as provided herein, the municipal court or hearings officer shall consider the city’s case as presented and shall issue its final order either declaring a default and levying an appropriate fine and costs or declaring the complaint insufficient and dismissing the case. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.I)


8.05.100 Hearing.

A. Unless precluded by law, informal disposition of any proceeding may be made, with or without a hearing, by stipulation, consent order, agreed settlement, or default.

B. The city shall not be represented before the municipal court judge or hearings officer by city counsel except as provided below. A respondent charged with a violation may be represented by an attorney; provided, that five working days’ written notice of such representation is received by the city so that the city may have counsel represent it. The municipal court judge or hearings officer may for good cause waive this notice requirement in individual cases or reset the hearing for a later date.

C. The city must prove the violation occurred by a preponderance of the admissible evidence.

D. A name of a person, firm or corporation found on rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse, or recyclable material, in such a way that it denotes ownership of the items, constitutes rebuttable evidence that the person, firm or corporation has violated the refuse hauling, dumping and/or littering regulations.

E. The municipal court judge or hearings officer shall place on the record a statement of the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications made to the judge or hearings officer on a fact in issue during the pendency of the proceedings. The judge or hearings officer shall notify the parties of the communication and of their right to rebut such communications.

F. The municipal court judge or hearings officer shall have the authority to administer oaths and take testimony of witnesses. Upon the request of the respondent, or upon his or her own motion, the municipal court judge or hearings officer may issue subpoenas in accordance with the Oregon

Rules of Civil Procedure, which shall apply to procedural questions not otherwise addressed by this chapter.

1. If the respondent desires that witnesses be ordered to appear by subpoena, respondent shall so request in writing at any time five days prior to the scheduled hearing. A $15.00 payment for each of them shall accompany such request.

2. Subject to the same five-day limitation, the city may also request that certain witnesses be ordered to appear by subpoena.

3. The municipal court judge or hearings officer may waive the five-day limitation for good cause.

4. Witnesses ordered to appear by subpoena shall be allowed the same fees and mileage as allowed in civil cases which shall be the responsibility of those requesting the witnesses’ appearance.

5. If a fine is declared in the final order, the order shall also provide that the respondent shall also pay any witness fees attributable to the hearing.

G. Each party shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses who testify and shall have the right to submit evidence on his, her or its own behalf.

H. After due consideration of the evidence and arguments, the municipal court judge or hearings officer shall determine whether the violation alleged in the complaint has been established.

1. When the determination is that the violation has not been established, an order dismissing the complaint shall be entered.

2. When the determination is that the violation has been established, or if an answer admitting the infraction has been received, an appropriate order shall be entered.

3. The final order issued by the municipal court judge or hearings officer shall set forth both findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall contain the amount of the fine and costs imposed and instructions regarding payment.

4. A true copy of the order shall be delivered to the parties, or to their attorneys of record, personally or by mail.

I. A tape recording shall be made of the hearing unless waived by both parties. The tape shall be retained for at least 90 days following the hearing or final judgment on appeal. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.J)


8.05.110 Review.

A. Any motion to reconsider the order of the municipal court judge or hearings officer must be filed within 10 days of the original order or it may not be heard.

B. Any aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final adverse ruling by writ of review to the Circuit Court as provided by ORS 34.010 through 34.100. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.K)


8.05.120 Enforcement of fines and costs.

A. Fines and costs are payable upon receipt of the written settlement or final order declaring the fines and costs. Fines and costs under this chapter are a debt owing to the city and may be collected in the same manner as any other debt allowed by the law.

B. The city may institute appropriate suit or legal action, in law or equity, in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of any written settlement of the department or final order of the municipal court judge or hearings officer, including, but not limited to, its suit or action to obtain judgment for any civil penalty imposed by an order of the municipal court judge or hearings officer pursuant to FMC 8.05.030 and/or FMC 8.05.050(A) and/or any assessment for costs imposed pursuant to FMC 8.05.050(B).

C. Fines and costs collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be credited to the general fund. (Ord. 6-1993 § 1.L)


Chapter 8.10 NUISANCES

Sections:

8.10.010    Title.

8.10.020    Definitions.

8.10.030    Purpose.

8.10.040    Administration.

8.10.045    Notice procedure.

8.10.050    Specific nuisances prohibited.

8.10.055    Removal of animal waste.

8.10.057    Vehicle storage and repair in residential neighborhoods.

8.10.060    Routine and emergency inspection – Authority.

8.10.070    Abatement – General procedures.

8.10.080    Abatement – Emergency situations.

8.10.090    Repealed.

8.10.100    Appeal and hearing procedures – General requirements.

8.10.110    Appeal and hearing procedures – Review of decision.

8.10.120    Abatement by owner – Required.

8.10.130    Abatement by city – Assessment.

8.10.140    Waiver of assessments.

8.10.150    Liens against property.

8.10.160    Repealed.

8.10.170    Violation.


8.10.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “Fairview Nuisance Code,” and may be so pleaded and referred to as such and shall apply within the jurisdictional limits of the city. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 1)


8.10.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Administrator” means the city administrator or an authorized designee.

B. “Council” means the Fairview city council.

C. “Discarded vehicle” means any vehicle on private property which meets at least two of the following conditions: It reasonably appears to be inoperative, wrecked, is in obvious disrepair, has no current vehicle registration plates displayed, or is totally or partially dismantled.

D. “Explosive” means a chemical compound, mixture or device that is used or intended to be used for the purpose of producing a chemical reaction resulting in a substantially instantaneous release of gas and heat, including but not limited to dynamite, blasting powder, nitroglycerin, blasting caps and nitrojelly, but excluding fireworks as defined by state law, black powder, smokeless powder, small arms ammunition and small arms ammunition primers.

E. “Firewood” means wood that is cut to lengths that will fit a lawfully permitted fireplace or wood stove installed on the property where the wood is located.

F. “Garbage” means all animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.

G. “Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any surface that is not authorized by the owner.

H. “Intersection” means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two or more streets or highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one street or highway crosses the other.

I. “Liquid waste” means waste oil, septic tank pumping, liquid industrial wastes or other similar material.

J. “Municipal court judge” means a judge of the Fairview municipal court.

K. “Nuisance” means any annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious condition or practice, excepting noise, causing or capable of causing an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety and welfare; provided, that anything defined as a nuisance by city ordinance shall also be considered a nuisance.

L. “Owner” means any person having a legal interest in real or personal property or any person in possession or control of real or personal property, but excludes any person whose interest is for security only.

M. “Person” means any natural person, association, trust, partnership, firm or corporation, or other entity.

N. “Radioactive substance” means a substance which emits radiation in the form of gamma rays, x-rays, alpha particles, beta particles, neutrons, protons, high-speed electrons or other nuclear particles, but radiation does not include sound waves, radio waves, visible light, infrared light or ultraviolet light.

O. “Rodent” means a mouse or rat.

P. “Rubbish” means glass, metal, paper, wood, plastics or other nonputrescible solid waste.

Q. “Sewage sludge” means residual waste of sewage treatment plants, consisting of digested organic waste and indigestible solids.

R. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a public right-of-way, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

S. “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, whether in solid or liquid form, except wastes produced by the human body, liquid-carried industrial waste or sewage hauled as an incidental part of septic tank or cesspool cleaning service, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, fill dirt, sewage sludge, street refuse, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and used construction materials, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, discarded home or industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solids and semisolid waste, dead animals and other discarded solid materials.

T. “Vector” means any insect organism, including but not limited to flies, fleas, lice, ticks, fly maggots and mosquito larvae, capable of bearing or carrying a disease transmittable to human beings.

U. “Vehicle” means any device which is designed or used for transporting people, goods or property upon a public street or roadway, including but not limited to a body, engine, transmission, frame or other major parts, but does not include a device propelled by human power, such as a bicycle, or a device operated exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks. (Ord. 4-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 2)


8.10.030 Purpose.

The council has determined it necessary to establish and maintain a program for the effective control and abatement of nuisances which constitute a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate that purpose. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 3)


8.10.040 Administration.

A. Enforcement. The administrator shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. An action to enforce the terms of this chapter may be brought before the Fairview municipal court consistent with the procedures set out in Chapter 2.27 FMC.

B. Rules and Regulations. The administrator may adopt rules necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, consistent herewith. (Ord. 4-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 8-2007 § 2; Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 4)


8.10.045 Notice procedure.

A. Abatement notices for violations of this chapter shall be provided in writing, except that courtesy notice of violations may be given in any form of communication prior to any abatement notice.

B. Written notice of violation provided under FMC 8.10.070 shall be mailed or personally delivered to the property owner of record. In addition, notice may be personally delivered or mailed to any property manager, tenant, or other party deemed to have need of notice. Any mailed notice may be sent by regular postpaid mail.

C. Written notice of a violation provided under FMC 8.10.080 shall be mailed to the property owner of record by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or signature confirmation. In addition, notice shall be posted to the subject property. (Ord. 4-2017 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.10.050 Specific nuisances prohibited.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or allow to exist the following things, practices or conditions on any property or within public road rights-of-way adjacent to that property, which shall be nuisances:

1. A pond or pool of stagnant water which emits an obnoxious odor or is a source of vector breeding or otherwise presents a threat to the public health, safety and welfare;

2. An animal carcass not buried, destroyed or otherwise disposed of in a lawful manner within 24 hours after death;

3. Accumulation, collection or storage of solid waste without prior approval of lawful authority, unless the person is licensed thereby to operate a business specifically for those purposes;

4. An abandoned, discarded or unattended icebox, refrigerator or other container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot be easily opened from the inside;

5. Any property, whether vacant or improved, including any building, residence, structure or any accumulation of any materials which may attract or harbor vectors or rodents;

6. Any explosive or radioactive substance as herein defined, unless the possession is authorized by law;

7. Any accumulation of dirt, sand, gravel, pieces or chunks of concrete or other similar inorganic material, which is unsightly and reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood;

8. Graffiti on private property that is not removed within seven days of the date of written notice from the administrator;

9. An open pit, well, quarry, cistern, excavation or other hole of a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more without reasonable safeguards or barriers to prevent them from being accessible to children;

10. Dead or decaying trees and tree limbs that present a safety hazard to the public or to abutting property owners;

11. Any discarded vehicle upon private property;

12. Any vehicle or other personal property such as, but not limited to, a trailer, boat, recreation vehicle or pleasure craft, parked or stored in such a way as to obstruct the public sidewalk;

13. Signs, hedges, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstructions at or near intersections which hinder the view necessary for the safe operation of vehicles;

14. Obstruction to public sidewalks or roadways by trees, bushes, roots, other natural growth, soil and solid waste;

15. Any excavation which endangers the lateral support or causes cracking, settling or other damage to streets, sidewalks, or other public property;

16. Any building or structure which is either vacant or under construction, which is not locked or otherwise secured by barriers or other devices to prevent them from being accessible to children;

17. Signs placed illegally within the public right-of-way;

18. Uncontrolled or uncultivated growth of weeds, brush, poison oak, poison ivy, tansy ragwort or grasses over 14 inches in height which offer vector or rodent harborage, contribute noxious pollens to the atmosphere, constitute a fire hazard or unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of abutting public or private property. Except, uncontrolled or uncultivated growth on public land or designated private conservation areas specifically for the purpose of providing native wildlife habitat shall not constitute a nuisance;

19. Any structure that is contaminated by toxic chemicals or that is in a condition that renders the structure unsafe. Where a governmental agency authorized by law to make the determination that a structure is unfit for use due to hazardous conditions on the property makes such a determination, there is a rebuttable presumption that the structure is a nuisance in violation of this chapter;

20. Maintaining an occupied travel trailer, motor home, camper, or vehicle or trailer modified for sleeping at any location other than a recreational vehicle park licensed under the provisions of the state, except as follows:

Vacation trailers and motor homes may be used by visitors of the residents, and shall be allowed on the residents’ property for a period of time not to exceed 14 days (or longer if approved by director of community development) in any consecutive six-month period;

21. Connection of any electric, water, sewer, gas, or telephone line from any source to a motor home, travel trailer, camper or utility trailer if any portion of such line between the connection at the termination and the point of connection at the source extends over, across, or under any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or portion thereof;

22. Firewood that is not stacked and protected in such a way as to prevent deterioration;

23. Any fence or wall which is not structurally sound and in good repair;

24. Use or storage of furniture which is upholstered or not designed for outdoor use, or equipment or appliances which are not designed for outdoor use, in an outdoor area such as a porch, patio, or yard;

25. Waste receptacles or waste materials placed for collection in a manner not in accordance with FMC 8.20.245.

B. The enumeration of nuisances in subsection A of this section shall not limit the power of the administrator to investigate or declare any other condition a nuisance which is within the scope of FMC 8.10.020(K).

C. Except for notices posted by the city, state or federal government, no person may attach or cause to be attached an advertisement, bill, placard, poster or sign upon real or personal property, whether public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in control of the property. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any city development code regulation of the use and location of signs. (Ord. 4-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2-2009 § 1; Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord 17-1998 § 1; Ord. 13-1993 § 5)


8.10.055 Removal of animal waste.

A. The owner or person having custody or control of any dog shall have the responsibility for cleaning up after the dog by immediately removing and disposing of in a sanitary manner any feces deposited by the dog upon public property or private property of another. “Sanitary manner” means placing the feces in a closed or sealed container and depositing in a trash receptacle. Further, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or person having custody or control of any dog to have in his/her possession suitable equipment for the picking up, removal and sanitary disposal of dog feces.

B. The provision of subsection A of this section shall not apply to a guide dog accompanying a blind person or to a service dog accompanying a disabled person or to a dog when used in police or rescue activities.



C. The provisions of this section are in addition to the provisions found in Multnomah County Code Section 8.10.170 as adopted in Chapter 6.05 FMC. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 11-1998 § 1)


8.10.057 Vehicle storage and repair in residential neighborhoods.

Every person shall maintain the following things, practices or conditions on any property used as a residence unless the practice or condition occurs as part of a lawfully established nonconforming use, or nonconforming development pursuant to the Fairview zoning code:

A. All driveways must be constructed with concrete, asphalt or comparable hard surface. “Driveway” means the private vehicular drive that connects a house, garage, carport or other building with the street.

B. Parking areas, other than driveways, must be surfaced with concrete, asphalt or not less than six inches of three-quarters inch minus or greater crushed stone. “Parking area” means any portion of the property, other than the driveway, that is used to park vehicles.

C. No commercial vehicle which exceeds 8,000 pounds gross weight, 21 feet in length or eight feet in height shall be parked in the driveway or parking area unless it is a vehicle that is routinely on standby and necessary to use under emergency circumstances.

D. Service, repair or storage of vehicles not owned and registered with the state of Oregon to a resident of the site is prohibited. A vehicle registered to a resident of the site may be serviced and repaired under the following conditions:

1. The service and repair is minor in nature. Minor service and repair includes tune-ups, replacement and servicing of oil and other fluids, and replacement and adjustment of minor parts such as tires, hoses, belts, filters, fuses, and similar items. It does not include: body and fender repair and replacement; painting; engine or transmission removal or replacement; or any work using (on a regular basis) welders, torches, or air-driven power tools. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001)


8.10.060 Routine and emergency inspection – Authority.

A. The administrator may enter any property or building at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection or enforcing this chapter. Except when an emergency exists, the administrator shall obtain the consent of the owner or a warrant from the municipal court or other court of competent jurisdiction before entering private property or a private building. When an emergency is believed to exist, the consent of the owner or warrant requirement does not apply.

B. As used in this section and FMC 8.10.070 and 8.10.080, an emergency exists when the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a nuisance constitutes an immediate and active danger to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 6)


8.10.070 Abatement – General procedures.

A. An investigation may be conducted whenever the administrator receives a complaint that a nuisance exists.

B. Whenever the administrator believes there is reasonable cause to believe a nuisance exists, the administrator shall give written notice to the owner of the nuisance’s existence and demand abatement within 10 days from the date of the written notice or such lesser time to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The notice shall contain:

1. A description of the real property by street address or otherwise on which the nuisance exists sufficient to identify the same;

2. A description of the nature of the nuisance;

3. The action necessary to abate the nuisance;

4. The time within which the nuisance must be abated;

5. A statement that unless the nuisance is timely abated, the city may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the property; 

6. A statement that the city may file an action in Fairview municipal court under Chapter 2.27 FMC seeking an order of abatement if the owner fails to abate the nuisance voluntarily; and

7. A statement that the owner may request a hearing before the Fairview municipal court upon written request to the administrator within seven days of the date of the notice.

C. Nothing stated within requires the city or administrator to take any action unless it is in the city’s best interest to do so. (Ord. 8-2007 § 3; Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 6)


8.10.080 Abatement – Emergency situations.

A. In an emergency the administrator may order immediate abatement of a nuisance and give notice of the requirement for immediate abatement to the owner.

B. In an emergency, if required for public health, safety or peace reasons, and in lieu of action under subsection A of this section, the administrator may proceed with immediate abatement of the nuisance. The administrator shall then immediately send written notice of abatement to the owner of the property. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 8)


8.10.090 Uncontrolled or uncultivated vegetation.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2001. (Ord. 13-1993 § 9)


8.10.100 Appeal and hearing procedures – General requirements.

A. Any person receiving a notice under FMC 8.10.070(B) or 8.10.080 may request a hearing by writing the administrator within seven days of the date of the notice.

B. The administrator shall, upon receipt of request for a hearing, notify the municipal court and thereafter shall, consistent with the terms of FMC 2.27.070, notify the person requesting the hearing as to the hearing’s time and place.

C. The person requesting the hearing and the administrator shall have the rights accorded parties under Chapter 2.27 FMC. Any party may be represented by legal counsel.

D. After the hearing, the judge shall issue and mail a copy of the order determining the question to the person requesting the hearing, the administrator and other designated persons.

E. If the municipal court finds a nuisance to exist, the order shall set a date for abatement to be accomplished by the owner.

F. If the municipal court determines that anything removed under FMC 8.10.080(B) no longer constitutes a nuisance or can be released upon such condition as the municipal court judge may prescribe that will eliminate the nuisance, the person entitled thereto may claim it upon paying the expense incurred in its removal and storage as the case may be.

G. If the municipal court determines that there was a wrongful abatement under FMC 8.10.080(B), the judge may order the administrator to make reasonable restitution. (Ord. 8-2007 § 4; Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 10)


8.10.110 Appeal and hearing procedures – Review of decision.

Review of any action of the municipal court taken under this chapter and the rules adopted herewith shall be taken solely and exclusively in the manner set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes Sections 34.010 through 34.100. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 11)


8.10.120 Abatement by owner – Required.

Failure of the owner to abate the nuisance within 10 days as provided by FMC 8.10.070(B), or within the time set by the municipal court under FMC 8.10.060, 8.10.070, and 8.10.080 shall be an additional violation of this chapter. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 12)


8.10.130 Abatement by city – Assessment.

A. If an owner fails to abate a nuisance as required under this chapter, the administrator shall, prior to abating anything made a nuisance under this chapter, file an action against the owner pursuant to Chapter 2.27 FMC and obtain an order therefrom authorizing the abatement.

B. If the city abates the nuisance, an accurate record of the abatement costs shall be kept and shall include a surcharge of 40 percent of the cost of the abatement for administrative overhead and the costs associated with bringing the action under Chapter 2.27 FMC. A billing for the amount of the costs shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner. Payment shall be due to the city within 15 days from the date of the billing. (Ord. 8-2007 § 5; Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 13)


8.10.140 Waiver of assessments.

A. Conditions. The cost of abating a nuisance may be waived for low income, elderly or disabled persons, if upon timely application, it appears by the administrator that the following conditions are met:

1. The owner is disabled or over 65 years of age and, if single, had an income during the preceding calendar year from all sources of less than $7,500, or if the head of a family had an income during the preceding calendar year from all sources of less than $10,000; and

2. The owner is living on the property from which the nuisance is to be abated.

B. Waiver of Assessments – Application Procedures. An application for waiver of nuisance abatement costs shall be filed with the administrator, in writing, within 10 days from the date of notice of the amount of cost of abatement. The administrator may require the owner to supply additional information as evidence that the applicant qualifies under the provisions of this chapter. An application for waiver of nuisance assessment costs must be submitted for each cost of abatement notice sent to the applicant. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 14)


8.10.150 Liens against property.

A. The administrator shall cause a lien to be filed against the concerned property if payment is not made as provided in FMC 8.10.130 or waived under FMC 8.10.140.

B. The lien provided for in subsection A of this section shall be given priority over all liens except those for taxes and assessments and shall include interest at the legal rate accruing from the date billing is sent to the owner of the property.

C. The lien provided for in subsection A of this section shall be foreclosed in the manner prescribed by state law for the enforcement of liens and collection of assessments. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 15)


8.10.160 Summary abatement.

Repealed by Ord. 8-2007. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 16)


8.10.170 Violation.

A. Each Day Deemed Separate Offense. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate violation and the abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty but rather a remedy.

B. Violation – Penalty. Any owner or person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be fined not more than $1,000 for each offense. The penalties set forth in this section are in addition to and not in lieu of civil remedies.

C. Any person convicted two times for the same offense in violation of this chapter shall be considered on the third violation a “habitual offender” and shall be fined no less than $500.00 on the third and every subsequent conviction. (Ord. 8-2007 § 6; Ord. 12-2003 § 1; Ord. 4-2001; Ord. 13-1993 § 17)


Chapter 8.12 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY

Sections:

8.12.010    Title.

8.12.020    Definitions.

8.12.030    Chronic nuisance property prohibited.

8.12.040    Remedy.

8.12.050    Procedure.

8.12.060    Commencement of actions – Burden of proof – Defenses – Mitigation of civil penalty.

8.12.070    Closure during pendency of action.

8.12.080    Enforcement of closure order – Costs – Civil penalty.

8.12.090    Assessment lien created.


8.12.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the Fairview Chronic Nuisance Code. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.12.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Administrator” means the city administrator or designee.

B. “Chief of police” or “police chief” means the chief of police or the chief’s designee.

C. “Chronic nuisance property” means any property where:

1. Three or more nuisance activities have occurred at or near the property during any 30-day period;

2. Four or more of the nuisance activities have occurred at or near the property during any 90-day period; or

3. Five or more of the nuisance activities have occurred at or near the property during any 365-day period.

D. “Nuisance activity” means any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct:

1. Driving under the influence of intoxicants as defined under state law (currently ORS 813.010);

2. Unlawful prostitution procurement activities, prostitution, or related offenses as defined under state law (currently ORS 167.007 through 167.017);

3. Noise as defined under Chapter 9.25 FMC;

4. Assault or menacing as defined under state law (currently ORS 163.160 through 163.190);

5. Recklessly endangering another person as defined under state law (currently ORS 163.195);

6. Assaulting a public safety officer as defined under state law (currently ORS 163.208);

7. Endangering the welfare of a minor as defined under state law (currently ORS 163.575);

8. Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, or sexual misconduct as defined under state law (currently ORS 163.415 through 163.445);

9. Public indecency as defined under state law (currently ORS 163.465);

10. Criminal trespass as defined under state law (currently ORS 164.243 through 164.265);

11. Criminal mischief as defined under state law (currently ORS 164.345 through 164.365);

12. Graffiti-related offense as defined under FMC 8.10.050 and under state law (currently ORS 164.381 through 164.386);

13. Unlawful use of an electrical stun gun, tear gas or mace as defined under state law (currently ORS 163.212 and 163.213);

14. Disorderly conduct as defined under state law (currently ORS 166.023 and 166.025);

15. Riot as defined under state law (currently ORS 166.015);

16. Harassment as defined under state law (currently ORS 166.065 through 166.070);

17. Interfering with peace officer as defined under state law (currently ORS 162.247);

18. Alcoholic liquor violations as defined under state law (currently ORS 471.105 through 471.482);

19. Unlawful manufacture, delivery, or possession of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined under state law (currently ORS 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285, and/or 475.752 through 475.979);

20. Intimidation as defined under state law (currently ORS 166.155 through 166.165);

21. Unlawful discharge of a firearm as defined under Chapter 9.10 FMC;

22. Possession and use of weapons as defined under state law (currently ORS 166.180 through 166.250);

23. Offensive littering as defined under Chapter 8.05 FMC and under state law (currently ORS 164.805);

24. Theft as defined under state law (currently ORS 164.015 through 164.140);

25. Arson or related offenses as defined under state law (currently ORS 164.315 through 164.335);

26. Animal offenses as defined under state law: animal abuse or neglect (currently ORS 167.315 through 167.330); animal abandonment (currently ORS 167.340); animal fighting (currently ORS 167.355); or dog fighting (currently ORS 167.365);

27. Curfew as defined under Chapter 9.05 FMC;

28. Homicide/murder as defined under state law (currently ORS 163.005 through 163.095);

29. Any violation of ORS Chapter 163 not enumerated above; or

30. Any attempt to commit (as defined in ORS 161.405) and/or conspiracy to commit (as defined in ORS 161.450 and 161.455) any of the above activities, behaviors, or conduct.

Any of the above activities will be deemed to have occurred on the property for purposes of this definition if engaged in within 300 feet of the property by any person associated with the property.

E. “Person in charge” means any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to an owner or occupant of property under his or her ownership or control. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.12.030 Chronic nuisance property prohibited.

In addition to any other remedy available by law, any property that becomes chronic nuisance property or any owner or person in charge who permits property to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to civil penalties and closure of the property pursuant to this section. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.12.040 Remedy.

The city may commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for a determination that property has become chronic nuisance property. The court may order any or all of the following:

A. That the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for a period of not less than 30 but not more than 180 days;

B. Impose civil penalties upon the owner or person in charge in an amount up to $500.00 per day for each day the person had actual knowledge the property was chronic nuisance property and permitted or allowed the property to remain so; and

C. Any other remedy deemed appropriate to abate the nuisance. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.12.050 Procedure.

A. When the chief determines that property is chronic nuisance property, the chief shall cause a notice to be prominently posted on the property and mail a copy thereof by first-class mail to both the person in charge of the property where the nuisance exists and to the owner, if different. If the person in charge of the property is not the owner, a copy of the notice shall be sent by first-class mail to the person listed as the owner on the county’s tax records.

B. The notice shall contain the following:

1. The street address and description sufficient for identification of the property; and

2. A statement that the chief of police has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the condition(s) leading to the determination.

C. The chief shall execute a statement setting out the date of posting and mailing of the notice. The failure of any person or owner to receive actual notice of the determination that the property is chronic nuisance property by the chief of police shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this chapter.

D. Concurrent with the procedures set forth above, the chief of police shall send a copy of the notice to the city administrator as well as such other documentation the chief believes appropriate to support their determination and any recommendation concerning closure of the property and imposition of civil penalties. The city administrator shall review the material submitted and may, if it is deemed by the administrator to be appropriate, authorize the city attorney to commence judicial proceedings seeking a declaration that the property is a chronic nuisance property and any such remedy(ies) as are described in FMC 8.12.040 that are deemed by the city administrator to be appropriate. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.12.060 Commencement of actions – Burden of proof – Defenses – Mitigation of civil penalty.

A. In an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property, the city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.

B. It is a defense to an action seeking closure of chronic nuisance property that the owner or person in charge at the time in question could not, in the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, determine the property had become chronic nuisance property or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the finding that the property is chronic nuisance property.

C. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors:

1. The actions taken by the owner(s) or person(s) in charge to mitigate or correct the conditions constituting the nuisance at the property;

2. The financial condition of the owner(s) or person(s) in charge;

3. Whether the conditions constituting the nuisance at the property were repeated or continuous;

4. The magnitude or gravity of the conditions constituting the nuisance;

5. The cooperativeness of the owner(s) or person(s) in charge with the city;

6. The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition constituting the nuisance; and

7. Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.12.070 Closure during pendency of action.

If the city administrator, after consultation with the chief, determines chronic nuisance property presents an imminent threat to the public’s health, safety and welfare, the city may seek to apply to the court for such relief deemed by the city administrator to be appropriate to alleviate the imminence of the threat. In such an event, the notification procedures set forth in FMC 8.12.050 need not be complied with and the city may immediately commence an action with the court. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.12.080 Enforcement of closure order – Costs – Civil penalty.

A. If a court finds that property constitutes chronic nuisance property, it may order closure as set out in FMC 8.12.040(A).

B. In the event the court determines the owner or person in charge had knowledge of the activity(ies) or condition(s) constituting violation of this chapter and nonetheless permitted, suffered, or allowed the activities to occur, the court may impose a civil penalty consistent with FMC 8.12.040(B).

C. The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event that the owner(s) or person(s) in charge fail to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to effect closure shall become an assessment lien upon the property and entered in the city’s lien docket. As used in this subsection, “costs” means costs actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of the property. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.12.090 Assessment lien created.

A. Liens imposed by this chapter shall be collected in all respects as provided for street improvement liens and bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum from 10 days after the entry in the lien docket.

B. Any person assessed the costs of closure and/or a civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the city. (Ord. 3-2019 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 8.15 ABANDONED AND DISCARDED VEHICLES

Sections:

Article I. Abandoned Vehicles

8.15.010    Definitions.

8.15.020    Abandoned vehicles prohibited.

8.15.030    Impounding hazardous vehicles.

8.15.040    Towing and storage liens.

8.15.050    Notice prior to removal – Methods – Contents.

8.15.060    Notice after removal – Method – Contents.

8.15.070    Hearing to contest validity of removal and custody.

8.15.080    Exemption.

8.15.090    Decision.

8.15.100    Failure to appear.

Article II. Discarded Vehicles

8.15.110    Repealed.

8.15.120    Repealed.

8.15.130    Repealed.

8.15.140    Repealed.

8.15.150    Repealed.

8.15.160    Repealed.

8.15.170    Repealed.

8.15.180    Repealed.

8.15.190    Repealed.

8.15.200    Repealed.

8.15.210    Repealed.

8.15.220    Repealed.

8.15.230    Repealed.

Article I. Abandoned Vehicles


8.15.010 Definitions.

As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Abandoned vehicle” means a vehicle left on a street, right-of-way or other public property that has not been driven more than 500 feet for at least 72 hours. “Abandoned vehicle” also means a vehicle left on a street or right-of-way for more than 24 hours and one or more of the following conditions exist:

1. The vehicle does not have a lawfully affixed, unexpired registration plate, or fails to display current registration.

2. The vehicle appears to be inoperative or disabled.

3. The vehicle has one or more flat tires or has missing wheels.

4. The vehicle appears to be wrecked, partially dismantled or junked.

B. “Hazardous vehicle” means a vehicle that is disabled, abandoned, parked or left standing on a road, highway, right-of-way, alley or other public property within the city and that is in such a location or condition as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to people using the road, street, alley or other public property. For example, and not by limitation, the following are hazardous vehicles:

1. Any vehicle blocking public or private rights-of-way.

2. Any vehicle with leaks in gas tanks.

3. Any vehicle blocking fire hydrants.

4. Any vehicle that is parked so that any part of the vehicle extends within the paved portion of the travel lane.

C. “Law enforcement officer” means any authorized law enforcement officer of the city, or other city employee authorized to enforce this article.

D. “Owner” means a person, corporation or association with a claim, either individually or jointly, or ownership of any interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle.

E. “Private garage” means a reputable, private storage yard, garage, or other storage place selected by the city council or an officer of the city designated by the council to make such selection.

F. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 5-1985 § 1)


8.15.020 Abandoned vehicles prohibited.

A. No vehicle which the law enforcement officer has reason to believe is an abandoned vehicle shall be parked or left standing upon the right-of-way of any public street or alley or other public property within the city of Fairview.

B. A vehicle so parked or left standing may be taken into custody by the law enforcement officer and shall be held at the expense of the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. The law enforcement officer may use department personnel, equipment and facilities for the removal and preservation of the vehicle, or may hire other personnel, equipment and facilities for that purpose. (Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 5-1985 § 2)


8.15.030 Impounding hazardous vehicles.

A. Upon discovering a hazardous vehicle, the law enforcement officer may immediately cause the vehicle to be towed or impounded without prior notice to the owner.

B. The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the cost of towing and storing the vehicle. (Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 5-1985 § 3)


8.15.040 Towing and storage liens.

A. A qualified towing and storage operator who, at the request of a city official, takes a vehicle into custody under the provisions of this article shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents for the just and reasonable towing and storage charges, may retain possession of it until the charges are paid, and may have it sold at public auction to satisfy the lien. The lien that attaches to the vehicle and its contents shall be a possessory chattel lien in accordance with ORS 87.152 and shall be foreclosed in the manner provided in ORS 87.152 to 87.212, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section.

B. If the vehicle is taken into custody under the provisions of this article and held by the law enforcement officer rather than by a private garage at his request, the vehicle and its contents shall be disposed of at a public auction, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section.

C. If the appraised value of the vehicle is $750.00 or less, the vehicle may be disposed of in the manner provided in ORS 819.220. (Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 5-1985 § 4)


8.15.050 Notice prior to removal – Methods – Contents.

A. Whenever a vehicle is found in violation of FMC 8.15.020, it shall be the duty of the law enforcement officer to attempt to locate the owner of the vehicle by transmitting the license number or vehicle identification number (if available or accessible) to the state agency responsible for storing vehicle owner and registration information. If the owner is identified, the law enforcement officer should attempt to notify the owner that the vehicle is in violation of city code and must be moved within 24 hours or the vehicle will be towed.

B. Whether or not the owner is identified and contacted, before an officer can tow a vehicle pursuant to FMC 8.15.020, the officer will cause a notice to be placed upon the windshield or some other part of the vehicle easily seen by the passing public.

The notice required under this section shall comply with all of the following:

1. Notice shall be given by affixing a notice to the vehicle with the required information. The notice shall be affixed to the vehicle at least 24 hours before taking the vehicle into custody. The 24-hour period under this subsection includes holidays, Saturdays and Sundays.

2. Notice shall state the following:

a. That the vehicle will be subject to being taken into custody and removed by the appropriate authority.

b. The statute, ordinance, or rule violated by the vehicle and under which the vehicle will be removed.

c. The place where the vehicle will be held in custody or the telephone number and address of the appropriate authority that will provide the information.

d. That the vehicle, if taken into custody and removed by the appropriate authority, will be subject to towing and storage charges and that a lien will be attached to the vehicle and its contents.

e. That the vehicle will be sold to satisfy the costs of towing and storage if the charges are not paid.

f. That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle is entitled to a hearing, before the vehicle is impounded, to contest the proposed custody and removal, if a hearing is timely requested.

g. That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle may also challenge the reasonableness of any towing and storage charges at the hearing.

h. That the owner must request a hearing, in writing, within five days after receipt of the notice pursuant to FMC 8.15.070. Failure to request a hearing, in writing, within five days shall act as a waiver of the right to a hearing.

3. If there is no vehicle identification number on a vehicle and there are no registration plates and no other markings to identify the owner of the vehicle, then an officer is not required to provide such notice and the vehicle may be removed and disposed of as though notice and an opportunity for a hearing had been given.

B. If the owner of the vehicle requests a hearing before the vehicle is taken into custody, the vehicle shall not be taken until a hearing is set and held in accordance with appropriate sections.

C. This section does not apply to a hazardous vehicle. (Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 5-1985 § 5)


8.15.060 Notice after removal – Method – Contents.

A. After a hazardous vehicle has been taken into custody pursuant to FMC 8.15.030, notice must be provided to the owner.

1. Notice shall be by certified mail within 48 hours of the removal.

2. The notice must be sent to the last known owners of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles.

3. The 48-hour period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

4. If a notice is returned as unclaimed or the owner has moved and failed to provide a forwarding address or notify the Department of Motor Vehicles of their change of address, the notice requirement shall be considered met for purposes of this section.

B. Any notice given under this section after a vehicle is taken into custody and removed shall state all of the following:

1. That the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed by the city and the statute, ordinance or rule under which the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed.

2. The location of the vehicle or the telephone number and address of the appropriate authority that will provide the information.

3. That the vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges, the amount of charges that have accrued to date, the daily storage charges, and that the owner is responsible for those charges.

4. That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for payment of the towing and storage charges and that the vehicle and its contents will be sold to cover the charges if the charges are not paid within 30 days.

5. That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to contest the validity of taking the vehicle into custody and removing it and to contest the reasonableness of the charges for towing and storage, if a hearing is timely requested.

6. The owner must request a hearing, in writing, within five days after receipt of the notice pursuant to FMC 8.15.070. Failure to request a hearing, in writing, within five days shall act as a waiver of the right to a hearing.

7. That the vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed by presentation to the city of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and either payment of the towing and storage charges or the deposit of cash security or a bond equal to the charges with the city. (Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 5-1985 § 6)


8.15.070 Hearing to contest validity of removal and custody.

A. A person provided notice under FMC 8.15.050 or 8.15.060 or any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the vehicle may request a hearing under this section to contest the validity of the removal and custody of a vehicle or proposed removal and custody of a vehicle under this section by submitting a request for hearing with the appropriate authority not more than five days from the mailing date of the notice. The five-day period in this section does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

B. The city administrator shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings officer at a hearing under this section may be an officer, official or employee of the appropriate authority but shall not have participated in any determination or investigation related to the taking into custody and removing of the vehicle that is subject to the hearing.

C. A hearing under this section shall comply with all of the following:

1. If the city receives a request for hearing before the vehicle is taken into custody and removed pursuant to FMC 8.15.020, the vehicle shall not be removed unless the vehicle constitutes a hazardous vehicle.

2. A request for hearing shall be in writing and shall state grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes that the custody and removal of the vehicle is not justified.

3. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing under this section, the city shall set a time for the hearing within 72 hours of the receipt of the request and shall provide notice of the hearing to the person requesting the hearing and to the owners of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders shown in the records of the Department of Transportation, if not the same as the person requesting the hearing. The 72-hour period in this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays. The hearing can be set for a later date if the owner or person entitled to possession so requests.

4. If the city finds, after hearing and by substantial evidence on the record, that the custody and removal of a vehicle was:

a. Invalid, the city shall order the immediate release of the vehicle to the owner or person with the right of possession. If the vehicle is released under this paragraph, the person to whom the vehicle is released is not liable for any towing or storage charges. If the person has already paid the towing and storage charges on the vehicle, the city shall reimburse the person for the charges. New storage costs on the vehicle will not start to accrue, however, until more than 24 hours after the time the vehicle is officially released to the person under this paragraph.

b. Valid, the appropriate authority shall order the vehicle to be held in custody until the costs of the hearing and all towing and storage costs are paid by the party claiming the vehicle. If the vehicle has not yet been removed, the appropriate authority shall order its removal.

5. A person who fails to appear at a hearing under this section is not entitled to another hearing unless the person provides reasons satisfactory to the city for the person’s failure to appear.

6. The city is only required to provide one hearing under this section for each time the city takes a vehicle into custody and removes the vehicle or proposes to do so.

7. A hearing under this section may be used to determine the reasonableness of the charge for towing and storage of the vehicle. Towing and storage charges set by law, ordinance or rule or that comply with law, ordinance or rule are reasonable for purposes of this subsection.

8. The city shall provide a written statement of the results of a hearing held under this section to the person requesting the hearing.

9. Hearings held under this section may be informal in nature, but the presentation of evidence in a hearing shall be consistent with the presentation of evidence required for contested cases under ORS 183.450.

10. The determination of the hearings officer at a hearing under this section is final and is not subject to appeal.

D. At any time prior to the requested hearing, the owner or the person entitled to possession of the vehicle may regain possession of the vehicle by posting with the city security in the form of cash in an amount sufficient to cover costs of removing and storage. (Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 5-1985 § 7)


8.15.080 Exemption.

A vehicle that is being held as part of any criminal investigation is not subject to any requirements under FMC 8.15.050 or 8.15.060 unless the criminal investigation relates to the theft of the vehicle. (Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 5-1985 § 8)


8.15.090 Decision.

If the municipal judge or hearings officer finds that:

A. The action of the law enforcement officer in taking the vehicle into custody was proper, the municipal judge or hearings officer shall enter an order supporting the removal.

B. The action of the law enforcement officer in taking the vehicle into custody was invalid, the judge or hearings officer shall:

1. Order the vehicle released to the owner;

2. Find that the owner is not liable for any towing or storage charges occasioned by the taking; and

3. Order the city to satisfy the towing and storage lien.

C. The action of the municipal judge or hearings officer is final. (Ord. 5-1985 § 9)


8.15.100 Failure to appear.

If the person requesting the hearing does not appear at the scheduled hearing, the judge or hearings officer may enter an order supporting the removal and assessment of towing and storage costs and apply any security posted against such costs. (Ord. 5-1985 § 10)

Article II. Discarded Vehicles


8.15.110 Definitions.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 1)


8.15.120 Declaration of public nuisance.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 2)


8.15.130 Prohibited action.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 3)


8.15.140 Police duty.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 4)


8.15.150 Entry upon private property.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 5)


8.15.160 City council hearing.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 6)


8.15.170 Abatement procedures.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 7)


8.15.180 Redemption procedures.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 8)


8.15.190 Low-value vehicle.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 9)


8.15.200 Public sale notice.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 10)


8.15.210 Public sale procedures.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 11)


8.15.220 Assessment of costs.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 12)


8.15.230 Penalties.

Repealed by Ord. 4-2017. (Ord. 1-1986 § 13)


Chapter 8.20 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT

Sections:

8.20.010    Title.

8.20.020    Purpose, policy and scope.

8.20.030    Definitions.

8.20.035    Solid waste license required.

8.20.040    Rules and regulations.

8.20.045    Current licensees.

8.20.055    Recycling collection registration required.

8.20.060    Exemptions.

8.20.065    Penalties.

8.20.070    Licensing and service areas.

8.20.080    Licenses.

8.20.090    Term of license.

8.20.100    General provisions, indemnification, bond and insurance.

8.20.110    Subcontracts for service and transfer of licenses.

8.20.120    License fees.

8.20.135    Rates for collection service.

8.20.145    Ownership of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris.

8.20.155    Suspension, modification or revocation of license.

8.20.165    Restraining orders.

8.20.175    Uncontrollable event.

8.20.185    General license responsibilities and restrictions.

8.20.195    Customer service requirements.

8.20.205    Hours for collection activity.

8.20.210    Miscellaneous provisions.

8.20.215    Collection of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris.

8.20.220    Recycling service.

8.20.225    Yard debris service.

8.20.230    Collection of other materials.

8.20.235    Billing procedures.

8.20.240    Termination of service.

8.20.245    Receptacles.

8.20.250    Missed collection.

8.20.255    Refusal of collection service.

8.20.260    Cleanup on route – Prevention of leaking and spilling loads.

8.20.265    Covers for open body vehicles.

8.20.270    Vehicle and receptacle identification.

8.20.275    Compliance with federal, state and local regulations.

8.20.280    Safety and maintenance.

8.20.285    Compliance with zoning ordinances.

8.20.290    Promotion and education.

8.20.295    Reporting.

8.20.300    Spring cleanup.

8.20.305    Collection frequency.

8.20.310    Collection of extra receptacles.

8.20.315    Disposal of collected solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris.

8.20.320    Access for inspections and delivery of notices.

8.20.400    General customer requirements.

8.20.405    Payment responsibility (customer).

8.20.410    Notification of missed collection or billing errors (customer).

8.20.415    Location of receptacles (customer).

8.20.420    Set-out time for receptacles (customer).

8.20.425    General preparation of materials (customer).

8.20.430    Weight of receptacles (customer).

8.20.435    Putrescible waste storage (customer).

8.20.440    Preparation of recyclable materials (customer).

8.20.445    Preparation of yard debris materials (customer).

8.20.450    Food waste requirement.

8.20.455    Other solid waste (customer).

8.20.460    Disposal of unacceptable solid waste materials (customer).

8.20.500    Dispute resolution.

8.20.600    Penalties and remedies.


8.20.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Solid Waste Management Ordinance of the City of Fairview.” (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.020 Purpose, policy and scope.

Following due investigation and thorough review of the needs of this city with respect to a program of solid waste management by this council, which review and investigation included a review of present practices within the city and those of adjoining communities and the local metropolitan area, staff review and research and input from those professionally involved with the administrative enforcement and development of solid waste management programs, this council does here determine and declare it to be in the public interests of the city of Fairview and does, by this chapter, establish a solid waste management program for the city of Fairview to ensure safe, economical and comprehensive solid waste collection and disposal service for the city, to ensure that rates and charges for such service are just, fair and adequate to provide necessary public service on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis, to promote technologically and economically feasible resource recovery and recycling, and to provide administrative rules and regulations pertinent thereto to ensure the development and maintenance of such programs to the optimum degree possible. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.030 Definitions.

A. “Agreement” or “collection license agreement” means the current agreement to provide collection of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris between the city and a licensee.

B. “Allowable expenses” includes all reasonable costs incurred by licensee(s) associated with the provision of solid waste, recyclable material(s) and yard debris collection services required by the terms of this chapter and all other applicable laws, regulations or orders as now exist or as they hereafter may be amended. Allowable expenses shall be presumed reasonable if, in the context of overall cost for a licensee, such expenses are comparable with the expenses incurred by a preponderance of similarly situated solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection companies in the Portland metropolitan area. Allowable expenses shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Costs associated with the disposal and/or processing of all materials (including recyclables) collected as required by this chapter, including the costs of marketing materials to secondary markets, and all applicable fees;

2. All labor costs, directly or indirectly associated with and necessary to the provision of services required by this chapter, including costs associated with all contracts and collective bargaining agreements, supervisory labor, workers’ compensation and benefits including health care, pension, and payroll taxes;

3. All vehicle, equipment, container, and asset costs (including timely replacement, depreciation and interest expenses), lease costs (of an amount no greater than those that would be charged by an independent third party to provide substantially equivalent equipment), vehicle registration fees, motor fuel, oil, tires, reasonably necessary repairs and maintenance for all such vehicles and equipment to provide the services defined in this chapter;

4. Performance bond(s) and liability insurance premium(s) in the amounts of coverage required by the city;

5. All administrative, management cost(s) and expense(s) allocated to the services required under this chapter including (but not limited to) reasonable compensation, management fee(s), and benefit(s) for officers and employees, payroll taxes, administrative staff, data processing, billing, rent and supplies; provided, that there shall be included in allowable expenses only that portion of management fees and officer and employee compensation and benefits that are comparable to prevailing industry standards at solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection companies in the Portland metropolitan area that are similar in size and operation to licensee(s) and there shall be excluded from allowable expenses only that portion of management fees, compensation and benefits paid by the licensees that are in excess of such levels;

6. Utilities;

7. Training and worker safety;

8. Marketing, promotion and public education costs preapproved by the city;

9. Interest costs on the purchase of equipment or facilities, or loans for working capital but not interest costs which are otherwise an unallowable expense as defined in this section;

10. Property, equipment or facility rental or lease costs; provided, that with respect to any lease entered by a licensee with a “related party,” the lease costs under such lease shall only be included in allowable expenses to the extent that such lease costs do not exceed those that would be charged by an independent third party to provide the substantially equivalent property, equipment or facilities;

11. Costs for collecting and maintaining information directly and specifically required by this chapter, as well as the costs of preparing, producing and printing all reports and information required under this chapter (including the fees and expenses of accountants and other outside advisors), and all costs and expenses of participating in, complying with or otherwise being subject to the accounting and regulatory processes associated with or required by this chapter;

12. Any expense incurred in the collection, handling, processing, storing, transporting, marketing, or sale or other disposition of recyclable materials and any expense incurred in connection with education, promotion and notice of the opportunity to recycle; and

13. Any other expense determined by the city and the licensees to be reasonable and necessary to the provision of the services required under this chapter, and agreed to in advance and in writing.

Allowable expenses as defined above may be provided by affiliates of, or related parties to, a licensee; provided, that they do not exceed the market rate charged by third parties for similar services. If an expense of a licensee is questioned by the city, that licensee must submit proof that the expense is reasonable.

C. “Bulky wastes” means large items of solid waste such as appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches greater than four inches in diameter and 36 inches in length, stumps and other wastes whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods.

D. “Business” means any entity of one or more person, corporate or otherwise, engaged in commercial, professional, charitable, political, industrial, educational, or other activity that is nonresidential in nature, including public bodies.

E. “Business recycling service customer” means any person who enters into a service agreement with a waste hauler or recycler for business recycling services.

F. “City” means the city of Fairview, Oregon.

G. “Collection or collection service” means all or any part of the activities involved in collecting and transporting solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris to an appropriate disposal or recycling facility.

H. “Collection license” means a license granted by the city authorizing a person to provide collection service within the city and to use city streets for such purpose.

I. Collection License Agreement. See “Agreement.”

J. “Collector” means the person or entity who provides collection service.

K. “Compactor” means any power-driven mechanical equipment designed for the containment and compaction of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris.

L. “Compensation” means: (1) any type of consideration paid for service, including, but not limited to, rent, membership fees, proceeds from resource recovery, any direct or indirect provision for the payment of money, goods, services or benefits by tenants, lessees, occupants, members or similar persons; or (2) the exchange of service between persons.

M. “Construction and demolition debris” means used or discarded construction materials removed from a premises during construction, demolition or renovation of a structure (where a city permit has been issued).

N. “Curbside” means a location within three feet of the edge of a public street, excluding such area separated from the street by a fence or enclosure. The “street” may be a public alley if the licensee desires to pick up receptacles from the alley. For residences on a flag lot, or other private driveway, or any private street not meeting the above standards, “curbside” shall be the point where the driveway or private street intersects the public street, or at such other location agreed upon between the licensee and customer or as determined by the city.

O. “Customer” means those generators of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris to whom a licensee or registration holder provides collection service.

P. “Depot” means a facility for transferring containerized solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris from one mode of transportation to another, including a place for receiving source-separated recyclable material.

Q. “Drop box” means a single container designed for the storage and collection of large volumes of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris materials that is 10 cubic yards or larger in size.

R. “Fair market value” means the cash price (or its equivalent in terms of savings on collection and disposal fees) that is at least equal to the cost of collection and disposal of a recyclable material or group of recyclable materials that would be purchased or exchanged between the collector of said recyclable material or group of recyclable materials and the generator of said recyclable material or group of recyclable material. Collection includes type, frequency, condition and extent of collection service, together with the education and promotion for said service.

S. “Fair market value exemption” means the exemption set forth under ORS 459A.075 wherein a source-separated recyclable material must be purchased from the generator or exchanged between the generator and the licensee with a measurable savings in solid waste collection or disposal cost to the generator resulting, in order to qualify for the exemption.

T. “Force majeure” means acts of God, fire, landslides, lightning, storms, floods, freezing, earthquakes, epidemics, volcanic eruptions, riots, civil disturbances, strikes, lockouts, or other industrial disturbances, acts of the public enemy, wars, blockades, embargoes, or acts of civil or military authority, breakage, explosions or accident to machines or other materials, pipelines or materials, governmental restraint, unavailability of a disposal site and any other event which could not with reasonable diligence be controlled or prevented by the party affected by the event.

U. “Generator” means a person who last uses a material and makes it available for disposal or recycling.

V. “Gross revenue” means the gross receipts derived by a licensee from fees collected from customers for solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection services and other services provided in their service area under their agreement, together with net receipts from the sale of recyclable materials.

W. “Hazardous waste” is the meaning defined in ORS 466.005(7) (or any successor thereto) and/or solid waste that is required to be accompanied by a written manifest or shipping document describing the waste as “hazardous waste” or “dangerous waste,” pursuant to any state or federal law, and regulations promulgated thereunder. Hazardous waste shall not include incidental household hazardous waste or small quantity generator waste which is commingled with solid waste.

X. “Household hazardous waste” means any discarded, useless or unwanted chemical, material, substance, or product that is or may be hazardous or toxic to the public or the environment and is commonly used in or around households. Household hazardous waste includes, but is not limited to, some cleaners, solvents, pesticides, and automotive and paint products.

Y. “Licensee” means a person granted a collection license by the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter.

Z. “Medical and infectious waste” is the meaning assigned thereto in ORS 439.386 and OAR 340-93-030(42) and (52), and any successor provisions thereto.

AA. “Multifamily” means any multiple building or group of buildings that contains five or more dwelling units on a single tax lot.

BB. “Operating margin” means the before tax net profit which shall be calculated by the method defined as “return on revenues.”

CC. “Other solid waste” means solid waste materials including, but not limited to, white goods, bulky waste, tires, and medical and infectious waste.

DD. “Person” includes a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

EE. “Placed for collection” means solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris that have been placed by the generator for collection by a licensee in accordance with the terms of this chapter.

FF. “Processing” means an operation where collected, source-separated recyclable materials are sorted, graded, cleaned, identified or otherwise prepared for end use markets.

GG. “Rates” means the amounts of compensation paid by a customer for various levels of collection service of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris.

HH. “Receptacle” means a can, cart, container or drop box used by the customer to contain solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris for collection service in accordance with the terms of this chapter.

II. “Recyclable materials” means newspaper, ferrous scrap metal, nonferrous scrap metal, used motor oil, corrugated cardboard and kraft paper, aluminum, container glass, high-grade office paper, tin/steel cans, yard debris, mixed scrap paper, plastic containers, milk jugs, phone books, magazines, and empty aerosol cans.

JJ. “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating or reconstituting recyclable materials which would otherwise be disposed of in a landfill and returning them to the economy in the form of raw materials for new, reused, or reconstituted products.

KK. Registration. See FMC 8.20.055, Recycling collection registration required, for definition.

LL. “Residential” means a single-family dwelling or a multifamily dwelling with up to and including four dwelling units on a single tax lot.

MM. “Return on revenues” means:

1. The sum of gross collection revenues from solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris operations, plus any additional revenues from the sales of recyclable materials shall be added together;

2. The sum of allowable expenses shall be deducted from gross collection revenues;

3. This will give the before tax operating margin;

4. That operating margin shall be divided by the sum of gross revenue in subsection (MM)(1) of this section. This will give the before tax return on revenues. Expressed as a percentage, the return on revenues shall be approximately 10 percent of gross collection revenues, which is consistent with industry averages for solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection companies.

NN. “Service area” means the geographic areas which are granted to each individual licensee by a collection license.

OO. “Service level” means any type of regulated service provided to customers as reflected in the rate schedule.

PP. “Solid waste” means all useless or discarded putrescible and nonputrescible materials, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, paper and cardboard, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge, useless or discarded commercial industrial, demolition and construction materials, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, discarded home appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid materials, dead animals and infectious waste, as defined in ORS 459.386. Solid waste does not include:

1. Materials defined as principal recyclable materials in OAR 340-90-070, and any others designated by the city, which have been correctly source-separated and placed for collection or taken to a depot by the generator;

2. Hazardous wastes as defined in ORS 466.005; and

3. Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as such materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of fowls or animals. (OAR 340-90-010(36))

QQ. “Source-separated recyclable materials” means any recyclable material separated from solid waste prior to collection.

RR. “Term” means the length of the agreement, as provided for in this chapter.

SS. “Unallowable expenses” shall include the following:

1. All charitable and political contributions;

2. Fines and penalties incurred by a licensee;

3. Payments for services provided by related parties to a licensee to the extent that such payments exceed the reasonable cost that would be charged by an independent third party to provide the substantially equivalent service;

4. Accruals for future unknown regulatory changes;

5. Costs associated with purchase of other companies including, but not limited to, employee stock ownership plan payments, goodwill, amortization of goodwill and premiums on key-person life insurance policies;

6. Principal or interest payments on the acquisition of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection routes; the purchase of equipment and facilities at a price that would be construed to include goodwill or a premium in excess of fair market value at the time of acquisition;

7. State and federal income taxes;

8. Attorney’s fees and related expenses resulting from:

a. Any judicial proceeding in which the city and a licensee are adverse parties, unless the licensee is the prevailing party;

b. Any judicial proceeding in which a licensee is ruled to be liable due to willful misconduct or gross negligence or in violation of law or regulation;

9. Any other expenses defined as “unallowable” and approved by the council.

TT. “Waste evaluation” means an evaluation completed by the city or a licensee of a business entity’s waste management practices, with the purpose of providing guidance to the business entity on effective means to reduce waste, increase recycling, and purchase recycled products.

UU. “White goods” means kitchen or other large appliances which are “bulky wastes” as defined herein.

VV. “Yard debris” means compostable materials including grass clippings, leaves, pruning and similar vegetative materials, but does not include sod, stumps or other similar bulky wood materials, rocks or dirt. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.035 Solid waste license required.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person may collect or transport solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris in the city without first obtaining a collection license. This does not apply to persons collecting or transporting their own solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard debris. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.040 Rules and regulations.

The city administrator or designee may promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the administration of this chapter and to the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris. Copies of rules and regulations issued hereunder will be filed of record with the city recorder and be available for public inspection at all reasonable times. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.045 Current licensees.

A list of the companies currently licensed to collect solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris within the city of Fairview is maintained by the city recorder. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.055 Recycling collection registration required.

A. Except for licensees operating in their designated service area or residential customers who self-haul their recyclable materials, any person wishing to collect recyclable materials in the city shall obtain a recycling collection license issued by the city recorder. To apply for a recycling collection license, a person must submit a completed application form, along with the application fee in an amount determined by the city and as set by council resolution. 

B. A recycling collection license may be issued under the following conditions:

1. If the person is a civic, community, benevolent, charitable, or similar nonprofit organization, a recycling collection license registration will be issued at no charge.

2. If a person other than described in subsection (B)(1) of this section wishes to collect recyclable materials, the fee shall be in an amount determined by the city and set by the council resolution.

3. In order to obtain and maintain a license to collect recyclable materials within the city, a person shall only collect or transport recyclable materials source-separated by the generator for recycling or reuse and purchased or exchanged with the generator at fair market value.

C. Recycling collection licenses are issued for periods of no longer than one year. Approved license holders must abide by the following requirements or face revocation of their license:

1. License holders shall keep the city notified of all collection sites within city limits.

2. License holders shall provide quarterly reports to the city on tonnage collected at all collection sites.

3. Outside collection receptacles shall have a closed top with openings adequate to deposit material, be made of material approved by the city, and be generally maintained in good condition.

4. Outside collection receptacles shall have signage with legible, clean and reasonably sized print that can be read from a distance of at least 10 feet and states: 

a. The name of the collection organization and phone number of the hauler; and

b. A list of accepted material along with preparation instructions located near the opening of the receptacle.

5. Registrants shall maintain outside collection site(s) so they are free of trash, and recyclable materials remain inside the collection receptacles.

D. The registrant shall comply with all of the requirements stated in the city’s recycling collection license application. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.060 Exemptions. 

Licenses shall not be required of the following:

A. Any person transporting or disposing of solid waste products produced by himself so long as he complies with this chapter, other city ordinances, ORS Chapter 459 and appropriate rules and regulations adopted under any of the foregoing.

B. Federal or state agencies that collect, store, transport or dispose of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris or those who contract with such agencies to perform such collection service, but only insofar as the service is performed by or for such agencies. The administrator shall be notified of all such activities.

C. Any person from transporting solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris through the city that is neither collected nor disposed of within the city.

D. Any person transporting or disposing of resource recovering sewage sludge, septic tank pumpings and cesspool pumpings or like effluents.

E. Dead livestock, vegetable and animal solid and semisolid fats and oils.

F. Hazardous waste.

G. Reusable beverage containers as defined by state statute.

H. Construction and demolition debris.

I. Solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris that is produced as an incidental part of the regular carrying on of the business of a janitorial, landscaping, gardening, tree or rendering service, but a person shall not provide collection service for any accumulated solid waste generated by a customer.

J. Solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris that are generated by a person and transported by that person to a disposal site or resource recovery facility. For residential properties of four or fewer living units, the solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris generated by a tenant, licensee, occupant or any person other than the owner of a property, and transported by the owner of that property, are also exempt.

K. Collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards by private charitable organizations regularly engaged in such business or activity, including, but without limitation, Salvation Army, Goodwill, St. Vincent De Paul Society and similar groups.

L. Nonprofit charitable, benevolent or civic organizations from recycling wastes; provided, that such collection is not a regular or periodic business of such organization; provided, that license be first obtained for such activity from the city recorder, and that such license be valid for a period of not more than four weeks; and provided, that said organization shall notify, in advance of commencing such recycling collection, the licensee in the area in which such activity is to take place.

M. If a person (other than described above and other than a licensee) desires to collect recyclable material(s), a license may be issued if the city council determines that the material being collected is not material normally or customarily collected as part of the home or business recycling program, solid waste collection program, or that such collection will not be detrimental to the recycling program. A fee may be charged for such license as established by council resolution. All applicable provisions of this chapter shall apply to licenses granted under this subsection.

N. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require a licensee to store, collect or dispose of or deal with “hazardous waste” as defined by ORS Chapter 459. Nothing shall prohibit the city from withdrawing by amendment to this chapter certain solid waste services on the basis of the finding that such services are not necessary for the implementation of or the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.065 Penalties.

Collecting or transporting solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris without a license or registration shall be subject to civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per day per violation.

In addition to any citation issued or other fines or penalties imposed, if the city administrator reasonably believes that a vehicle or collection equipment, including receptacles, is used by a person to commit the offense of collecting solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris without a license or registration, the vehicle may be towed or the equipment may be impounded without prior notice pursuant to FMC 10.05.020. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.070 Licensing and service areas.

A license to provide collection service for solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris in any portion of the city shall be granted only after a council determination of need for the service. Normally, if one licensee exists, no other person shall be licensed to provide the same service in the same area; however, the determination of need is in the discretion of the city council that in making that determination shall place primary consideration upon the following objectives:

A. To provide the most effective service for the least cost;

B. To avoid duplication of service areas that will cause inefficiency in operation, excessive costs, unnecessary use of energy resources, increased traffic, and greater wear on streets;

C. To provide service to all properties, including those properties in areas of the city where full development has not yet occurred;

D. To give consideration to the licensee and the charges necessary for its service operation so as to promote an efficient operation providing the optimum level of quality service with modern equipment;

E. Cooperation with other governmental units to encourage the development of a high quality of solid waste management; and

F. To give consideration to the public interest and consideration to the future as well as the present needs of the community. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.080 Licenses.

A. Licenses for each service shall be granted by the council on the basis of:

1. Service record;

2. Financial status;

3. Adequate equipment and personnel capabilities to meet current and anticipated future needs; and

4. Good moral character related to collection.

B. At the time of the review, the council may choose to renew a person’s license. If the council determines consistent with the criteria set out in subsection A of this section a person who holds a license should no longer retain it, that person’s license shall not be renewed and the council may then consider application(s) for a license to serve the affected area from any interested person, and award a license for that area based on the criteria stated in subsection A of this section. The council shall also follow this procedure if a license is terminated prior to a scheduled review. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.090 Term of license.

Licenses in place at the time of council approval of the ordinance codified in this chapter expire on March 19, 2000. Council shall consider renewal of these licenses for a term of not more than 10 years. Licenses shall be reviewed by the city every five years and the city may require that conditions be attached to a license or modifications be enacted by a collection licensee, based upon said review. Any requirement for conditions to be attached to a license or for modification(s) to be enacted by a collection licensee shall be subject to the notification and hearing process set forth in FMC 8.20.155. Upon written application by the licensee at the time of the five-year review, the council shall determine whether to extend the license term for an additional five years and thereby restore the license term to a total of 10 years. The council shall make the determination within 120 days from the date of the written application by the licensee and the determination shall be based on the criteria set forth in FMC 8.20.070. If the council determines not to extend the license term for an additional five years, then the licensee shall continue to have the five years that is remaining on its 10-year license term. The council has the right to suspend, modify, or revoke a license in accordance with FMC 8.20.155. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.100 General provisions, indemnification, bond and insurance.

A. Licensees are subject to the exercise of the city’s police power and to such reasonable regulations as the city may, from time to time, provide by resolution, ordinance or regulation. The issuance of a license shall not be construed as a waiver of any local, state or federal law as now or hereinafter enacted, and such licensee shall be subject thereto, if applicable.

B. Bond. A licensee shall, concurrently with his acceptance of the license, file with the city recorder and maintain in full force and effect for the term of said license (or any renewal thereof), a corporate surety bond in an amount established by the council guaranteeing full and faithful performance by said licensee of the duties and obligations required by this chapter. Licensee’s bond shall be subject to review and approval by the city attorney; licensee shall furnish proof that the bond remains in effect annually to the city recorder or more often, upon request.

C. Indemnification. Licensee, by acceptance of license, agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the city from any loss, damage, penalty or other claim on account of or in connection with any activity of licensee in the operation of his solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection business, including activity by any contract licensee. Licensee agrees further in the event suit shall be filed against the city either independently of or jointly with said licensee or its contract hauler for any loss, damage, penalty or claim, that licensee shall, upon notice to or by the city, accept the defense thereof and defend the city against any such action, and in the event of a final judgment being attained against the city, either independently or jointly with licensee or its contract hauler, that licensee will pay said judgment and all costs incurred, including any legal costs which the city may incur as required to protect its interests hereunder or enforce this provision, and to hold the city harmless therefrom.

D. Insurance. A licensee shall maintain, at all times, insurance in such form and with such companies as shall be approved by the city attorney, to cover licensee’s business operation, including each vehicle operated by it. Such insurance coverage shall provide for protection of not less than $1,000,000 for each person, or less than $500,000 for bodily injury due to each occurrence, and not less than $1,000,000 for property damage due to each occurrence. All insurance coverage shall provide for at least 30-day prior written notice to the city recorder in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in said policies. The city shall be named as an additional insured on each policy required hereunder. Copies of all policies required hereunder shall be filed with the city recorder prior to the commencement of licensee’s operations or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be. Licensee shall furnish proof annually or more often if required by the city, that such insurance remains in effect.

E. Nonwaiver. None of the provisions of this chapter including the provisions of this section providing for the posting of surety bond by licensee, for the attainment and maintenance of public liability and property damage insurance coverage by licensee, are to be construed to excuse performance by licensee or any of its obligations or to limit the licensee’s liability under this chapter or otherwise for damages resulting from licensee’s operations within the city. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.110 Subcontracts for service and transfer of licenses.

A. The licensee may subcontract with another person to provide service within its service area upon approval of the city given by council resolution; provided, that the subcontract does not amount in effect to a transfer of the collection license and the subcontracting party agrees to:

1. Abide by the provisions of this chapter.

2. In written application to the city, show how they will meet the four criteria applying to the current licensee as listed in FMC 8.20.080(A)(1) through (4).

B. Licensee shall not sell or exchange service accounts or alter service area boundaries except upon written approval of the city council. The council may consent to the transfer or sale if it determines that the transferee is qualified for a license pursuant to FMC 8.20.070 to 8.20.100, and the proposed transferee submits information addressing the criteria set out in writing in advance of such request. The council may require a transferee to pay a transfer fee established by council resolution. Such sale or transfer granted shall bind transferee to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.120 License fees.

For the privilege of being granted a license, using city streets and other facilities, and to defray the city’s regulatory and administrative expenses, each licensee shall pay to the city a fee equal to four percent of the gross receipts (less drop box disposal revenues, construction and demolition debris collection service revenues), and revenues from the sale of recyclable materials received by licensee from solid waste services conducted within the city. In addition, each licensee may be required to pay additional fees (or provide additional services) as approved by the council.

A. The fee shall be computed and collected on a quarterly basis – consisting of the three-month period ending each September 30th, December 31st, March 31st and June 30th, in each year the license is in effect. Fees shall be paid within 30 days of the end of each quarter.

B. At the time of payment of said fees, the licensee must file with the city recorder a sworn statement of quarterly gross receipts for the period covered by the tendered fee. Such statements shall be public records. Licensee shall maintain adequate books and records, disclosing the gross receipts resulting from the solid waste services conducted within the city and under the license, which books and records shall be open at reasonable times and places for audit and inspection by authorized city personnel or their representatives. The city may require a uniform system of bookkeeping and record keeping to be used by licensees.

C. Deliberate misrepresentation by licensee of gross receipts or failure to keep proper or appropriate books and records shall constitute cause for revocation of the license.

D. The licensee fee hereinabove set forth is in addition to any other fee or tax now or hereafter imposed by the city or any other governmental unit. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.135 Rates for collection service.

A. The city shall establish a rate schedule for all service levels for solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection service to be provided by licensee(s).

B. Rates shall be adopted by resolution.

C. Rates shall be established to the greatest extent practicable on a cost of service basis.

D. Rates shall be adequate to cover allowable expenses and to provide the return on revenue as defined in this chapter, to allow investment in equipment and to ensure quality collection service.

E. The rates that may be charged by a licensee for collection service shall conform to the latest schedule on file with the city recorder. Any rate not set by resolution but to be charged in the city must be approved by the city council prior to implementation.

F. Rates shall be reviewed by the city every two years. Licensees shall furnish financial and other information the council considers necessary to determine the schedule of charges. Licensees may identify information submitted to the city as confidential. Prior to submitting such information to the city, licensees shall prominently mark any such information with the word “confidential.” The city shall treat any information so marked as confidential and shall not subject confidential information to public disclosure except as required by law. If the city receives such a request, licensees will be notified.

G. All books, records, accounts and data relating to collection service operations conducted within the city by licensees are subject to inspection and audit by the city. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.145 Ownership of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris.

Solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris placed for collection shall be owned by and be the responsibility of the customer up until the time of collection. At the time of collection, the solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris shall become the property of the licensee or registration holder for that customer. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.155 Suspension, modification or revocation of license.

A. The city administrator may suspend, modify or revoke a license if the licensee:

1. Willfully violates this chapter or ORS Chapters 459 and 459A or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder; or

2. Willfully refuses or is unable to provide adequate service as defined in the license agreement and this chapter, after written notice from the city administrator. 

B. In the event the city administrator determines that a serious health hazard or danger exists as a result of the act or failure to act on the part of a licensee, the city administrator may suspend the license or permit here granted without a hearing, but shall immediately notify licensee and provide an opportunity for hearing before the city council within 10 working days from date of such suspension, setting forth in such notice the reasons therefor.

1. Upon such hearing, the licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard by the council and the council may then affirm, modify or set aside the suspension ordered by the city administrator and may by resolution take whatever action it deems appropriate to assure compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter.

2. If a license granted hereunder is temporarily or permanently suspended, limited or terminated for any reason whatsoever by the city administrator or city council, the city may take whatever steps it may deem appropriate to assure that solid waste collection service is provided to the residents and inhabitants and properties of the area served by the licensee so affected, including the right to provide, on a temporary basis, such service by the city itself.

C. In lieu of immediate suspension, modification, or revocation of a license, the city administrator may order compliance and make suspension, modification, or revocation contingent upon compliance with the order within a time stated in the order.

D. If a license is terminated and no suitable applicant applies for a license or if a license is suspended, the city may require any licensee of the city to provide service, or the city may provide service.

E. The licensee may appeal the suspension, modification, or revocation of its license in accordance with ORS 34.010 to 34.100 (writ of review). (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.165 Restraining orders.

In addition to all other council authority, the council may issue temporary restraining order(s) enjoining the violation of any of the provisions of the license, the registration, this chapter, or city rules and regulations, and directing the violator to cease an act or acts described in the order. Before issuing a temporary restraining order, the council shall have reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred. The council will not issue an order under this section without first receiving an affidavit containing allegations of the violation. The affidavit shall specify the alleged violation in language sufficient to apprise the alleged violator of the act or acts to be enjoined. The order shall direct the alleged violator to appear at a time and place stated in the order and show cause why the alleged violator should not be immediately enjoined from doing the act or acts specified. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.175 Uncontrollable event.

An uncontrollable event is one that occurs by change of law or force majeure. Upon such occurrence, and with approval of council, all solid waste collection and disposal costs incurred by any licensee for compliance with the law or mitigation of the force majeure shall be an automatic pass-through to licensee’s customers retroactive to the onset of the uncontrollable event. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.185 General license responsibilities and restrictions.

A. Each licensee shall provide collection service for solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris for customers in its service area in accordance with the standards and specifications as set forth in this chapter, applicable state laws and regulations. Each licensee shall furnish all necessary skill, labor, equipment, materials, billing facilities, transportation facilities and related services necessary therefor. Each licensee shall make available for subscription all levels of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection services for which the city sets rates.

B. A licensee shall not discontinue service to its service area or any portion thereof without the prior approval of the city council. Council approval is contingent upon arrangements being made to ensure that there is no interruption of service between licensee’s scheduled date of service termination and the date of service start-up by a replacement licensee. Council approval must be received no less than 90 days before termination of service. Each licensee must give at least 60 days’ notice of the service discontinuation to the affected customers along with information on the new service provider.

C. A licensee may refuse collection service to any customer if that customer refuses to pay for the service in accordance with the rate approved by the city council; provided, however, in no event shall a licensee terminate said service without first giving notice as specified in this chapter.

D. Licensees shall provide for the collection of medical and infectious wastes, as defined by ORS 459.386, and comply with all requirements of ORS Chapter 459 and all rules adopted by the Department of Environmental Quality, the State Health Division, and the Public Utility Commission.

E. Licensees may subcontract with other licensees for the collection of medical and infectious waste with the approval of the public works director.

F. Licensees are not required to collect improperly prepared and separated medical and infectious waste.

G. Unacceptable Solid Waste Materials. A licensee is not responsible for the collection of certain solid waste such as liquid fats, nonpetroleum oils, semisolid wastes, flammable materials, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumping or other sludge, manure, dead animals, and vehicles.

H. Hazardous Wastes. A licensee is not responsible for the collection of hazardous wastes. The licensees shall comply with all federal, state, local and METRO regulations applicable to the collection and disposal of hazardous wastes. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.195 Customer service requirements.

A. General. The licensee shall respond within 24 hours or by the next business day to customer telephone calls and complaints. Both office and on-route staff shall be knowledgeable and courteous in answering customer information requests and resolving customer complaints regarding solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris services.

B. Licensee shall provide collection and disposal of solid wastes from all city facilities, city parks, city sidewalk containers and city activity areas within the licensee’s service area at no cost to the city on a regular schedule. This includes an annual city cleanup and city-sponsored special events.

C. Written Complaints. Licensees shall maintain a written log and respond in writing to any written questions or complaints within three working days (weekends and holidays excepted). The city will receive a quarterly log of such complaints.

D. Hours of Availability. The licensee shall provide telephone service so licensee may be reached by customers from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily (weekends and holidays excepted). In addition, licensee shall provide a message recorder for all other hours.

E. Notification to New Residential Customers. At the time a new customer contacts a licensee to request start-up of collection service, the licensee will inform the customer of:

1. Service level options and rates;

2. Billing procedures;

3. Issuance of recycling bins;

4. Restrictions on the storage of putrid materials for subscribers of monthly garbage collection; and

5. Hazardous waste restrictions and collection locations.

F. Notification to New Multifamily Customers. At the time a new customer contacts a licensee to request start-up of collection service, the licensee will inform the customer of:

1. Service level options and rates;

2. Billing procedures;

3. State of Oregon requirements that all tenants be provided with the opportunity to recycle four or more materials; and

4. The availability of yard debris collection service.

Each licensee shall provide city-approved written information on the proper preparation of recyclable materials to all new multifamily customers within seven days of sign-up.

G. Notification to New Commercial Customers. At the time a new customer contacts a licensee to request start-up of collection service, the licensee will inform the customer of:

1. Service level options and rates;

2. Billing procedures;

3. The availability of collection of recyclable materials;

4. The availability of yard debris collection service; and

5. The availability and benefits of waste evaluations. The licensee will also provide this information to each existing commercial customer when any change is made to the level or type of service provided to that customer.

Each licensee shall provide city-approved written information on the proper preparation of recyclable materials to all new commercial customers within seven days of sign-up. (Ord. 1-2008 § 1; Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.205 Hours for collection activity.

A. Residential and Multifamily Neighborhoods. Any person collecting solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris shall limit the hours of collection activity in predominately residential and multifamily neighborhoods to between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless weather or holiday schedules require extended hours of collection.

B. Commercial and Industrial Areas. Excepting commercial and industrial areas abutting industrial areas, there shall be no limit on the hours of collection activity for any solid waste, recycling, and yard debris materials in predominately commercial and industrial areas. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.210 Miscellaneous provisions.

A. Licensees or permittees have the responsibility of disposing of the solid waste materials they collect; disposal shall be made at approved facilities and the licensee or permittee will obey all laws and regulations regarding disposal and will not make or cause a nuisance in so doing.

B. Licensees or permittees have the privilege of using city streets and alleyways for collection of solid waste materials; all such collections will be made with the least possible delay and inconvenience to the public or individuals.

C. Licensees shall collect all solid waste materials from parties availing themselves of the use of the collection system within their areas when such materials are placed in proper receptacles and located in proper places in accordance with this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted hereunder. The city shall not be responsible in any way for the collection of charges by a licensee, but the licensee shall collect for his/her services in an ordinary and customary business manner.

D. The licensees shall do all things necessary to give the city a good and efficient system of collection and disposal of solid waste materials and shall operate for the common good, benefit, and the health, welfare and needs of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.215 Collection of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris.

Licensees shall collect solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris, provided the materials comply with the preparation requirements and other requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.220 Recycling service.

A. General. The licensees shall provide the opportunity for recycling collection for all persons within their licensed area. Licensees shall collect recyclable materials listed in FMC 8.20.440, provided the materials comply with the preparation and other requirements set forth in this chapter.

B. Opportunity to Recycle.

1. Residential Customers. Each licensee will provide residential customers with weekly curbside collection of all properly prepared recyclable materials.

2. Multifamily Customers. A licensee will provide each of its multifamily customers with adequate receptacles for the collection of four or more recyclable materials. The licensee will provide a sufficient number of receptacles to set up collection areas at a ratio of one area for recyclable materials for every three areas for solid waste, or at a level established or approved by the public works director. Color separated glass bottles and jars are considered to be one recyclable material. Licensees will provide at least weekly collection of these recyclable materials unless an alternate schedule is agreed upon by the customer and licensee.

3. Business Recycling Requirement.

a. Intent. The purpose of this section is to comply with the business recycling requirement set forth in Metro Code Chapter 5.10. A significant increase in business recycling will assist the Metro region in achieving waste reduction goals, conserving natural resources, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

b. Applicability. This section applies to all businesses and business recycling service customers. This section does not apply to businesses whose primary office is located in a residence. A residence is the place where a person lives.

c. Business Recycling Requirement. Businesses shall source separate all recyclable paper, cardboard, glass and plastic bottles and jars, and aluminum and tin cans for reuse or recycling. Businesses and business recycling service customers shall ensure the provision of recycling containers for internal maintenance or work areas where recyclable materials may be collected, stored, or both. Businesses and business recycling service customers shall post accurate signs where recyclable materials are collected, stored, or both that identify the materials that the business must source separate for reuse or recycling and that provide recycling instructions.

d. Exemption from Business Recycling Requirement. A business may seek exemption from the business recycling requirement by providing access to a recycling specialist for a site visit and establishing that it cannot comply with the business recycling requirement.

e. Franchised Hauler Certification. By June 30th of each fiscal year, the franchised hauler will provide certification to the city of Fairview that all businesses within Fairview are in compliance with these requirements. Any business that does not appear to comply with these requirements will be subject to educational and enforcement actions by the city.

f. Compliance with Business Recycling Requirement. A business or business recycling service customer that does not comply with the business recycling requirement may receive a written notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall describe the violation, provide the business or business recycling service customer an opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the notice, and offer assistance with compliance. A business or business recycling service customer that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation. The citation shall provide an additional opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the citation and shall notify the business or business recycling service customer that it may be subject to a fine.

A business or business recycling service customer that does not cure a violation within the time frame specified in the citation may be subject to a fine as set forth in FMC 8.20.600.

C. Collection of Additional Recyclable Materials. Upon approval by the public works director, licensees may collect additional recyclable materials not defined in this chapter as recyclable materials.

D. Processing of Collected Recyclable Materials. The licensees shall transport and market collected recyclable materials. The licensees shall deliver all properly prepared and collected recyclable materials to a processor or broker of recyclable materials, or to an end-use market. Licensees shall not deliver (or cause to be delivered) any collected recyclable materials for disposal unless the recyclable materials are improperly prepared. The licensee should not collect recyclable materials that are visibly improperly prepared at the time of collection. Improper disposal of properly prepared recyclable materials is considered cause for revocation of a license. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.225 Yard debris service.

A. General. The licensees shall collect yard debris materials, provided the materials have been prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter.

B. Processing of Collected Yard Debris Materials. The licensees shall transport all properly prepared and collected yard debris materials to a regional processor. The licensees shall not deliver (or cause the delivery of) any collected yard debris materials for disposal as garbage unless the yard debris materials are improperly prepared. The licensees should not collect yard debris materials that are visibly improperly prepared at the time of collection. Disposal of improperly prepared yard debris materials is considered cause for revocation of a license. Customers that have improperly prepared yard debris will be educated through personal contact or flyer as to the proper procedures for preparing of yard debris for collection. (Ord. 1-2008 § 1; Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.230 Collection of other materials.

A. Other Solid Waste. The licensee shall provide the opportunity for collection of other solid waste materials as defined and provided for in this chapter for all persons within their geographic area licensed by the city. Other solid waste materials include white goods, bulky waste, tires, and medical and infectious waste.

B. Tires. The licensee shall acquire all necessary permits from the Department of Environmental Quality for the storage or transportation of tires.

C. Medical and Infectious Wastes. The licensees shall provide for the collection of medical and infectious wastes or may subcontract with other licensees for this service. In either case, the licensee and its subcontractor(s) shall conform to all rules and laws including, but not limited to, those of the state of Oregon regarding the collection, transportation, storage, treatment and disposal of medical and infectious wastes.

D. Collection Frequency. The collection frequency for other materials shall be as agreed upon by a licensee and their customer and within seven working days of the customer request. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.235 Billing procedures.

A. Billing Period. The licensees may bill customers either once per month or once every two months but shall not bill more than 60 days in advance of the service. Customer payments shall not be due more than 31 days prior to the end of the service period being billed, nor less than 14 days after the date of the postmark on the billing. Licensees may require payment at time of service for services requested by customers that are less frequent than monthly. Licensees may also require payment at time of service from customers whose accounts are overdue or who have demonstrated a pattern of late or nonpayment.

B. Vacation Credit. 

1. The licensees shall give a partial vacation credit to customers who stop service for a minimum period of two consecutive weeks and up to three consecutive weeks, and a full vacation credit to customers who stop service for a minimum period of four consecutive weeks.

2. The licensees will calculate and give vacation credits according to a formula established by the city.

C. Billing Policy. Each licensee shall provide new customers with a copy of billing procedures and shall give the procedures to any customer upon request. If a licensee or customer determines that an error in billing has occurred, the customer’s account shall be debited or credited for the underbilled or overbilled amount if the billing error occurred one year or less prior to the date the error was discovered. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.240 Termination of service.

A. Billing Past Due. A licensee may terminate solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection service to any customer if the customer has not paid a bill within 30 days of the billing due date.

B. Notice of Termination of Service. A licensee shall not terminate said service without first notifying the customer in writing of the intention to terminate service, postmarked not less than seven days prior to the date of intended termination of service.

C. Disputed Billings. The licensees shall not take any action to collect any portion of a bill subject to a dispute until there is a resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.245 Receptacles.

A. General. The customer may provide the receptacle for 20-gallon can and 32-gallon can service levels. The licensees shall provide all receptacles that are mechanically collected, except that a customer may arrange with their licensee to provide a compactor. A commercial or multifamily customer may provide its own mechanically collected receptacles subject to compatibility with the licensee’s equipment and the receptacle requirements of this chapter. All compactors shall comply with applicable federal and state safety regulations and shall be compatible with the licensee’s equipment.

B. Recycling Bins. The licensees shall provide one recycling bin to each residential customer and other customers as agreed to between the customer and the licensees. A second recycling bin shall be provided for free to each customer, upon request. Additional or replacement bins shall be provided to the customer for an amount equal to the cost incurred by the licensee to purchase such bins. In the case of bins missing when a customer has moved out, the licensee may bill the old customer for the replacement cost or require that the bins be returned to the service address.

C. Condition of Receptacles. Receptacles provided by licensees or customers shall be designed for safe handling, nonabsorbent, vector-resistant, durable, leak-proof, and except for drop boxes and recycling bins, provided with tight-fitting watertight lids or covers that can be readily removed or opened. Receptacles must remain watertight and free of holes throughout their period of use. Customer-provided cans should be equipped with a handhold on the bottom and two handles in good working condition.

D. Repair or Replacement of Customer-Supplied Receptacles. The licensees shall take care not to damage receptacles owned by the customer. A licensee shall reimburse the customer for the cost of repair or replacement of a licensee-approved receptacle when the licensee causes damage to a customer’s receptacle, provided the damage is not caused by normal wear and tear and provided the receptacle satisfied the standards for receptacles described in this chapter.

E. Repair or Replacement of Licensee-Supplied Receptacles. The customer shall take appropriate actions to ensure that hazardous materials, chemicals, paint, corrosive materials, medical and infectious waste, or hot ashes are not put into a can, cart, container, or drop box. A licensee may bill a customer for the cost to repair or replace a receptacle owned by the licensee when the customer does not take reasonable care to prevent abuse, fire damage, vandalism, excessive wear, or other damage to the receptacle.

F. Location of Receptacles. Licensees shall leave emptied receptacles in a location that does not obstruct mailboxes, the sidewalk, a fire hydrant, or impede traffic flow or on-street parking. Licensees are responsible for closing receptacles as securely as possible to prevent lids from blowing away or rain from getting into the receptacles. When possible, the licensees and registration holders shall place drop boxes on private property locations.

G. In-Ground Cans. Licensees are not required to remove a receptacle from an in-ground or “sunken” location.

H. Placement and Removal of Receptacle from Set-Out Location. Receptacles and materials shall be placed at the set-out location no sooner than 2:00 p.m. on the day prior to regularly scheduled collection. The customer shall remove each emptied receptacle from the set-out location and return the receptacle to the customer’s yard or permanent storage area within 24 hours of collection.

I. Ownership of Receptacles. Receptacles provided by a licensee are the property of the licensee. The customer shall leave licensee’s receptacles at the service address when the customer moves. Receptacles provided by a customer are the property of the customer. (Ord. 4-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.250 Missed collection.

A. The licensees shall respond promptly to reports of missed collections. A complaint of missed collection received by a licensee from a customer (or the city) that is not due to the late or improper set-out by the customer shall be remedied by collecting the material at no extra charge:

1. By 5:00 p.m. of the same day if the report is received prior to 12:00 noon on the normal collection day; or 

2. Within 24 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) if notification is received after 12:00 noon on the normal day of collection; or

3. At another time if mutually agreed upon by a licensee and customer.

B. The licensees shall pick up collections missed due to hazardous weather conditions as weather and road conditions permit, or the customer may set out the missed collection, at no additional charge, on the subsequent regular collection day. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.255 Refusal of collection service.

A. Hazardous Conditions. A licensee may temporarily refuse to perform collection services where there is a temporary hazardous condition that creates an undue risk to the person providing service, licensee’s collection vehicle(s) or equipment, private property, or the public. Hazardous conditions include overhanging branches, steep slopes, unusual topography, wet or icy ground or pavement, vicious animals, low-hanging wires or basketball nets, poor access to the point of collection, or locations where the weight of the collection vehicle or equipment would damage private roads, driveways, or bridges. The licensee must make a reasonable effort to notify the customer of the reason for refusal of service on the same day such refusal occurs. If the licensee is unable to notify the customer on the same day, the licensee shall send written notice of the reason for refusal of service to the customer. If a hazardous condition exist(s), and the licensee determines that collection service shall not occur that day, the licensee shall:

1. Notify the public works director of refusal of service.

2. Provide a person to receive customer inquiries on the day of canceled service or, at a minimum, leave a recorded message stating the revised collection schedule. If more than one collection day is affected, the above procedures will be repeated.

B. Improperly Prepared Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials or Yard Debris. A licensee may refuse collection service when the preparation of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris does not satisfy the requirements of this chapter.

C. Overweight Receptacles. A licensee may refuse collection service for a receptacle that is over the weight limits listed in this chapter. When a receptacle is overweight, it is the customer’s responsibility to separate materials into additional receptacles to comply with weight requirements. If the customer requests, the licensee will provide the actual weight of the overweight receptacle by 5:00 p.m. on the business day following the request.

D. Improper Location of Receptacles. A licensee may refuse collection service when a receptacle is in a location that does not satisfy the requirements of this chapter.

E. Notice for Refusal of Collection Service. The licensee shall leave a written notice at the time of noncollection when it refuses collection service consistent with this chapter. The written notice shall describe the specific reason for refusing service, the actions needed to resume service, and the pickup options for the materials not collected. The licensee shall leave the notice securely attached to the customer’s receptacle or to the customer’s front door at the time of the refused service. The licensee shall document the date, time and reason for refusal of any collection service.

F. Collection Options for Refusal of Service. When there is a refusal to collect materials, the licensee will provide collection of double the customer’s subscribed service level volume of properly prepared materials, at no additional cost, on the subsequent regular collection day. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.260 Cleanup on route – Prevention of leaking and spilling loads.

A. Licensees and registration holders shall make a reasonable effort to pick up all material blown, littered, broken, or leaked during the course of collection subsequent to being set out by the customer.

B. All solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection vehicles shall be constructed, loaded, operated and maintained in a manner to reduce to the greatest extent practicable, the dropping, leaking, blowing, sifting or escaping of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris, vehicle fuel, hydraulic fluid or lubricants from the vehicle onto private property and public streets while stationary or in transit. Licensees and registration holders shall make a reasonable effort to clean up all dropped, leaked, blown, or escaped solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris, spilled vehicle fuel, hydraulic fluid or lubricants as soon as practicable. Licensees and registration holders will immediately notify the public works director and the Department of Environmental Quality of all significant vehicle fluid spills. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.265 Covers for open body vehicles.

All open body collection vehicles shall have a cover that shall be either an integral part of the vehicle or a separate cover. This cover shall be used while the vehicle is in transit, except while carrying only bulky wastes, such as stoves, refrigerators and similar white goods. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.270 Vehicle and receptacle identification.

A. Vehicle Identification. The licensee shall ensure that all solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection vehicles bear a METRO identification tag and clearly identify the licensee’s name, telephone number, and vehicle number prominently and conspicuously on both sides of the vehicle.

B. Receptacle Identification. The licensee shall ensure that all of its containers, drop boxes and compactors are clearly identified by displaying the licensee’s name and telephone number prominently and conspicuously. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.275 Compliance with federal, state and local regulations.

Licensees and registration holders shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to driving, transportation, collection, disposal and processing of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.280 Safety and maintenance.

All collection equipment must be maintained and operated in compliance with all local, federal and state statutes, ordinances, and regulations including compliance with regulations related to the safety of the collection crew and the public. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.285 Compliance with zoning ordinances.

Facilities for storage, maintenance, and parking of any vehicles or other equipment shall comply with all applicable zoning ordinances and all other applicable local, federal and state statutes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)




8.20.290 Promotion and education.

The licensees shall participate in city-directed promotion and education efforts. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.295 Reporting.

In addition to the financial reports required by FMC 8.20.135(F), the licensees shall provide to the public works director:

A. A quarterly report listing the quantities of recyclable materials collected from Fairview customers during the previous period; the locations to which these materials were delivered for processing or remanufacturing; number of customer accounts; and other information as requested. The report shall be submitted on a form provided or approved by the city.

B. A quarterly report listing the names and addresses of commercial customers that were offered waste evaluations during the reported period and that received waste evaluations from the licensee during the reported month. The report shall be submitted on a form provided or approved by the city.

C. A quarterly report on recycling activities. The report shall contain detailed information on education and promotion activities, worksheets on collection and disposal, and other information as required by the city. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.300 Spring cleanup.

Each spring, the city hosts spring cleanup events; each licensee shall provide support for these events and assist in these activities to the maximum extent possible. Support and assistance shall include, but are not limited to, one-time collection and disposal of as many as five extra bags of garbage from each residential customer at no extra charge; providing staffing, equipment and/or services for special collection events; and promoting events at no cost to the city. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.305 Collection frequency.

A. General. The licensees shall be responsible for the scheduling of all solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection services.

B. Residential Customers. The regular collection frequency for residential solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection service shall be weekly except for materials defined as bulky wastes, unless a customer subscribes to monthly service.

C. Commercial and Multifamily Customers. The collection frequency for commercial and multifamily solid waste collection service shall be not less than weekly and as agreed upon by a licensee and customer. The collection frequency for compactors may be up to, but not exceeding, every 14 days. Collection of recyclable materials may occur less frequently than weekly if agreed upon by a licensee and customer.

D. Special Collection of Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials or Yard Debris. Each licensee shall provide occasional or special collection of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris on request by the customer at a fee approved by the city for such collections. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.310 Collection of extra receptacles.

Licensee(s) shall collect from residential customers occasional extra receptacles of solid waste set at the curb as an “extra” beyond a customer’s subscribed service level. The licensees may charge the fee established by the city for such “extras,” except in cases of missed collections that are the fault of a licensee. The licensees may require the customer to give 24 hours’ prior notification of an extra set-out that would require extraordinary time, labor, or equipment, or if the customer has a record of nonpayment of charges for extras. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.315 Disposal of collected solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris.

Each licensee shall dispose of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collected within their franchised geographic area at city or METRO facilities. The licensee shall not mix solid waste for disposal with any properly prepared, source-separated recyclable materials or yard debris. The licensees shall not dispose of any materials that have been source separated pursuant to state law. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.320 Access for inspections and delivery of notices.

The licensee shall make all company premises, facilities and records related to their solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection services (including, but not limited to, offices, storage areas, nonfinancial records, records pertaining to the origin of any solid waste collected by the licensee, receipts for sale or delivery of collected recyclable materials, customer lists, and all records related to vehicle maintenance and safety which are required under PUC motor carrier requirements and regulations and Chapter 767 of the Oregon Statutes) available for inspection by city employees within 24 hours of notice by telephone. Such inspections are only for purposes of enforcing this chapter, and are limited to normal business hours. During normal business hours, licensee(s) shall make all company premises and facilities accessible to city employees for delivery of written notices. Collection vehicles must be accessible for inspections during the normal operating hours, in addition to normal business hours. Where receptacles are stored in the public right-of-way or when the city is inspecting a situation where the licensee is allegedly disposing recyclables or yard debris with solid waste, the need for 24-hour notice does not apply to inspection of receptacles or vehicles. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.400 General customer requirements.

A. All residential, multifamily and commercial properties in the city shall provide for collection of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris in accordance with this chapter.

B. The owner of any residential or multifamily dwelling complex who rents, leases or lets dwelling units for human habitation shall:

1. Subscribe to and pay for collection service with the licensee on behalf of his/her tenants or, if the dwelling complex contains four or fewer units, self-haul solid waste from tenants to a METRO-approved disposal facility;

2. Provide a sufficient number of receptacles of adequate size to prevent the overflow of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris from occurring. Receptacles shall be placed in a location accessible to all dwelling units;

3. Provide for sufficiently frequent, but at least weekly, collection of solid waste and recyclable materials, except for compactors, which shall be collected at least every 14 days; and

4. If the dwelling complex has four or fewer units and the owner is self-hauling tenants’ solid waste, provide for the same level and frequency of collection of source-separated recyclable materials and yard debris as are required of licensees serving residential customers. Upon request by the city, the owner shall provide proof of compliance with this requirement. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.405 Payment responsibility (customer).

A. Responsible Party. Any person who receives service shall be responsible for payment of said service. Special rules for tenant occupied residential dwellings are provided in FMC 8.20.400.

B. Missed Collections. A customer may not deduct the cost of past unreported missed collections from the customer’s service bills.

C. Vacation Credit. The customer is responsible for requesting a vacation credit from the licensee. The customer may request a vacation credit to stop service for a minimum period of two consecutive weeks and must give at least 48 hours’ advance notice to the licensee of the request for service suspension.

1. A customer shall receive a partial vacation credit if service is stopped for a minimum period of two consecutive weeks and up to three consecutive weeks, and a full vacation credit if service is stopped for a minimum period of four consecutive weeks.

2. The licensees will calculate and give vacation credits according to a formula approved by the city. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.410 Notification of missed collection or billing errors (customer).

The customer shall promptly notify the licensee about a missed collection or billing error. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.415 Location of receptacles (customer).

A. General. The customer shall place receptacles in a location that does not obstruct mailboxes, water meters, the sidewalk, fire hydrants, driveways, or impede traffic flow or on-street parking. The customer shall provide for reasonable vertical clearance for receptacle(s) picked up away from the curbside or roadside.

B. Residential Service. Receptacles must be placed at the curbside. Special placement arrangements for mobility-impaired customers, or those whose lots are not physically configured to allow curbside placement, may be made by agreement between a customer and licensee.

C. Multifamily Customers. 

1. General. The customer shall set solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris receptacles at a location that is readily accessible and safe to empty or load, that does not require a licensee to go up and down stairs, and that is agreed upon by the licensee and the customer.

2. Opportunity to Recycle. The owner of any multifamily complex with five or more dwelling units shall provide tenants with separate location(s) for receptacles or depots for the collection of four or more types of source-separated recyclable materials. Color separated glass bottles and jars are considered to be one recyclable material.

3. Number of Collection Areas. In order to ensure that tenants are provided with a convenient opportunity to recycle, the owner of any multifamily complex with five or more dwelling units will establish collection areas at a ratio of one area for recyclable materials for every three areas for solid waste, or at a level established or approved by the city.

D. Commercial. The customer shall set solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris receptacles at a location that is readily accessible and safe to empty or load, that does not require a licensee to go up and down stairs, and that is agreed upon by the licensee and the customer.

E. Location of Roll Carts. The customer shall place roll carts at the curbside, or roadside, or at such other location agreed upon by the customer and their licensee.

F. Drop Boxes. When possible, the customer should arrange for the licensee to place drop boxes on private property locations.

G. Location of Compactors. The customer shall place compactors at a location that protects the privacy, safety, and security of customers, that provides access needed to prevent unnecessary physical and legal risk to the licensee, and that is agreed upon by the customer and their licensee. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.420 Set-out time for receptacles (customer).

The customer is responsible for proper placement of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris receptacles by 6:00 a.m. on the customer’s designated collection day. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.425 General preparation of materials (customer).

The customer shall place solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris safely and securely in the receptacles to prevent lightweight materials from blowing away prior to and while being placed into the collection vehicle or receptacle. The customer shall load the contents of a receptacle in such a manner that they fall freely from the receptacle when emptied by a licensee. A licensee shall not be responsible for digging the contents out of a receptacle. The customer shall not overfill a can, cart, or container so that the lid cannot be securely closed. The customer is responsible for closing the receptacle as securely as possible to prevent the lid or materials from blowing away or rain from getting into the receptacle. The customer shall bag cold ashes, animal wastes, kitty litter and other fine materials separately from other solid waste. The customer may dispose of these materials in the solid waste receptacle. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.430 Weight of receptacles (customer).

A. Cans and Carts. The customer shall limit the weight of a receptacle and its contents to the maximum weights listed as follows:

	Receptacle Type/Capacity	Maximum Weight

	20-gallon can	35 lbs.

	32-gallon can	60 lbs.

	35-gallon/40-gallon roll cart	60 lbs.

	60-gallon roll cart	120 lbs.

	90-gallon roll cart	145 lbs.

B. Containers and Drop Boxes. The weight of material put into a container or drop box, whether compacted or not, shall not exceed the lifting capacity of that licensee’s equipment nor shall the weight put the licensee over the weight limit for the loaded vehicle. The licensees shall furnish their customers with information concerning limitations on their equipment, upon request. A licensee is not required to collect containers exceeding 300 pounds gross loaded contents per loose cubic yard; but if an overweight container is collected, the licensee may charge the customer for disposal costs on the excess over 300 pounds. If drop boxes are overloaded to exceed the weight limit for a loaded vehicle, the customer shall be charged for any fine resulting from an overweight ticket. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.435 Putrescible waste storage (customer).

The customer shall not store putrescible materials in a receptacle in excess of seven days. The customer shall ensure that said materials are removed from the premises at regular intervals not to exceed the seven days. An exemption may be made to this rule for the storage of putrescible materials in a compactor that is totally sealed, nonleaking and nonodorous. Putrescibles stored in such a compactor may be stored for no more than 14 days. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.440 Preparation of recyclable materials (customer).

A. Commercial and Multifamily Customers. Recyclables from commercial and multifamily customers shall be prepared in accordance with city-approved instructions provided by the licensees.

B. Residential Customers. The customer may include the following recyclable materials in recycling receptacles and shall separate and prepare these materials as outlined below:

1. Aerosol Cans. Cans must be completely empty. Do not crush or flatten. Remove all paper labels and plastic lids. Leave nozzle buttons in place. Cans may be placed with steel (tin) cans or in a separate brown paper bag.

2. Aluminum. Include aluminum cans, food trays, and foil. Remove all organic material, flatten, and place in a brown paper bag.

3. Corrugated Cardboard and Brown Paper Bags. Flatten and securely tie into bundles with string or twine. Limit the size of any single piece or bundle to 36 inches in any direction.

4. Glass Bottles and Jars. Remove lids and rinse containers. Sort by color (brown, clear and green) and place in separate brown paper bags. Do not include broken glass, drinking glasses, cooking ware, plate glass, safety glass, light bulbs, ceramics, and nonglass materials. (Metal lids may be included with steel cans.)

5. Magazines. Place in brown paper bag or securely tie into bundles with string or twine. Include magazines and catalogs. Do not contaminate with other materials or other types of paper. 

6. Motor Oil. Place in a clear leak-proof, unbreakable plastic container of not more than one gallon each, with a screw-on cap. Do not include other fluids.

7. Newspapers. Place in brown paper bags or securely tie into bundles with string or twine. Include anything that came with the newspaper except for product samples or plastic bags or wrapping. Do not include other types of paper.

8. Plastic Bottles and Jugs. Include any type of plastic bottle with a neck smaller than the base. Remove lids, caps and pumps, rinse out, flatten, and place in a brown paper bag. Do not include motor oil, pesticide, or other hazardous material bottles. No tubs, bags, toys or other types of plastic.

9. Scrap Metal. Remove all nonmetal parts from the scrap metal and place the scrap metal in a brown paper bag or bundle. Limit any single piece or bundle to 30 inches in any direction and 30 pounds. Do not include appliances, car parts, bicycles or lead batteries.

10. Scrap Paper. Place in brown paper bags. Includes opened unwanted mail, envelopes, paper egg cartons, cereal and shoe boxes, and wrapping paper. Do not include foil, waxy or plastic paper, food contaminated paper or any paper type listed above.

11. Steel (Tin) Cans. Remove labels, rinse, remove both ends if possible, flatten and place in a brown paper bag. May include steel can ends and jar/bottle lids. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.445 Preparation of yard debris materials (customer).

A. Receptacles. The customer may place yard debris in 32-gallon cans or carts, in “kraft” type paper bags, or in bundles. The customer must securely tie bundles with string or twine to support the bundle when lifted. Bundles may be no greater than 48 inches in length and 18 inches in diameter. The customer shall not use plastic bags to contain yard debris. The customer may contract with the licensee for use of a 60-gallon roll cart for the collection of yard debris.

B. Acceptable Materials. The customer is responsible for including only those materials that meet the definition of yard debris provided in this chapter. “Yard debris” means materials that include clippings, leaves, prunings of no greater than four inches in diameter and 48 inches in length and other similar vegetative waste generated from

landscaping activities, but does not include sod, stumps, or similar bulky wood materials, rock, or dirt.

C. Weight of Receptacles. The customer shall limit the weight of a receptacle and its contents to the maximum weights listed as follows:

	Receptacle Type/Capacity	Maximum Weight

	Bundled yard debris	60 lbs.

	“Kraft” paper bag (30-gallon)	45 lbs.

	32-gallon can	60 lbs.

	60-gallon roll cart	120 lbs.

D. Labeling of Receptacles. The customer is responsible to mark all rigid yard debris receptacles with a “yard debris only” sticker provided by the licensee. The “yard debris only” sticker needs to be clearly visible from the street. Bags containing yard debris must be clearly identifiable as such from the street. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.450 Food waste requirement.

A. Applicability. This section applies to all covered businesses.

B. A “covered business” is a business that cooks, assembles, processes, serves, or sells food or does so as service providers for other enterprises. 

Covered businesses subject to the business food waste requirement include but are not limited to:

Cafeterias and buffets;

Caterers;

Colleges and universities*; 

Correctional facilities;

Drinking places*;

Elementary and secondary schools*;

Food product manufacturing;

Food service contractors;

Full service restaurants;

Grocery retail;

Grocery wholesale;

Hospitals*;

Hotels*;

Limited service restaurants;

Nursing and residential care*;

Retirement and assisted living*;

Specialty food markets;

Warehouse clubs.

*Only those with full-service restaurants or on-site food preparation or service are subject to this requirement. 

C. Business Food Waste Requirement.

1. Covered businesses must separate food waste from all other solid waste for collection. “Food waste” means waste from fruits, vegetables, meats, dairy products, fish, shellfish, nuts, seeds, grains, coffee grounds, and other food that results from the distribution, storage, preparation, cooking, handling, selling or serving of food for human consumption. “Food waste” includes but is not limited to excess, spoiled or unusable food and includes inedible parts commonly associated with food preparation such as pits, shells, bones, and peels. “Food waste” does not include liquids or large amounts of oils and meats which are collected for rendering, fuel production or other nondisposal applications, or any food fit for human consumption that has been set aside, stored properly and is accepted for donation by a charitable organization and any food collected to feed animals in compliance with applicable regulations. 

2. Covered businesses must collect food waste that is controlled by the business, agents, and employees. This requirement does not apply to food wastes controlled by customers or the public. At its discretion, a business may also collect food waste from customers or the public but must ensure that food wastes are free of nonfood items. K-12 schools may also include student-generated food waste from school cafeteria meals but must ensure that food wastes are free of nonfood items. 

3. Covered businesses must have correctly labeled and easily identifiable receptacles for internal maintenance or work areas where food waste may be collected, stored, or both.

4. Covered businesses must post accurate signs where food waste is collected, stored, or both that identify the materials that the covered business must source separate. 

5. Owners or managers of single- or multi-tenant buildings containing covered businesses must allow or otherwise enable the provision of food waste collection service to lessees or occupants subject to the business food waste requirement.

D. Compliance Timeline. Covered businesses must comply with the food waste requirement as determined by the quantity of food waste they generate per week, on average. Implementation will begin with business group 1 and progress to the other groups according to the dates noted below. Covered businesses that demonstrate they generate less than 250 pounds per week of food waste are not subject to this requirement:

	1.	Business Group 1

	March 31, 2020 – March 31, 2021

	≥ 0.5 ton (1,000 pounds) per week food waste generated.

	2.	Business Group 2

	March 31, 2021 – Sept. 30, 2022 

	≥ 0.25 ton (500 pounds) per week food waste generated.

	3.	Business Group 3 

	Sept. 30, 2022 – Sept. 30, 2023 

	≥ 0.125 ton (250 pounds) per week food waste generated and elementary and secondary schools.

E. Temporary Compliance Waivers to Covered Businesses. A covered business may seek a temporary (12-month) waiver from the business food waste requirement by providing access to a recycling specialist for a site visit and demonstrating that the covered business cannot comply with the business food waste requirement. Businesses must agree to periodic waiver verification site visits to determine if conditions that warrant the waiver are still in place and cannot be remedied in accordance with waiver criteria.

F. Enforcement of the Business Food Waste Requirement.

1. A covered business that does not comply with the business food waste requirement may receive a written notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance will describe the violation, provide the covered business an opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the notice, and offer assistance with compliance. 

2. A covered business that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation. The citation will provide an additional opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the citation and will notify the covered business that it may be subject to a fine.

3. A covered business that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the citation may be subject to a fine per FMC 1.01.090. (Ord. 7-2019 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 1-2008 § 1; Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.455 Other solid waste (customer).

A. Set Out. The customer shall set other solid waste materials out at the time and location agreed upon with their licensee.

B. Preparation of Materials.

1. Medical and Infectious Wastes. The customer shall place medical and infectious wastes in appropriate receptacles. The customer shall not place medical and infectious waste materials into a receptacle for collection with solid waste, recycling, or yard debris materials. The customer should contact their licensee for information on proper disposal options.

2. Other Wastes. The customer is responsible to prepare other wastes as agreed upon with their licensee. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.460 Disposal of unacceptable solid waste materials (customer).

The customer shall not place unacceptable materials in solid waste receptacles. Unacceptable materials include: oils, fats and other liquids generated by commercial entities; semisolid wastes; hazardous wastes; and flammable materials. The customer should contact their licensee or METRO for information on proper disposal options. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.500 Dispute resolution.

The licensees shall have a written policy for resolving disputed billings. The licensees shall provide a copy of disputed billing policies to the city for review and approval. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


8.20.600 Penalties and remedies.

A. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day or portion of a day such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense and violation and is punishable accordingly.

B. In addition to the penalties described above, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and the city may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or other appropriate legal relief to temporarily or permanently enjoin or abate such violation.

C. The remedies provided in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other penalties and remedies available to the city under any other ordinance or law. (Ord. 6-2002 § 1)


Chapter 8.30 PRIVATE PROPERTY IMPOUNDS

Sections:

8.30.010    General provisions.

8.30.020    Definitions.

8.30.030    Conditions.

8.30.040    Prohibitions.

8.30.050    Photographs.

8.30.060    Offer transportation assistance to vehicle owner/owner’s agent.

8.30.070    Animals in towed vehicles.

8.30.080    Notification following the tow.

8.30.090    Notification of release.

8.30.100    Release at scene.

8.30.110    Regulations.

8.30.120    Predatory tow practices.

8.30.125    Towing and storage rates.

8.30.130    Penalty.

8.30.140    Citizen complaints.


8.30.010 General provisions.

A. Title. This chapter shall be known as the Fairview private property impound code.

B. Purpose. The purpose of the private property impound (PPI) code is to require that towing from private parking facilities be performed safely and at a reasonable price. Because towing from private parking facilities affects city residents and visitors, regulation is necessary to ensure that the public safety and convenience are protected.

C. Conformity to State Laws. The PPI code shall be construed in conformity with the laws and regulations of the State of Oregon Motor Vehicle Code regarding towing from private property.

D. Savings Clause. If any provision of the PPI code is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable, such holding shall not affect the validity, legality and enforceability of any other provision of the PPI code. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.020 Definitions.

A. “Owner’s agent” means a person bearing documentation from the registered owner officially authorizing them to possess or operate the vehicle.

B. “Private parking facility” means any property used for motor vehicle parking at which the property owner or manager restricts or reserves parking, including, but not limited to, mobile home parks, apartment complexes, private gated communities and business or shopping centers or malls.

C. “Private parking facility owner” means the owner, operator, lessee, manager or other person(s) in lawful possession of a private parking facility, or any designated agent of the private parking facility owner.

D. “Private property impound(s)” or “PPI” means the impoundment of a vehicle from a private parking facility at the request of the property owner, operator, lessee, manager or person in lawful possession of the private property facility, without the prior consent of the vehicle’s registered owner.

E. “Release at scene fee” or “RAS fee” means the fee allowed to be charged when a vehicle owner/owner’s agent returns before the PPI tower has departed in tow. Not applicable until the hookup is complete and tow truck is in motion.

F. “Temper fee” means an additional charge assessed by a tow driver when someone uses offensive language or is perceived as aggressive.

G. “Towing” means to draw or pull along a vehicle by means of a tow truck or car carrier.

H. “Towing firm” or “tower” means any entity whose business includes the towing of motor vehicles from private parking facilities and the subsequent storage of such towed vehicles.

I. “Vehicle owner” means the person registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles as the owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.030 Conditions.

All PPI towers operating within the city of Fairview shall:

A. Perform all PPI tows in a safe manner, taking care not to cause damage to the person or property of others while towing or storing a vehicle; and

B. Practice courtesy and professionalism when dealing with police, and persons redeeming or seeking to redeem a towed vehicle; and

C. Cooperate fully with any police agency to facilitate processing of any PPI towed vehicle identified as a possible stolen vehicle; and

D. Be considered in possession of any vehicle towed under this chapter, and therefore entitled to charge a release at scene fee, when the hookup is complete and the tow truck has begun towing the motor vehicle by engaging the tow truck’s transmission and moving forward. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.040 Prohibitions.

PPI towers operating within the city of Fairview under this chapter shall not:

A. Require any vehicle owner/owner’s agent to make any statement or sign any document promising not to dispute validity of the tow or fees assessed or relieving the PPI tower from responsibility for the condition of the vehicle or its contents;

B. Solicit PPI towing business by means of payment of a gratuity, commission or any other consideration to the private property owner, operator, manager or employee;

C. Remove a vehicle from a private parking facility unless the hookup has been completed and all safety equipment has been attached;

D. Use predatory tow practices, as described in FMC 8.30.120;

E. Charge or assess a temper fee; or

F. Charge fees in excess of those in FMC 8.30.125. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.050 Photographs.

Prior to performing private property facilities impound, the PPI tower shall photograph the vehicle to be towed and the parking facility signage. Such photographs shall illustrate the conditions of the vehicle’s location that warrant such an impound, and be made available upon request by the police chief or designee, pursuant to a complaint investigation or audit. The tow company is not allowed to charge a fee for photographs. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.060 Offer transportation assistance to vehicle owner/owner’s agent.

Pursuant to ORS 822.230(3)(d), PPI towers shall offer to either provide transportation for the vehicle owner/operator from the immediate vicinity of the location from which the vehicle was towed to the tower’s storage lot for release of the vehicle, or make a call on behalf of the vehicle owner to arrange transportation. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.070 Animals in towed vehicles.

If a vehicle is found to contain any live animal, the PPI tower shall make every effort to protect the welfare of the animal. If the vehicle has not been redeemed within two hours after it reaches the PPI tower’s storage lot, the PPI tower shall contact the local animal control authority to arrange for the animal to be taken into protective custody. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.080 Notification following the tow.

The PPI tower shall notify the Fairview police department of the completion of the tow and location of the vehicle within one hour after the vehicle is placed into storage, or released at the scene. Such notifications shall be made by faxing a clearly legible document to the Fairview police department. Such notification shall include, at a minimum:

A. Vehicle license plate (to verify against prior notice information);

B. Issuer state of license plate;

C. Expiration date of license plate;

D. VIN (vehicle identification number), if visible;

E. Make of vehicle;

F. Model of vehicle;

G. Style of vehicle;

H. Year of vehicle;

I. Color of vehicle;

J. Address from which the vehicle was towed or released at the scene;

K. Address to which the vehicle was towed;

L. Name of the business or person who authorized the tow;

M. Time that prior notice was given;

N. Name and phone number of tow company. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.090 Notification of release.

Within eight hours of releasing a vehicle to the registered owner/owner’s agent or foreclosing on possessory lien, the PPI tower shall notify the Fairview police department by faxing a document with all release information completed. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.100 Release at scene.

A. If the vehicle owner or operator returns to the vehicle while the tower is still attaching equipment to the vehicle, or the vehicle is fully attached but the tow driver is still outside the cab of the tow truck, or if the tow driver has entered the cab of the tow truck but has not yet engaged the tow truck’s transmission to begin removal of the towed vehicle; the PPI tower shall release the vehicle to the vehicle owner or operator at no charge.

B. If the vehicle owner or operator stops the PPI tower when the hookup is complete and the tow truck is in motion with the vehicle, the PPI tower shall immediately halt the tow and inform the vehicle owner of the amount of the RAS (release at scene) fee, and that the vehicle owner has up to 15 minutes, without additional charge, to provide payment of the RAS fee. If the vehicle owner/owner’s agent fails to provide payment within 15 minutes, the PPI tower may proceed to tow the vehicle to the storage facility. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.110 Regulations.

A. It shall be unlawful to tow a vehicle from a private parking facility unless:

1. The private parking facility owner/operator gives the PPI tower express written authorization identifying the specific vehicle, signed at the time of the tow request; or

2. The private parking facility owner/operator has signed an agreement authorizing the PPI tower to act as the agent of the parking facility owner/operator in selection of cars to be towed and the PPI tower signs an authorization for each tow identifying the specific vehicle, signed at the time of the tow request. Predatory towing as described in FMC 8.30.120 is prohibited.

B. Signage. It shall be unlawful to tow a vehicle from a private parking facility unless the private parking facility meets the following signage requirements:

1. At least one sign shall be posted and readily visible at each entryway into the parking lot, not more than 10 feet from the public right-of-way or street edge. Such signs shall:

a. Be posted so that the center of the sign is not more than eight feet nor less than four feet above the ground; and

b. Be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size; and

c. State that parking is prohibited, reserved or otherwise restricted; and

d. State who is authorized to park and the hours during which parking is restricted. (Example: “Parking for customers of _______ only during _______ hours.”); and

e. State that towing and storage of a vehicle will be at the owner’s expense; and

f. Prominently display the PPI tower’s name and 24-hour telephone contact number for release of a vehicle; and

g. Be maintained so as to remain unobstructed by any tree, shrub, bush, vehicle or other obstacle; and

h. For all signs posted, revised, or replaced on or after January 1, 2017, state if unauthorized vehicles will be ticketed or cited and what the ticket/citation amount will be.

2. When a private parking facility is shared by multiple business operations (i.e., shopping mall or office park) parking spaces must be marked, or signs posted, so as to indicate which spaces are reserved for each business.

3. PPI towers may request an exception to the rules for sign location. Such request must be made in writing and offer an alternative posting for approval.

4. Fire lanes from which vehicles may be towed shall be marked in compliance with Fairview’s adopted fire code. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.120 Predatory tow practices.

It shall be unlawful for a PPI tower to park within 1,000 feet of a private parking facility for the purpose of covert observation in order to obtain PPI tows. It shall be unlawful for a PPI tower to post any observer in a private parking facility for the purpose of monitoring and ordering towing. It shall also be unlawful for a PPI tower to patrol private parking facilities for the purpose of looking for vehicles to tow. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.125 Towing and storage rates.

A schedule of approved maximum rates and fees for PPI towing, RAS, and storage shall be adopted by city council. Such schedule shall be published annually. PPI towers may submit a request for an increase in the approved maximum rates not later than two months before the end of any calendar year. Prior to making any changes in the PPI rate schedule, city council shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of determining fair and reasonable rates. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.30.130 Penalty.

Any person or entity violating any provision or failing to comply with any requirement imposed by this code is subject, upon a determination that such violation or failure has occurred, to a civil penalty of up to $500.00 for each violation for a first offense and a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for repeat violations by the same person or entity. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-2008)


8.30.140 Citizen complaints.

A. A vehicle owner/operator whose vehicle has been impounded, or who has paid an RAS fee, has 90 days from the date of the tow to file a written complaint against the PPI tower with the city administrator.

B. The city administrator shall provide a copy of the written complaint to the PPI tower within 15 days of receipt.

C. The PPI tower shall provide a written statement of response within 10 days of the date it received the complaint, unless an extension is granted by the city administrator. The response shall include all documentation requested by the city administrator, including a copy of the agreement or signed invoice authorizing the tow, an explanation for how the circumstances justified the two, and the photograph of the vehicle and signs at the scene of the tow as required by this chapter.

D. After reviewing the complaint and the response provided by the PPI tower, the city administrator shall determine whether the tow was properly performed under this chapter and, if not, the appropriate remedy as set forth under FMC 8.30.130. The city administrator shall submit a written decision and mail it to each party within 75 days from the date of receipt of the original complaint. The city administrator’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1 (Exh. A))


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.05    Curfew Hours for Minors

9.06    Sale, Use, and Possession of Tobacco, Electronic Smoking Devices, and Vapor Products to or by Minors Prohibited

9.10    Weapons

9.15    Property Seizure and Forfeiture

9.16    Unclaimed Property in Police Custody

9.20    Inventory of Personal Property of Arrested Persons and Contents of Impounded Vehicles

9.21    Compliance with U.S. Controlled Substances Act

9.25    Noise

9.30    Alarms

9.35    Prohibition on Marijuana Facilities


Chapter 9.05 CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS

Sections:

9.05.010    Unlawful activity.

9.05.020    Hours specified.

9.05.030    Exemption – Burden of proof.

9.05.040    Responsibility of guardian.

9.05.050    Violation – Procedure.

9.05.060    Violation – Penalty.


9.05.010 Unlawful activity.

It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to be, or remain, in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the city of Fairview between the hours hereafter specified, unless such minor child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 21 years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have the care, custody or control of the minor, or unless such minor is then and there engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which makes it necessary for her or him to be in or upon such street, highway, park, alley or other public place between such specified hours. (Ord. 7-1963 § 1)


9.05.020 Hours specified.

The specified hours for the purpose of this chapter shall be as follows:

A. For minor children under the age of 14 years who have not begun the 9th grade the specified hours shall be 9:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning, except that during the summer months when school is not in session the hours shall be between 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning;

B. For minor children 14 years of age or over or who have begun the 9th grade, the specified hours shall be between 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday; the specified hours on Friday and Saturday shall be between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning except that during the summer months during which time regular school is not in session the hours for all days of the week shall be between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning. (Ord. 7-1963 § 2)


9.05.030 Exemption – Burden of proof.

When a minor child under the age of 18 years must of necessity by virtue of employment, night school, school activity or other lawful pursuit be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the city of Fairview between the above specified hours, the burden of proof thereof shall be upon the minor child or person claiming the exempt status of being engaged in a lawful pursuit. (Ord. 7-1963 § 3)


9.05.040 Responsibility of guardian.

It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of a minor child under the age of 18 years to allow such minor child to be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place during the hours, specified in FMC 9.05.020(A) or (B), as applicable, except as otherwise provided herein. The conviction of a minor child for violation of this chapter on three separate occasions shall be prima facie evidence that said parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of said minor has allowed or permitted said minor child to violate this chapter. (Ord. 7-1963 § 4)


9.05.050 Violation – Procedure.

Any peace officer of the city of Fairview or any other law enforcement officer may arrest any minor child under the age of 18 years for a violation of any applicable provision of this chapter and said officer may:

A. On any first violation of this chapter take or send the offending minor child to his or her residence and notify the parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of the minor of said violation; or

B. If the arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the parents of the minor are failing to exercise proper control, care or custody of the minor, to take the minor directly before the court having juvenile jurisdiction in the area where the arrest was made.

C. On any second or subsequent violation of any applicable provision of this chapter the offending minor shall be taken directly before the court having juvenile jurisdiction in the area in which said offense occurred for disposition in accordance with the provisions hereof. (Ord. 7-1963 § 5)


9.05.060 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, including any minor child, who shall violate any provision of this chapter, may be, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city of Fairview, Oregon, punished by a fine of not more than $50.00, or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than five days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, further, that in such cases where a sentence of confinement shall be ordered against a minor under the age of 18 years, in such case said minor shall be confined only in detention facilities provided for juveniles. (Ord. 7-1963 § 6)


Chapter 9.06 SALE, USE, AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO, ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES, AND VAPOR PRODUCTS TO OR BY MINORS PROHIBITED

Sections:

9.06.010    Definitions.

9.06.020    Unlawful activity.

9.06.030    Penalty.


9.06.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meaning:

A. “Tobacco” means any tobacco product, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, electronic cigarettes and any other form of tobacco or nicotine product that may be utilized for smoking, chewing, vaping, inhaling, or any other means of ingestion or consumption.

B. “Vapor product” means a product that employs a mechanical heating element, battery or circuit and that can be used to heat a solution; or a cartridge or other unit containing a solution to be placed in an electronic cigarette, device or product. For the purposes of this chapter, a “solution” may but need not contain nicotine. (Ord. 2-2015 § 1 (Exh. A))


9.06.020 Unlawful activity.

A. The sale and distribution of tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or vapor products in any form to persons under 18 years of age is prohibited.

B. A person under the age of 18 may not purchase, attempt to purchase, use, possess, or obtain any tobacco, electronic smoking device, or vapor product.

C. Tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or vapor products in a retail store may not be located in an area accessible to customers without assistance by a store employee. (Ord. 2-2015 § 1 (Exh. A))


9.06.030 Penalty.

The sale of tobacco or vapor product in any form to persons under 18 years of age is prohibited. Any person who knowingly sells, or causes to be sold, tobacco to a person under 18 years of age commits the crime of endangering the welfare of a minor, pursuant to ORS 163.575. (Ord. 2-2015 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 9.10 WEAPONS

Sections:

9.10.010    Prohibition.

9.10.020    Penalties.


9.10.010 Prohibition.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized peace officer to fire or discharge a firearm, spring gun, air-actuated pellet gun, air gun, BB gun, bow and arrow, crossbow or a weapon which propels a projectile by the use of gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion within the city of Fairview. This provision only applies when the unlawful use of a weapon does not constitute a crime under ORS 166.220.

B. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the firing or discharging of a weapon by any person in the lawful defense of the person or person’s family.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the discharge of a bow and arrow or crossbow within Metro’s Chinook Landing Marine Park so long as the discharge is within a designated archery range and while conforming with all rules and regulations governing the use of the archery range or use that would constitute a crime under ORS 166.220.

D. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the firing or discharging of a weapon by an authorized person with a valid weapons discharge permit upon real property constituting the Troutdale Reynolds Industrial Park, between Marine Drive and the Columbia River Levee and East of 223rd Avenue, for the purpose of taking or dispersing wildlife which pose a risk to aircraft safety in accordance with U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and Federal Aviation Administration authorizations.

1. A weapons discharge permit may be obtained by an authorized person from the city administrator on forms provided by the city. Each applicant shall provide the following: name, address, purpose, time of discharge, duration, and safeguards to be maintained.

2. A weapons discharge permit is immediately revocable by the city administrator if the safety of any person or property is being endangered. (Ord. 14-2015 § 1; Ord. 4-2008 § 1; Ord. 9-1988 § 1)


9.10.020 Penalties.

The offenses described in this chapter, unlawful use of a weapon, are Class A violations. (Ord. 4-2008 § 1; Ord. 9-1988 § 2)


Chapter 9.15 PROPERTY SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE

Sections:

9.15.010    Title.

9.15.020    Definitions.

9.15.030    Policy and purpose.

9.15.040    Forfeiture.

9.15.050    Seizure.

9.15.060    Institution of legal proceedings.

9.15.070    Disposition of property.

9.15.080    Nonconsensual use of property for illegal activity.


9.15.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the “Forfeiture Ordinance of the City of Fairview”. (Ord. 9-1987 § 1)


9.15.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Controlled substances” are those terms defined in ORS 475.005(6) (1987 ed.) except that this shall not include less than one avoirdupois ounce of marijuana.

B. “Deliver or delivery” is that term defined in ORS 475.005(8) (1987 ed.).

C. “Facilitate” means that the property must have some substantial connection to, or be instrumental in, the commission of the underlying illegal activity which this chapter seeks to prevent.

D. “Gambling” is the term defined in ORS 167.117(4) (1985 ed.).

E. “Illegal activity” means:

1. Gambling or promotion of gambling except as specifically permitted by statute; or

2. The manufacture or delivery of controlled substances; or

3. The possession of controlled substances with the intent to distribute.

F. “Manufacture” is that term defined at ORS 475.005(14) (1987 ed.).

G. “Marijuana” is that term defined at ORS 475.005(15) (1987 ed.).

H. “Possession of controlled substances with the intent to distribute” is that term defined at 21 USC 841(a) (1976 ed., published 1981).

I. “Production” is that term defined at ORS 475.005(19) (1987 ed.).

J. “Promotion of gambling” is that term defined at ORS 167.117(10) (1985 ed.).

K. “Conspiracy” is that term defined at ORS 161.450 (1987 ed.). (Ord. 9-1987 § 2)


9.15.030 Policy and purpose.

A. The city council of the city of Fairview finds that:

1. Property that is seized from arrested persons which constitutes the proceeds or instrumentalities of a crime are generally returned to the criminal upon disposition of the charge.

2. These instrumentalities and proceeds are often used to again commit the same or another crime and the return of such property thus serves to encourage and perpetuate the commission of crime in the city of Fairview.

B. The city council of the city of Fairview therefore declares that to protect the safety and welfare of city of Fairview residents, it is in the best interest of the city to:

1. Cripple illegal drug trafficking and narcotics activities within this city by depriving narcotics dealers, and those persons dealing with them, of the instrumentalities and proceeds of their trade; and

2. Seize gambling equipment, records and the proceeds of illegal gambling activity; and

3. Otherwise deter illegal activity and remove the operating instrumentalities, profits and proceeds of certain crimes from criminals; and

4. Use the forfeited property to further fund general city purposes, including law enforcement and criminal prosecution functions. (Ord. 9-1987 § 3)


9.15.040 Forfeiture.

Any person who engages in or conspires to engage in illegal activity within the city of Fairview shall forfeit to the city of Fairview the following property, and no property right shall exist in them:

A. All controlled substances which are intended for or have been manufactured or delivered as defined in FMC 9.15.020.

B. All raw materials, products, containers, equipment, books, records, research materials (including formulas, microfilms, tapes and data) of any kind which are intended for use, to manufacture, compound, store, process or deliver any controlled substances.

C. All conveyances, including aircraft, vehicles or vessels which are used to manufacture or deliver or in any manner to facilitate the manufacture or delivery or any controlled substance or any such conveyance which is used to transport or conceal any controlled substance.

D. All monies, negotiable instruments, securities or other things of value furnished or exchanged or intended to be furnished or exchanged by or to any person to facilitate any illegal activities and all proceeds or profit traceable to such furnishment, exchange or illegal activity.

E. All proceeds, profits and things of value including residential property traceable to any illegal activity.

F. All equipment, materials or records of any sort that are used, or intended for use to facilitate any illegal gambling activity.

G. 1. All real property which is:

a. Used to manufacture or deliver or distribute any controlled substance; or

b. Used to facilitate the promotion of gambling as defined in ORS 167.127 (1987 ed.).

2. This section shall not apply to residential real property which is used to facilitate the manufacture of less than one ounce of marijuana when dried.

H. This chapter shall not apply to those unlawful acts defined in ORS 166.720(1), (2) and (3) (1987 ed.). (Ord. 9-1987 § 4)


9.15.050 Seizure.

Any property subject to forfeiture to the city of Fairview under this chapter may be seized by any peace officer on behalf of the city without issuance of court process when:

A. The seizure is incident to an arrest or search under a search warrant or an inspection under an administrative search; or

B. The property subject to seizure has been the subject of a prior judgment in favor of the city of Fairview in a forfeiture proceeding under this chapter; or

C. A police officer lawfully seizes the property under ORS 133.525 to 133.703 (1987 ed.) and has probable cause to believe that the property has been used or is intended for use in or to facilitate illegal activity as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 9-1987 § 5)


9.15.060 Institution of legal proceedings.

A. In the event of a seizure under this chapter, and upon the recommendation of the chief of police, the city attorney, acting in the name of the city, may institute a forfeiture proceeding to obtain a judgment of forfeiture against the seized property.

B. The proceedings shall be instituted within 180 days of the seizure for purposes of this chapter, and in accordance with the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure and the Oregon Rules of Evidence relating to civil actions. The defendant or the owner of the property may demand a trial by jury in any civil action brought pursuant to this section.

C. The city attorney shall cause notice of any forfeiture proceeding to be served by certified mail to all parties with a recorded security interest in the property to be forfeited.

D. The city attorney shall be entitled to deduct from the proceeds any legal fees, costs and expenses incurred in litigation resulting in a forfeiture hereunder. (Ord. 9-1987 § 6)


9.15.070 Disposition of property.

A. Prior to obtaining any forfeiture judgment, any money, securities and negotiable instruments that are not retained by the police for evidentiary purposes may be held by the city recorder pending the outcome of the forfeiture proceedings.

B. Seized property other than money, securities and negotiable instruments shall be kept in the custody of the city recorder for safekeeping until a forfeiture judgment is obtained or the matter of concern concluded.

C. When a judgment of forfeiture is obtained under this chapter, the property shall be disposed of as follows:

1. At the request of the chief of police, property other than cash, securities or negotiable instruments may be retained for official use by the chief of police for criminal justice and law enforcement purposes.

2. Cash and proceeds from securities and negotiable instruments shall be forfeited to the city of Fairview and placed in the general fund to be used for general city purposes.

3. When the chief of police determines that the property, other than cash or proceeds from securities or negotiable instruments, will no longer be used for law enforcement purposes, it shall be sold at a public auction, or at the discretion of the city council, sold or disposed of on such terms as the council shall direct. Any net proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the general fund to be used for city purposes.

4. The city recorder shall give notice of the aforementioned public sale by posting written notice of the sale in three public places within the city, at least 10 days before the sale. The notice shall describe the property and shall state the time and place of public sale at which the property may be purchased by the highest bidder, for cash.

5. The city recorder may deduct reasonable costs incurred in conducting the sale. The city recorder may also cancel the sale if the bids are deemed inadequate by the city recorder.

6. Members of city government, including officials, employees, and immediate family members, shall not be allowed to bid at any of these sales. (Ord. 9-1987 § 7)


9.15.080 Nonconsensual use of property for illegal activity.

No property shall be forfeited under this chapter to the extent of the interest of an owner or holder of a recorded security interest who did not consent to or was not aware of the use of the property in the illegal activity. (Ord. 9-1987 § 8)


Chapter 9.16 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY IN POLICE CUSTODY

Sections:

9.16.010    Title.

9.16.020    Definitions.

9.16.030    Purpose.

9.16.040    Notice of intent to dispose of unclaimed property.

9.16.050    Disposition of unclaimed property.


9.16.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “Unclaimed Property in Police Custody.” (Ord. 1-2011 § 1 (Att. 1))


9.16.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Chief of police” means the Fairview chief of police or his or her designated representative.

B. “Unclaimed property” means personal property, including money, that was seized by the Fairview police department as evidence, abandoned property, found property or stolen property, and that has remained in the physical possession of the Fairview police department for a period of more than 60 days following conclusion of all criminal actions related to the seizure of the evidence, abandoned property, found property or stolen property, or conclusion of the investigation if no criminal action is filed. (Ord. 1-2011 § 1 (Att. 1))


9.16.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth procedures for the disposition of unclaimed property in police custody. The procedures set forth in this chapter are in addition to any other method for property disposition set forth in the Fairview Municipal Code or other applicable law. (Ord. 1-2011 § 1 (Att. 1))


9.16.040 Notice of intent to dispose of unclaimed property.

Prior to disposing of unclaimed property, the chief of police shall provide notice and an opportunity for a person with an ownership or security interest in the unclaimed property to claim the property, as follows:

A. The chief of police shall prepare an inventory describing the unclaimed property.

B. The chief of police shall publish a notice of intent to dispose of the unclaimed property described in the inventory. The notice shall be posted in three public places in the jurisdiction of the police department, and shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction of the police department. A copy of the notice shall also be sent to any person that the police department has reason to believe has an ownership or security interest in any of the unclaimed property described in the notice. A notice shall be sent by regular mail to the last known address of the person.

C. The notice shall describe the unclaimed property as provided in the inventory, state the address and telephone number of the police department, and include a statement in substantially the following form: “The Fairview Police Department has in its possession the unclaimed property described below. If you have any ownership interest in any of that unclaimed property, you must file a claim with the Fairview Police Department within 30 days from the date of publication of this notice, or you will lose your interest in that property.”

D. Prior to the expiration of the time period stated in a notice issued pursuant to this section, a person may file a claim that presents proof satisfactory to the police department that the person is the lawful owner or security interest holder of any unclaimed property in that notice. When sufficient proof is provided, the police department shall then return the property to that person. The chief of police may require payment of costs incurred by the city prior to returning the property. (Ord. 1-2011 § 1 (Att. 1))


9.16.050 Disposition of unclaimed property.

If unclaimed property is not claimed within 30 days after providing notice pursuant to FMC 9.16.040, the unclaimed property shall be disposed of as follows:

A. Unclaimed or abandoned money shall be placed in the police department equipment replacement fund or otherwise used to pay for equipment funded from the police department equipment replacement fund.

B. Unclaimed property (other than money) shall be sold at auction and proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the police department equipment replacement fund or otherwise used to pay for equipment funded from the police department equipment replacement fund.

C. The chief of police shall have the discretion to convert unclaimed property to government use if the unclaimed property is serviceable and would support the city’s operations. If the property under consideration for government use has a value in excess of $500.00 the chief of police shall obtain prior approval from the Fairview city council. (Ord. 1-2011 § 1 (Att. 1))


Chapter 9.20 INVENTORY OF PERSONAL PROPERTY OF ARRESTED PERSONS AND CONTENTS OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES

Sections:

9.20.010    Purpose.

9.20.020    Definitions.

9.20.030    Inventories of impounded vehicles.

9.20.040    Inventories of persons in police custody.


9.20.010 Purpose.

This chapter is meant to exclusively apply to the process for conducting an inventory of the personal property in an impounded vehicle and the personal possessions of a person in police custody and shall not be interpreted to affect any other statutory or constitutional right(s) that police officers may employ to search persons or search or seize possessions for other purpose. (Ord. 14-1997 § 1)


9.20.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Valuable” means:

1. Cash money of an aggregate amount of $50.00 or more; or

2. Individual items of personal property with value of over $100.00.

B. “Open container” means a container which is unsecured or incompletely secured in such a fashion that the container’s contents are exposed to view.

C. “Closed container” means a container whose contents are not exposed to view.

D. “Police custody” means:

1. The imposition of restraint as a result of an arrest as that term is defined at ORS 133.005(1); or

2. The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police officer pursuant to a court order; or

3. The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police officer pursuant to ORS Chapter 426; or

4. The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police officer for purpose of taking the restrained person to an approved facility for the involuntary confinement of persons pursuant to Oregon law, or to determine identification to issue a citation pursuant to ORS 810.410.

E. “Police officer” means any active or reserve officer of the Fairview police department. (Ord. 14-1997 § 1)


9.20.030 Inventories of impounded vehicles.

A. The contents of all vehicles impounded by a police officer will be inventoried. The inventory shall be conducted before constructive custody of the vehicle is released to a third-party towing company except under the following circumstances:

1. If there is a reasonable suspicion to believe that the safety of either the police officer(s) or any other person is at risk, a required inventory will be done as soon as safely practical; or

2. If the vehicle is being impounded for evidentiary purpose in connection with the investigation of a criminal offense, the inventory will be done after such investigation is completed.

B. The purpose for the inventory of an impounded vehicle will be to:

1. Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid spurious claims to property;

2. Assist in the prevention of theft of property;

3. Locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances; or

4. Reduce the danger to persons and property.

C. Inventories of impounded vehicles will be conducted according to the following procedures:

1. An inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will be conducted throughout the passenger and engine compartments of the vehicle including, but not limited to, accessible areas under or within the dashboard area, in any pockets in the doors or in the back of the front seat, in any console between the seats, under any floor mats and under the seats.

2. In addition to the passenger and engine compartments as described above, an inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will also be conducted in the following locations:

a. Any other type of unlocked compartments that are a part of the vehicle including, but not limited to, unlocked vehicle trunks, consoles, glove boxes, and unlocked car-top containers; and

b. Any locked compartments including, but not limited to, locked vehicle trunks, locked hatchbacks and locked car-top containers, if either the keys are available to be released with the vehicle to the third-party towing company or an unlocking mechanism for such compartment is available within the vehicle.

3. A closed container left either within the vehicle or any of the vehicle’s compartments will have its contents inventoried only when:

a. The closed container is to be placed in the immediate possession of a person at the time that person is placed in the secure portion of a custodial facility, secure portion of a law enforcement vehicle or secure law enforcement holding room;

b. A person requests that the closed container be with him/her in the secure portion of a law enforcement vehicle or a secure law enforcement holding room; or

c. The closed container is designed for carrying money and/or valuables, including, but not limited to, closed purses, closed coin purses, closed wallets and closed fanny packs.

4. Upon completion of the inventory, the police officer will complete a report as directed by the chief of police.

5. Any valuables located during the inventory process will be listed on a property receipt. A copy of the property receipt will either be left in the vehicle or tendered to the person in control of the vehicle if such person is present. The valuables will be dealt with in such a manner as directed by the chief of police. (Ord. 14-1997 § 1)


9.20.040 Inventories of persons in police custody.

A. A police officer will inventory the personal property in the possession of a person taken into police custody and such inventory will be conducted whenever:

1. Such person will be either placed in a secure police holding room or transported in the secure portion of a police vehicle; or

2. Custody of the person will be transferred to another law enforcement agency, correctional facility, or “treatment facility” as that phrase is used in ORS 426.460 or such other lawfully approved facility for the involuntary confinement of persons pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes.

B. The purpose of the inventory of a person in police custody will be to:

1. Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid spurious claims to property; or

2. Fulfill the requirements of ORS 133.455 to the extent that such statute may apply to certain property held by the police officer for safekeeping; or

3. Assist in the prevention of theft of property; or

4. Locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances; or

5. Locate weapons and instruments that may facilitate an escape from custody or endanger law enforcement personnel; or

6. Reduce the danger to persons and property.

C. Inventories of the personal property in the possession of such persons will be conducted according to the following procedures:

1. An inventory will occur prior to placing such person into a holding room or police vehicle, whichever occurs first. However, if reasonable suspicion to believe that the safety of either the police officer(s) or the person in custody or both are at risk, an inventory will be done as soon as safely practical prior to the transfer of custody to another law enforcement agency or facility.

2. To complete the inventory of the personal property in the possession of such person, the police officer will remove all items of personal property from the clothing worn by such person. In addition, the officer will also remove all items of such personal property from all open containers in the possession of such person.

3. A closed container in the possession of such person will have its contents inventoried only when:

a. The closed container is to be placed in the immediate possession of such person at the time person is placed in the secure portion of a custodial facility, police vehicle or secure police holding room; or

b. Such person requests that the closed container be with them in the secure portion of a police vehicle or secure police holding room; or

c. The closed container is designed for carrying money and/or small valuables on or about the person including, but not limited to, closed purses, closed coin purses, closed wallets and closed fanny packs.

D. Valuables found during the inventory process will be noted by the police officer in a report as directed by the chief of police.

E. All items of personal property either left in the immediate possession of the person in custody or left with the facility or agency accepting custody of the person will be handled in the following manner:

1. A property receipt will be prepared listing the property to be retained in the possession of the respective police department and a copy of that receipt will be tendered to the person in custody when such person is released to the facility or agency accepting custody of such person; or

2. The property will be dealt with in such manner as may otherwise be directed by the chief of police.

F. All items of personal property neither left in the immediate possession of the person in custody nor dealt with as provided in subsection E of this section, will be released to the facility or agency accepting custody of the person so that they may:

1. Hold the property for safekeeping on the behalf of the person in custody; and

2. Prepare and deliver a receipt, as may be required by ORS 133.455, for any valuables held on behalf of the person in custody. (Ord. 14-1997 § 1)


Chapter 9.21 COMPLIANCE WITH U.S. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT

Sections:

9.21.010    Purpose.

9.21.020    Facilities not in compliance with U.S. Controlled Substances Act prohibited.

9.21.030    Violation and enforcement.


9.21.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to preclude and prohibit the opening, establishment, maintenance or operation of facilities that do not comply with the U.S. Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C.  801 et seq. (Ord. 5-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


9.21.020 Facilities not in compliance with U.S. Controlled Substances Act prohibited.

The establishment, maintenance, or operation by a person, business or other entity of a facility within the city that is not in compliance with the U.S. Controlled Substances Act is prohibited and is declared to be a public nuisance. The city may abate any nuisance under this chapter either pursuant to Chapter 8.10 FMC or it may pursue any other available remedies including but not limited to an action seeking declaratory relief and/or injunctive relief. (Ord. 5-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


9.21.030 Violation and enforcement.

The establishment, maintenance or operation of a facility by a person, business or other entity within the city in violation of the requirements of this chapter or any other applicable provisions of the Fairview Municipal Code shall be subject to any and all enforcement remedies available to the city under law and/or the Fairview Municipal Code including but not limited to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 8.10 FMC and/or pursuit of an appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 5-2014 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 9.25 NOISE

Sections:

9.25.010    Purpose.

9.25.020    Definitions.

9.25.030    Sound measurement.

9.25.040    Sound limitations.

9.25.050    Prohibitions.

9.25.060    Exceptions.

9.25.070    Variances.

9.25.080    Ordinance provisions nonexclusive.

9.25.090    Administration and enforcement.

9.25.100    Penalties.


9.25.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the citizens of Fairview by:

A. Establishing hours within which certain sound levels may occur.

B. Establishing noise levels which may not be exceeded during the above mentioned hours.

C. Establishing a continuum of sanctions as required to enforce the provisions herein. (Ord. 10-1997 § 2)


9.25.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meaning:

A. “A-Scale” means the sound level in decibels measured using the A-weighted network as specified in American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters (ANSI S1.4-1971).

B. “City” means city of Fairview, Oregon.

C. “Decibel” means a unit of measuring the volume of a sound equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base of 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure which is 20 micropascals which is 20 micronutons per square meter.

D. “Noise” means any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sound which is likely to either disturb, injure or endanger the repose, health, safety or welfare of others.

E. “Noise sensitive unit” means any building, structure or portion thereof, vehicle or boat or other used as a school, hospital, adult care facility, day care center, church or adapted or used for the overnight accommodation of persons, including but not limited to individual homes or residential units, hotels, motels, apartments, trailers and nursing homes.

F. “Person” includes individuals, corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies, firms, partnerships and other entities authorized to do business in the state of Oregon.

G. “Sound producing device” includes without limitation: home or commercial sound, voice and musical instruments and systems of all types and description such as loud speakers, public address systems and home stereos; car stereos; tape recorders and players; compact disc players; television sets; musical instruments amplified or not; sirens, bells and whistles; vehicular sounds of all types and description such as tires, engines and exhausts; electrical and gas powered domestic tools of all types and description such as drills, chain saws, lawn mowers, saws, hammers and similar equipment; heat pumps, air conditioning units and refrigeration units including those mounted on vehicles; and construction equipment of all types and description such as earth moving equipment; concrete mixers and pumps, cranes, generators, compressors, pneumatic wrenches, jack hammers, rock drills, impact pile drivers, vibrators, saws and any other gas or electrically powered tool.

H. “Vehicle” includes, without limitation, automobiles, motorcycles, motorbikes, trucks, buses, earth moving equipment, snowmobiles and boats. (Ord. 10-1997 § 3)


9.25.030 Sound measurement.

A. Measurements shall be made with a calibrated sound level meter meeting the requirements of a Type I or Type II meter, as specified by the American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters (ANSI Standards 1.4-1971). For the purpose of this chapter, a sound level meter shall contain at least an “A” weighing network, and both fast and slow meter response capability.

B. Persons conducting sound level measurements shall be trained in the techniques of sound measurement and the operation of sound measuring instruments.

C. Measurements shall be made at or within the boundary of a property of a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound, or within a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound.

D. All measurements made pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the provisions herein. (Ord. 10-1997 § 4)


9.25.040 Sound limitations.

A. No person shall operate, cause or allow on property located within the city any source of sound in a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in this section when measured at or within the property boundaries of the receiving land use.

B. Sound levels shall be measured as stated below, expressed in decibels.

	Zone of Source	Zone of Receiver

	Residential	Commercial	Manufacturing

	Residential	55	60	65

	Commercial	55	65	65

	Manufacturing	60	65	70

C. All numbers are the maximum permissible sound levels indicated by decibels. Any area of the city which is inconsistent with the designated land use zones will be treated as being within the most restrictive designated land use zone. (Ord. 10-1997 § 5)


9.25.050 Prohibitions.

A. Construction. Construction work involving excavation, erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure shall be lawfully permitted only between the following hours except as permitted by legal variance:

Monday through Friday:    7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m

Saturday:    8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

Sunday:    10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

Use or operation of domestic power tools such as mechanically powered saws, sanders, drills, grinders, mowers, air compressors, or other sound producing equipment or device which exceed the standards set forth in FMC 9.25.040(B) shall not be permitted outside these hours.

B. Amplified Sound. Use or operation of an electrically amplified: home stereo system; car stereo system; radio; public address system; television; loudspeaker; musical instrument; or any other instrument for sound producing or any sound amplifying device shall not be permitted to exceed the sound levels as established in FMC 9.25.040(B).

C. Motor Vehicles.

1. Use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorized vehicle, whether or not designated for use on public roads at any time or under any condition of grade, load, acceleration, deceleration, at rest, whether or not in repair or operated in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, motor winding, squealing, screeching or other tire noise or any other unnecessary noise shall at times be subject to the provisions for maximum sound levels as established in FMC 9.25.040(B).

2. Sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street, except as necessary warning of danger to property or person or as permitted to be used by authorized emergency vehicles shall not be permitted. (Ord. 10-1997 § 6)


9.25.060 Exceptions.

Restrictions imposed by FMC 9.25.040 and 9.25.050 shall not apply to the following:

A. Sounds caused by organized athletic or other group activities, when such activities are conducted outdoors on property generally used for such purposes including parks, schools, athletic fields, race tracks, churches, waterways and airports. This exception shall not limit the city administrator’s authority to declare such event or activity in violation of other laws, ordinances or regulations.

B. Sounds caused by emergency work, or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency equipment, vehicles, and apparatus, regardless of whether such work is performed by a public or private agency, or upon public or private property.

C. Sounds caused by bona fide use of emergency warning devices and alarm systems.

D. Sounds regulated by federal law, including, but not limited to, sounds caused by railroad, aircraft or commercially licensed watercraft operations.

E. Sounds caused by blasting activities when performed under a permit issued by appropriate governmental authorities.

F. Sounds caused by regular vehicular traffic upon premises open to the public while operating in a manner complying with state motor vehicle noise regulations. (Ord. 10-1997 § 7)


9.25.070 Variances.

A. Permit Required.

1. The use of construction equipment, amplified voice and music sounds or creation of other sounds at levels which exceed those specified in FMC 9.25.040(B) and/or exceed the permissible time frame requirements specified in FMC 9.25.050(A) may be allowed only upon permit granted by the city administrator’s office.

2. Application for an amplified sound permit shall be made to the city administrator’s office on forms provided by the city.

3. Each applicant shall identify the location, date and time of the event for which the permit is sought and shall provide an estimate of the duration of the event.

4. In the case of a series of similar events to be conducted at the same location, the city administrator shall have the discretion to issue a permit covering the entire series.

B. Determination by the City.

1. The city administrator may grant a permit under this section if the event and its accompanying noise will not, in the administrator’s judgment, interfere unreasonably with the standards set forth herein including the effect upon those likely to be affected by the noise.

2. The nature of the surrounding properties and the benefit to the community shall be considered in relation to the event.

3. Whether the applicant’s previous record, if any, demonstrates compliance with the terms of the permit shall be grounds for consideration granting a permit.

C. Conditions of Permit.

1. The city administrator may impose reasonable conditions on a permit in order to protect the interests of the community, including those likely to be affected by the noise.

2. Unless otherwise specified in a permit, maximum noise levels as specified in FMC 9.25.040(B) shall not be exceeded by more than 10 decibels.

3. Any permit is subject to termination by the city administrator or designee should any conditions of the permit be violated or as required to protect the public interest.

4. The city administrator may submit to the city council any question arising with respect to this section, and if any member of the city council requests its submission to the council, any such question shall be heard by the council. In either event, the decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 10-1997 § 8)


9.25.080 Ordinance provisions nonexclusive.

This chapter shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other state law or county ordinance which is now or may in the future be in effect and which relates to the activities regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 10-1997 § 9)


9.25.090 Administration and enforcement.

It shall be the responsibility of the city administrator or designee to enforce all provisions of this chapter.

A. Upon receipt of a noise complaint, the city shall determine whether a violation has occurred pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B. If it is determined that a violation has occurred, a written warning accompanied by a copy of this chapter shall be issued by the city to the person responsible for the violation.

C. If, following a written warning as specified by subsection B of this section, the same person is again found in violation of this chapter, the person responsible for the violation shall be issued a citation and penalties shall be assessed as provided in FMC 9.25.100.

D. Upon citation of a person for a violation of this chapter, the person issuing the citation may seize the sound producing device which was the source of the sound as evidence only if the violation is determined pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-1997 § 10)


9.25.100 Penalties.

A. A violation of this chapter shall result in a fine of not more than $500.00. Each and every day during which any provision of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense.

B. In addition to the foregoing, the city may, with the approval of the city administrator, maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain the violation of the provisions of this chapter. In such an event, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable attorney fees and any administrative costs associated with the enforcement of this chapter relative to the particular violation. (Ord. 10-1997 § 11)


Chapter 9.30 ALARMS1

Sections:

9.30.010    Enforcement of county code.

9.30.020    Fees.


9.30.010 Enforcement of county code.

The city of Fairview authorizes Multnomah County, its agents and representatives to enforce, within the city limits of Fairview, Multnomah County Code sections concerning alarm systems, currently Multnomah County Code Sections 15.700 through 15.714, and as may be amended and enlarged in the future. (Ord. 4-2020 § 1 (Exh. A))


9.30.020 Fees.

Any fees implemented by Multnomah County Code Sections 15.700 through 15.714 shall be adopted and collected as set forth in Multnomah County Code Sections 15.700 through 15.714 and shall be applicable to actions taken under this Chapter 9.30 within Fairview. (Ord. 4-2020 § 1 (Exh. A))1

Prior legislation: Ords. 9-1991, 4-1993, 6-2004 and 12-2006. 


Chapter 9.35 PROHIBITION ON MARIJUANA FACILITIES

Sections:

9.35.010    Marijuana facilities prohibited.

9.35.020    Violations and enforcement.


9.35.010 Marijuana facilities prohibited.

A. Prohibition under HB 3400. No person, business or entity may establish one of the marijuana facilities listed below within city limits. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of a marijuana facility by a person, business or any other entity within the city is in violation of this chapter.

1. Marijuana processing sites registered with the Oregon Health Authority;

2. Medical marijuana dispensaries registered with the Oregon Health Authority;

3. Marijuana producers licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission;

4. Marijuana processors licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission;

5. Marijuana wholesalers licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission;

6. Marijuana retailers licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission; and

7. Public and private marijuana researches certified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

B. Prohibition on Medical Marijuana Grow Sites. No person, business or entity may establish a medical marijuana grow site within city limits, regardless of whether the person, business or entity is designated to produce marijuana under ORS 475.304. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of a medical marijuana grow site by a person, business or any other entity within the city is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2016 § 1; Ord. 13-2015 § 1)


9.35.020 Violations and enforcement.

A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter as herein set forth shall be cited and deemed guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and upon conviction before the municipal judge be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation thereof. Each day or portion of a day such violation continues or occurs shall be deemed a separate violation.

B. In addition, the establishment, maintenance or operation of a marijuana facility (including medical marijuana grow sites) by a person, business or any other entity within the city in violation of the requirements of this chapter will be subject to any and all enforcement remedies available to the city under law and/or the Fairview Municipal Code including but not limited to enforcement pursuant to the Fairview Municipal Code and/or the filing of an appropriate action and pursuit of an appropriate remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction.

C. The city may pursue any other remedies available to it, including but not limited to an action seeking declaratory relief and/or injunctive relief.

If the city brings an action in either law or equity in any of the courts of this state (including the U.S. District Court for the District of Oregon) other than its municipal court for the enforcement of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable attorney fees in the event it is the prevailing party. (Ord. 13-2015 § 1)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.05    Uniform Traffic Ordinance

10.10    Transfer of Jurisdiction of Certain Roads

10.15    Repealed

10.20    Off-Road Vehicles

10.25    Temporary Closure of City Streets and Ways for Special Events


Chapter 10.05 UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:

10.05.010    Title.

10.05.020    Applicability of state traffic laws.

10.05.030    Definitions.

10.05.040    Powers of the council.

10.05.050    Implementation of regulations.

10.05.060    Public danger.

10.05.070    Standards.

10.05.080    Authority of police and fire officers.

10.05.090    Obedience to and alteration of control devices.

10.05.100    Interfering with police officer.

10.05.110    General traffic regulations.

10.05.115    Speed racing.

10.05.120    Parking regulations.

10.05.130    Bicycles.

10.05.140    Pedestrians.

10.05.150    Parades.

10.05.155    Special events/street closures/no parking.

10.05.160    Funeral procession.

10.05.170    Parking citations and owner responsibility.

10.05.180    Impoundment of vehicles.

10.05.190    Brakes.

10.05.200    Penalties.

10.05.210    Existing control devices and markings.

10.05.220    Public drinking.


10.05.010 Title.

This chapter may be cited as the “Fairview Uniform Traffic Ordinance.” (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 1)


10.05.020 Applicability of state traffic laws.

To the extent required or permitted, the city of Fairview, unless otherwise stated herein or unless otherwise set forth in city ordinance as authorized or allowed by pertinent state statute, does here adopt and incorporate herein by reference all pertinent and applicable provisions of the State Traffic Acts as set forth, particularly ORS Chapter 153 and ORS Chapter 811 of the Oregon Vehicle Code. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 2)


10.05.030 Definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:

A. “Bus stop” means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by buses loading or unloading passengers.

B. “Holiday” means New Year’s Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed by the council to be a holiday.

C. “Loading zone” means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days.

D. “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including tractors, fork-lift trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning equipment, and any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power, notwithstanding that the vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the motor vehicle laws of Oregon.

E. “Passenger vehicle” means a vehicle (1) designed for the main purpose of transporting passengers, (2) with a registered weight of 10,000 pounds or less, (3) designed to transport no more than eight persons, (4) not required by Oregon law to register as any other type of vehicle, and (5) meets federal standards for highway use.

F. “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

G. Street. The terms “highway,” “road,” and “street” shall be considered synonymous, unless the context precludes such construction, and shall mean any public way, road, highway, street, thoroughfare and place, including bridges, viaducts and other structures within the boundaries of this city, open, used or intended for the use of the general public for vehicles or vehicular traffic. “Street” includes alleys.

H. “Traffic lane” means that area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic.

I. “Trailer” includes the definition for “trailer” under the Oregon Motor Vehicle Code and for the purposes of this chapter includes a large truck with a long trailer attached to the back of it also referred to as semi-trailers, semi-tractors, and tractor-trailer combinations. 

J. “Vehicle,” as used in subsequent sections of this chapter, includes bicycles. (Ord. 3-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-2015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 3)


10.05.040 Powers of the council.

A. Subject to state law, the city council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated by this or another ordinance.

B. The powers of the council include, but are not limited to:

1. Designation of through streets.

2. Designation of one-way streets.

3. Designation of truck routes.

4. Designation of parking meter zones and time limit restricted parking areas.

5. Designation of certain streets as bridle paths and prohibition of horses and animals on other streets.

6. Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city streets than specified by law.

7. Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones.

8. Revision of speed limits in parks.

9. Temporary blocking or closing of streets for public purpose.

10. Establishment of bicycle lanes and paths and traffic controls for such facilities.

11. Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage.

12. Issuance of oversize or overweight vehicle permits.

13. Establishment, removal, or alteration of the following classes of traffic controls:

a. Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes.

b. Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left, or U-turns, and the time when prohibition applies.

c. Parking areas and time limitations, including the permissible parking (e.g., parallel or diagonal).

d. Loading zones and stops for vehicles.

e. Traffic control signals. (Ord. 4-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 4)


10.05.050 Implementation of regulations.

The city administrator or his or her designee shall implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the council by installing, maintaining, removing, and altering parking controls and traffic control devices, including signage. The installation shall be based on consideration of, but not limited to, the standards contained in the “Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.” (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 5)


10.05.060 Public danger.

Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the administrator or his or her designee may install temporary traffic control devices. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 6)


10.05.070 Standards.

The regulations of the administrator or his or her designee shall be based on:

A. Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations.

B. Standards, limitations, and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission.

C. Other recognized traffic control standards.

D. Consideration of adopted land use and transportation policies and parking transportation needs of existing and future land uses. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 7)


10.05.080 Authority of police and fire officers.

A. It shall be the duty of city police officers so designated by the city council to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B. In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the police and fire departments may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.

C. In each instance in this chapter where reference is made to a fire officer and/or a fire department or the city fire department, such term shall designate and apply to the fire district servicing the city of Fairview or its designated agents. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 8)


10.05.090 Obedience to and alteration of control devices.

A. No person shall disobey the instruction of a traffic officer or traffic control device.

B. No unauthorized person shall install, move, remove, obstruct, alter the position of, deface or tamper with a traffic control device or a marking, sign, or device that regulates parking, stopping, or standing. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 9)


10.05.100 Interfering with police officer.

A. It is unlawful for any person to refuse to leave the area of a traffic accident or traffic investigation after being directed to leave that area by an individual whom the person knows to be a police officer.

B. “To leave the area of a traffic incident or traffic investigation” means to physically move to a location not less than 10 feet extending in a radius from where a police officer is engaged in a traffic incident or traffic investigation, including, but not limited to, effecting an arrest for a traffic crime. The radius may be extended beyond 10 feet when a police officer reasonably believes that such extension is necessary because there exists a substantial risk of physical injury to any person. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 10)


10.05.110 General traffic regulations.

A. Crossing Private Property. No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by crossing private property or premises open to the public. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services.

B. Unlawful Riding.

1. No operator shall permit a passenger to, and no passenger shall, ride on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise.

2. No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion upon a street.

C. Roller Skates, Sleds, Etc.

1. No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of a coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall use the streets except while crossing at a crosswalk, or in an authorized area.

2. No person shall use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds, or similar devices, except where authorized.

D. Damaging Sidewalks and Curbs.

1. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross a permanent or temporary driveway.

2. No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood, or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.

3. No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or device moved by a motor vehicle upon the curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be held responsible for the cost of repair.

E. Removing Glass and Debris. A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be on a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street.

F. Storage of Motor Vehicles on Streets. No person shall store or permit to be stored on a street, public right-of-way, public parking lot or other public property, without the permission of the council, a motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or any type of trailer or personal property for a period of 72 hours. Failure to move a motor vehicle or other personal property for a period of 72 hours shall constitute prima facie evidence of storage of a motor vehicle.

G. Obstructing Streets. No person shall park or leave on a street, including an alley, parking strip, sidewalk or curb, a vehicle part, trailer, box, ware, merchandise of any description, or any other thing that impedes traffic or obstructs the view, except as is allowed by this chapter or other ordinances of the city. 

H. Twenty Miles Per Hour Speed Limit in the Village. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the Fairview Village at more than 20 miles per hour. For the purposes of this section, “Fairview Village” is bordered by the following streets: NE Halsey, NE Fairview Ave., NE Glisan and Fairview Parkway and includes the following streets: NE Market Dr., NE Park Lane, NE Village, NE Clear Creek Way, NE Multnomah Dr., NE Chinook Way and NE Pacific Dr. Violation of this section is a speeding violation and punishable under the provisions of ORS 811.109 et seq.

I. Twenty Miles Per Hour Speed Limit in Historic Fairview. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in Historic Fairview at more than 20 miles per hour. For the purpose of this section “Historic Fairview” is bordered by the following streets: NE Halsey Street, Depot Street, Fairview Parkway (NE 207th Avenue), and Fairview Avenue (NE 223rd Avenue) and includes the following streets: NE 213th Avenue, NE Weidler Place, NE Hancock Street, NE Weidler Circle, Cedar Street, Wistful Vista Drive, San Rafael Street, NE 214th Avenue, Main Street, Depot Street, Harrison Street, Lincoln Street, 5th Court, 1st Street, 2nd Street, 3rd Street, 4th Street, 5th Street, 6th Street, 7th Street. (Ord. 10-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 9-2015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 11)


10.05.115 Speed racing.

A. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless the context requires a different meaning:

“Speed racing” is defined as set forth in ORS 811.125.

B. It is unlawful for any person to participate in speed racing upon any street or any premises open to the public, within the city limits of Fairview.

C. Any vehicle utilized within the city limits of Fairview in violation of this section may be towed without notice. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1)


10.05.120 Parking regulations.

A. Curb Markings and Signage.

1. When authorized under this title, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any curb markings or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. Curb marking shall have the following meaning:

a. Red means no stopping, standing, or parking at any time.

b. Yellow means no stopping, standing, or parking for a specified period of time (limited duration).

c. Blue means an area designated for the parking of vehicles with special license plates or other official designation issued to physically handicapped persons.

2. Measuring Curb Distances.

a. When an intersection is curved, measuring distance for prohibited parking will begin at the tangent of the curb. 

b. When the curb is straight, measuring distance for prohibited parking will begin at the high point of curb cut out.

B. Method of Parking.

1. No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking.

2. The operator who first begins maneuvering a motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street has priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle shall attempt to interfere.

3. When the operator of a vehicle discovers that the vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area, unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers.

C. Prohibited Parking or Standing. No person shall park or stand:

1. A vehicle in violation of state motor vehicle laws or in violation of a lawfully erected parking limitation sign or marking.

2. A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of 20 consecutive minutes in any two-hour period.

3. A vehicle over, upon, or in such a manner as to prevent access to any water meter, gate valve, or other appliance in use on any water meter connection or appurtenances to any other city-owned utilities, located on public property, the public right-of-way, or private property.

4. A vehicle in such a manner as to prevent a mail carrier from delivering or accessing any mailbox, public or private.

5. A vehicle while such vehicle is equipped with a vehicle alarm unless such system is designed to, and does in fact, cease emitting an intermittent or constant sound after an aggregate time of three minutes within a 15-minute period on any street or any premises open to the public, within the city limits of Fairview.

6. A vehicle in the Fairview City Hall parking lot (Parcel 1N3E33AB Tax Lots 05500 and 02200) unless the occupant(s) are visiting City Hall or have obtained permission from the city administrator or designee to park in the designated City Hall parking spaces. The restrictions apply at all times except for weekends and officially recognized holidays when City Hall is closed.

7. No parking on the north side of Sandy Boulevard from Fairview Parkway to Blossom Hill Drive.

8. No parking on the north side of Sandy Boulevard within 100 feet east of Blossom Hill Drive.

9. Passenger vehicle parking only on the north side of Sandy Boulevard from 100 feet east of Blossom Hill Drive for 518 feet. 

10. No parking on the north side of Sandy Boulevard within 100 feet west of Arbor Crest Drive.

11. No parking on the north side of Sandy Boulevard within 100 feet east of Arbor Crest Drive.

12. Passenger vehicle parking only on the north side of Sandy Boulevard from 100 feet east of Arbor Crest Drive for 570 feet.

13. No parking on the north side of Sandy Boulevard from 670 feet east of Arbor Crest Drive to NE 223rd.

14. No parking within 15 feet of the alley next to the Fairview City Hall that intersects with NE Park Lane.

15. Community center parking only in the marked spaces on 3rd Street between Harrison and Lincoln.

16. Any motor vehicle or trailer other than a passenger vehicle on a street between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day in front of or adjacent to a residence, motel, apartment house, hotel or other sleeping accommodation.

17. Any motor vehicle parked in a required front yard setback in any residential district. Private driveways, or other graveled or paved parking areas meeting all applicable city requirements, are exempt from this requirement.

18. No trailer parking on any street within the area bounded by NE Halsey Street, NE Fairview Parkway, NE 223rd Avenue, and NE Glisan Street except during loading and unloading. 

19. No parking on the south side of Sandy Boulevard from Fairview Parkway to 223rd Avenue.

D. Prohibited Parking. No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a street for the principal purpose of:

1. Displaying the vehicle for sale.

2. Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

3. Displaying advertising from the vehicle.

4. Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized.

E. Use of a Loading Zone. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. In no case, when the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect, shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone shall not exceed 15 minutes.

F. Unattended Vehicle. Whenever a police officer shall find a motor vehicle parked or standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station (City Hall).

G. Standing or Parking of Buses and Taxicabs. The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping the taxicab outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers.

H. Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands. No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus in a bus stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter the restricted space.

I. Lights on Parked Vehicles. No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle that is parked in accordance with this chapter upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a person or object at a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle.

J. Parking Time Limits.

1. A motor vehicle may park in a time limit restricted area only for a period not to exceed the posted time limit as determined by the city council.

2. Such time limits shall not apply on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, or Christmas.

3. A motor vehicle may not return to a restricted time limit area in the same block face or within 500 feet of where previously parked on the same block face for a one-hour period.

4. Upon expiration of the designated time limit, as indicated by the posted time limit sign, a citation may be issued if a motor vehicle remains parked or stopped on the same block face unless:

a. The motor vehicle has moved to an unregulated parking area in the same block face; or

b. The motor vehicle has vacated the block face for one hour.

K. Exemptions and Waiver.

1. The provisions of this chapter that regulate the parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles do not apply to:

a. A vehicle of the city, county, state, or a public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street.

b. A vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail.

c. A vehicle of a disabled person who complies with the provisions of ORS 811.610 to 811.630.

2. The city may in its sole discretion grant a temporary waiver of parking regulations of this chapter to allow a vehicle to park on a public street or city property in an area otherwise restricted or in excess of time limitations. Temporary waivers are granted by temporary parking waiver permits. The following shall apply to all temporary parking waiver permits:

a. Application for a temporary parking waiver permit shall be made to the city administrator at least five business days before the date of the requested waiver. The city administrator may consider applications submitted less than five days before the date of the requested waiver, but in no event shall the city administration consider an application submitted after a parking violation has occurred. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee established by resolution of the city council.

b. The city administrator or designee may issue the temporary parking waiver permit if the waiver is for good cause and will not impact public safety or convenience. If an application is denied, the applicant may appeal to the city council, whose decision shall be final.

c. No permit issued under this section shall be effective for more than three days. The city administrator or designee may reissue the permit for one additional three-day period upon a showing by the applicant that good cause continues to exist.

d. The permit shall bear the signature of the city administrator or designee, the signature of the issuing clerk, the date of issuance, the date or dates the permit is valid, the location of the vehicle on the public street, and the owner of the vehicle and the owner’s address or location at which he or she can be reached.

e. The permit shall be displayed on the vehicle’s front dashboard. (Ord. 6-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 4-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 9-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 1-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-2015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-2008; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 3-1999 § 1; Ord. 14-1994 § 1; Ord. 17-1986 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 12)


10.05.130 Bicycles.

A. Bicycle Operating Rules. In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this chapter and state law pertaining to bicycles, a person shall:

1. Not leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, the person shall leave the bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance. A person shall not leave a bicycle in violation of the provisions relating to the parking of motor vehicles.

2. Not ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the city.

B. Impounding of Bicycles.

1. No person shall leave a bicycle on private property without the consent of the person in charge or the owner thereof.

2. A bicycle left on public property for a period in excess of 24 hours may be impounded by the police department.

3. In addition to any citation issued, a bicycle parked in violation of this chapter that obstructs or impedes the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise endangers the public may be immediately impounded by the police department.

4. If the owner of a bicycle impounded under this chapter can be readily determined, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No impounding fee shall be charged to the owner of a stolen bicycle which has been impounded.

5. A bicycle impounded under this chapter which remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with the city’s procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property.

6. Except as provided in subsection (B)(4) of this section, a fee of $2.00 shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 13)


10.05.140 Pedestrians.

A. Pedestrians Must Use Crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross a street other than within a crosswalk in blocks with marked crosswalks or if within 150 feet of a marked crosswalk. A pedestrian shall cross a street at a right angle, unless crossing within a crosswalk. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 14)


10.05.150 Parades.

A. Prohibited Activity. No person shall organize or participate in a parade that may disrupt or interfere with traffic without obtaining a permit. A permit shall always be required of a procession of people using the public right-of-way and consisting of 50 or more persons or five or more vehicles.

B. Parade Permit.

1. Application for parade permits shall be made to the administrator at least seven days prior to the intended date of the parade, unless the time is waived by the administrator for good reason.

2. Applications shall include the following information:

a. The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade.

b. The date of the proposed parade.

c. The desired route, including assembling points.

d. The number of persons, vehicles, and animals that will be participating in the parade.

e. The proposed starting and ending time.

3. The application shall be signed by the person designated as chairperson.

4. The administrator shall issue a parade permit conditioned on the applicant’s written agreement to comply with the terms of the permit unless the administrator finds that:

a. The time, route, and size of the parade will unreasonably disrupt the movement of other traffic.

b. The parade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and contiguous areas that allowing the parade would deny reasonable police protection to the city.

c. The parade will interfere with another parade for which a permit has already been issued.

d. Information contained in the application is found to be false or a material detail has been omitted.

e. The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all the conditions of the permit.

5. If one or more of the conditions listed in subsection (B)(4) of this section, other than subpart (e), exists, the administrator may impose reasonable conditions in the permit, including, but not limited to:

a. Requiring an alternate date.

b. Requiring an alternate route.

c. Restricting the size of the parade.

6. The administrator shall notify the applicant of the decision within three days after receipt of the application.

7. If the administrator proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the council.

C. Appeal to Council.

1. An applicant may appeal the decision of the administrator by filing a written request of appeal with the recorder within 48 hours after the administrator has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a permit and so advised applicant.

2. The council shall schedule a hearing date, which shall not be later than three days following the filing of the written appeal with the recorder, and shall notify the applicant of the date and time that he or she may appear either in person or by a representative.

D. Offenses Against Parade.

1. No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or a parade participant.

2. No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade.

E. Permit Revocable. The administrator may revoke a parade permit if circumstances clearly show that the parade can no longer be conducted consistent with the public’s well-being or safety. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 15)


10.05.155 Special events/street closures/no parking.

A. A street closure/no parking permit application must be submitted and authorized pursuant to Chapter 10.25 FMC to be valid and enforceable. 

B. No person shall unreasonably interfere with lawful street closures or no parking barricades.

C. No person shall operate or park a vehicle that violates lawful street closure signs or no parking barricades. (Ord. 3-2013 § 1 (Exh. A))


10.05.160 Funeral procession.

A. No permit is required for a funeral procession.

B. A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route that is both legal and practical.

C. The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control.

D. All motor vehicles in the funeral procession shall be operated with their lights on.

E. No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.

F. No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession.

G. Each driver in the procession shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 16)


10.05.170 Parking citations and owner responsibility.

A. Citation on Illegally Parked Vehicle. When a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this chapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and any other information that may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking citation instructing the operator to answer to the charge or pay the penalty imposed within 10 days during specific hours and at a place specified in the citation.

B. Failure to Comply with Parking Citation. If the operator does not respond to a parking citation pursuant to FMC 10.05.120 within the required time period, the municipal court may order the vehicle to be towed and impounded.

C. Repealed by Ord. 9-2002.

D. Owner Responsibility. The owner of a vehicle in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, unless the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner’s consent.

E. Registered Owner Presumption. In a proceeding against a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle was registered to the defendant at the time of the violation shall constitute a presumption that the defendant was the owner. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 2-1997 § 2; Ord. 11-1986 § 17)


10.05.180 Impoundment of vehicles.

A. Whenever a vehicle is placed in a manner or location that constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to public safety, a police officer shall order the owner or operator of the vehicle to remove it. If the vehicle is unattended, the officer may cause the vehicle to be towed and stored at the owner’s expense. The owner of a parked vehicle found in violation and subsequently towed must pay a fine or post bail to the city and any administrative fees before the vehicle may be released. In addition, a valid operator’s license, proof of ownership, and proof of insurance must be presented.

B. The disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under authority of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance of the city and Oregon Revised Statutes relating to impoundment and disposition of vehicles abandoned on the city streets.

C. The impoundment of a vehicle will not preclude the issuance of a citation for violation of a provision of this chapter.

D. Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the expense of the vehicle owner.

E. Whenever a police officer observes a vehicle parked in violation of a provision of this chapter or state law, for conditions other than hazard, if the vehicle has three or more unpaid parking violations against it, the officer may, in addition to issuing a citation, cause the vehicle to be impounded. A vehicle so impounded shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges have been paid. Vehicles impounded under authority of this subsection may be sold by the tow company, per the guidelines of Oregon Revised Statutes, if they are not redeemed. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 5-2003 § 1; Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 18)


10.05.190 Brakes.

A. All motor vehicles and bicycles operated through or upon public streets and ways within the city of Fairview shall conform to the requirements of applicable state law and shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control their movement and to stop and hold such vehicle.

B. Brakes of a mechanical or hydraulic nature operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, must be effectively muffled to avoid loud, disturbing or unnecessary noises in the operation thereof. This section shall apply to the use of “exhaust” brakes or “jake” brakes. The discharge in the open air of the exhaust of a motor vehicle or the “exhaust” brakes or braking system of a motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises and/or emission of annoying smoke shall be considered a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 19)


10.05.200 Penalties.

A. Violation of FMC 10.05.110 is punishable by fine not to exceed $100.00.

B. Violation of FMC 10.05.100, 10.05.120 through 10.05.160, 10.05.190 and 10.05.220 is punishable by fine not to exceed $50.00.

C. Vehicles in violation of FMC 10.05.120(C)(6) or (C)(7) may be towed without notice. (Ord. 4-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 6-1992 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 20)


10.05.210 Existing control devices and markings.

Parking and traffic control devices and markings installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter are lawfully authorized. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 23)


10.05.220 Public drinking.

No person shall drink or consume intoxicating liquor in a public place or any motor vehicle in a public place unless such premises are licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission. (Ord. 9-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 9-2002 § 1; Ord. 6-1992 § 1; Ord. 11-1986 § 25)


Chapter 10.10 TRANSFER OF JURISDICTION OF CERTAIN ROADS

Sections:

10.10.010    Acceptance of jurisdiction.


10.10.010 Acceptance of jurisdiction.

The Fairview city council finds that it is in the best interest of the city to accept jurisdiction of the following county roads:

NE 202nd Avenue, No. 4833

(From NE Thompson Street to a point 249.94 feet south of NE Thompson Street)

NE 203rd Avenue, Nos. 4834, 4886

(From NE Thompson Street to a point 125.19 feet south of NE San Rafael Street)

NE 205th Avenue, No. 952

(From NE Halsey Street to north right-of-way line of NE Thompson Street)

NE 205th Avenue, No. 952

(From north right-of-way line of Banfield Freeway to NE Sandy Boulevard)

NE Broadway Court, No. 3376

(From NE 201st Avenue to a point 529.04 feet northeasterly of NE 201st Avenue)

NE San Rafael Street, No. 4885

(From NE 201st Avenue to NE 203rd Avenue)

NE Thompson Street, No. 3856

(From NE 201st Avenue to NE 205th Avenue)

NE Oregon Street, No. 595

(From NE 201st Avenue to NE 202nd Avenue)

NE 202nd Avenue, No. 595

(From NE Oregon Street to a point 90.00 feet, more or less, south of NE Oregon Street)

Half Street “Fairview”

NE 202nd Avenue, No. 595 (west half)

(From a point 90.00 feet, more or less, south of NE Oregon Street to a point 155.00 feet, more or less, south of NE Oregon Street)

(Ord. 8-1995 § 1)


Chapter 10.15 RECKLESS DRIVING

(Repealed by Ord. 9-2002)


Chapter 10.20 OFF-ROAD VEHICLES

Sections:

10.20.010    Definitions.

10.20.020    Authority of police officers.

10.20.030    Operation of off-road vehicles.

10.20.040    Seizure.

10.20.050    Disposition of vehicle.

10.20.060    Penalties.


10.20.010 Definitions.

A. As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

1. “Off-road vehicle” means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, sand, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain.

2. “Nonroad area” means any area that is not a road, or a road which is closed to off-road vehicles and posted as such; except that areas commonly held open to vehicular use, such as parking lots and race tracks, shall not be considered nonroad areas.

B. As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural, and the masculine includes the feminine. (Ord. 2-1985 § 1)


10.20.020 Authority of police officers.

It shall be the duty of city police officers so designated by the city council to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2-1985 § 2)


10.20.030 Operation of off-road vehicles.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an off-road vehicle on any nonroad area which the operator does not own, unless:

1. The operator possesses written permission from the owner, contract purchaser, renter or lessee of the nonroad area; or

2. The operator possesses written evidence of membership in a club or association to which the owner, contract purchaser, renter or lessee of the nonroad area has given written permission and a copy of which has been filed with the city; or

3. The owner, contract purchaser, renter or lessee of the nonroad area has designated the nonroad area as open for recreational purposes in accordance with ORS 105.655 to 105.680 by filing such consent and other information necessary to identify the area with the city; or

4. The owner, contract purchaser, renter or lessee has designated the nonroad as being open to off-road vehicle use by posting notice thereof which describes the boundaries of the nonroad area designated as open and which designates the hours during which the area is to be open.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to:

1. Falsify the written permission required by subsection (A)(1) of this section.

2. Falsify the evidence of club or association membership or the written permission required by subsection (A)(2) of this section.

3. Falsify the filing or consent required by subsection (A)(3) of this section.

4. Post the notice or remove the posted notice required by subsection (A)(4) of this section without the consent of the owner, contract purchaser, renter or lessee. (Ord. 2-1985 § 3)


10.20.040 Seizure.

A. The city police may arrest the person operating an off-road vehicle when the person is found in the act of operating an off-road vehicle in violation of this chapter; except, however, the city police may issue a citation in accordance with ORS 133.070 in lieu of exercising custody of the operator.

1. The city police may seize any off-road vehicle incident to arrest or citation of the operator if he has reasonable grounds to believe that the vehicle was operated with willful or reckless disregard or with the likelihood that the operation would cause substantial damage to the off-road area or that substantial damage has been caused by that operation.

2. The city police shall retain possession of the vehicle, if seized, and, in any event, proceed at once against the person arrested in municipal court.

B. If the person arrested is the legal owner of a seized vehicle, it shall be returned to the owner upon execution of a good and valid bond, or cash deposit, with sureties acceptable to the city in a sum equal to the average value of the vehicle as determined by the city, which bond or cash deposit shall be conditioned upon the return of the vehicle to the city police upon disposition of the judgment of the court.

1. If the person arrested is convicted of a violation of this chapter, and he is the owner of the off-road vehicle, the vehicle shall be subject to disposition as provided in FMC 10.20.050.

C. If the person arrested is not the legal owner of a seized vehicle, the city police shall make all reasonable efforts to identify the name and address of the owner. If the city police are able to determine the name and address of the owner, they shall notify the owner by registered or certified mail of the seizure and inform him of his rights under subsection D of this section.

D. Any person notified under subsection C of this section, or any owner of the vehicle, or any other person asserting a claim of lawful possession of a seized vehicle, may, prior to trial, move the court for return of the vehicle or obtain possession of the vehicle by posting bond or cash in accordance with subsection B of this section.

1. The court shall, upon receipt of motion for return of vehicle, hold a hearing to determine if the owner, or other person asserting a lawful claim to the vehicle, had any knowledge that the vehicle would be used in violation of this chapter.

2. If the court determines by clear and convincing evidence that the driver/owner had knowledge that the person arrested would use the vehicle in violation of this chapter, the vehicle shall not be returned to the driver/owner except in accordance with subsection B of this section and the vehicle shall be subject to forfeiture, as specified in FMC 10.20.050.

E. If the person arrested is not convicted of a violation of this chapter, and if the city police are in possession of the vehicle, it shall immediately be returned to the owner. (Ord. 2-1985 § 4)


10.20.050 Disposition of vehicle.

A. The court, upon conviction of the person arrested, may order a return of a seized vehicle to the owner after payment of all expenses, or it may, upon motion made by the city, order forfeiture and sale of the vehicle at public auction by the city police.

1. In determining whether to order a forfeiture and sale of the vehicle, the court shall consider the amount of damage caused by the use of the vehicle, and the willfulness of the violation.

B. If the court orders a forfeiture and sale of the vehicle, the city police, after deducting $50.00 for administrative expenses plus all other expenses incurred, shall pay, to the extent of the remaining proceeds, all liens of record, ratably and according to their priorities. Any balance remaining shall be paid into the general funds of the city.

C. If no person claims the vehicle, the city police shall advertise the sale of the vehicle and the description thereof not fewer than three times in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, said publication appearing for the first time not fewer than 14 days before the proposed sale and the last time not more than seven days before the proposed sale. Proceeds from the sale of the property, after deducting the expenses and cost, shall be paid into the general fund of the city of Fairview. Unsold property may be destroyed. (Ord. 2-1985 § 5)


10.20.060 Penalties.

Violation of this chapter is punishable by imprisonment of a period not to exceed 100 days or a fine not to exceed $500.00, or both. (Ord. 2-1985 § 6)


Chapter 10.25 TEMPORARY CLOSURE OF CITY STREETS AND WAYS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:

10.25.005    Purpose.

10.25.010    Definitions.

10.25.020    Authority and administration.

10.25.030    Exemptions.

10.25.040    Street closure permit application requirements.

10.25.050    Application process and approval criteria.

10.25.060    Permit fees and deposits.

10.25.070    Indemnification and insurance requirements.

10.25.080    Permit denial.

10.25.090    Permit revocation.

10.25.100    Appeal to city council.


10.25.005 Purpose.

These regulations are designed to allow for the orderly and safe closure of streets and other public ways under the city’s jurisdiction, minimize potential adverse impacts on transportation-dependent activities and ensure appropriate access is maintained for the needs of public works, public safety and emergency vehicle response. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.010 Definitions.

Unless the context requires otherwise, the following mean as provided herein:

A. “Adverse impacts” includes impacts to city residents, real property, traffic management and flow and the environment resulting from an event or seasonal event.

B. “Applicant” means the person who has filed a written application for a permit on behalf of themselves, an organization or group.

C. “City administrator” or “administrator” means the Fairview city administrator or designee. Designee implies on-duty police officers who may revoke the permit based on observations at the time of the event. In this case, the police officer will confer with his/her immediate supervisor prior to revoking the permit.

D. “City” means the city of Fairview, Oregon.

E. Event. See “Temporary event” or “Seasonal event.”

F. “Permit” is an actual form signed by the appropriate parties showing approval of the event as defined in the street closure permit application.

G. “Permittee” means the person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter.

H. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity.

I. “Plan” is a drawing detailing the closure and must include (at a minimum) streets to be closed, alternative streets to be used by vehicles and pedestrians to allow unrestricted access, fire hydrant locations, impacted residents along with addresses, visitor parking plan, and any other information relevant to the street closure request.

J. “Reimbursable costs” means those costs and expenses incurred by the city associated with the granting of a permit including, without limitation, the following:

1. Utility services provided for the event or seasonal event including all costs of installation, maintenance, connection, and removal;

2. Repair, maintenance and removal of facilities in the event of a failure of the applicant to comply with the promoter;

3. Repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, and other public property resulting from the event;

4. Garbage cleanup and disposal resulting from the fault of permittee to clean up the area after the event;

5. Other direct and indirect costs associated with issuance of the street closure permit.

K. “Seasonal event” is a periodic event occurring on an ongoing seasonal basis such as farmers’ markets, holiday craft fairs, and the like.

L. “Temporary event” is an event lasting for a limited time of not more than 12 hours in any one day nor exceeding seven consecutive days and not occurring more than two times within any 365-day period.

M. “Street closure” means the permitted traffic and/or parking restriction on an affected street, way, alley, or other public way.

N. “Street closure permit” or “permit” means written approval entitling permittee to a street closure. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.020 Authority and administration.

A. The city administrator is authorized to review applications for street closures and approve, approve with conditions or deny applications consistent with this chapter.

B. The administrator may adopt and utilize procedures and forms necessary to implement this chapter.

C. All other permits or orders required by law for activities conducted in conjunction with or as part of an event must be applied for and obtained separately from any street closure permit. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.030 Exemptions.

This chapter does not apply to any street closure initiated by the city or a public utility in order to repair public or public utility infrastructure, construct public or public utility infrastructure or limit access as a result of an event or situation necessitating the presence of public safety or emergency personnel and/or vehicles. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.040 Street closure permit application requirements.

A. Applicants wishing to temporarily close or otherwise limit access to a street, road, pathway or the like within the city for an event shall apply for and obtain a permit. An applicant shall file with the city administrator an application on a form approved by the administrator and submitted not less than 45 days prior to the date of the requested closure. Failure to meet the 45-day limitation is sufficient to deny issuance of the permit and is not appealable to the city council.

B. Applications submitted more than 45 days prior to the date of the requested closure are eligible for appeal rights described in FMC 10.25.100. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.050 Application process and approval criteria.

A. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city administrator may forward a copy thereof to the fire marshal, police, community development and public works departments for their review and comment. Those departments shall, within five working days, complete said review and thereupon offer recommendations as to the application’s approval, approval with conditions, or denial. The administrator may, in addition, seek comment from neighbors of the proposed event and require submission of additional information by applicant as the administrator deems necessary.

B. The administrator may approve, approve with conditions or deny the street closure application consistent with the standards set out in subsection (C) of this section.

C. The following criteria must be met by applicant prior to a permit being issued:

1. All temporary structures and other artifices erected for the event shall be removed at the end of the event, leaving the site in the same general condition as it was prior to the placement of the structure(s) or artifice. All structures or artifices shall meet applicable Oregon Building and Fire Code regulations. No obstruction shall be erected or maintained within a 15-foot radius of any fire hydrant within the area of the event.

2. Provision for adequate vehicle and pedestrian access and circulation shall be shown on a plan which shall then be reviewed and approved by the city. The plan will show how the access requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) are to be met.

3. Street closures where the processing and/or sale of goods, services and other commodities take place shall be conducted and maintain business hours not disruptive to use of adjacent or nearby residential properties. “Block parties” and/or similar social gatherings are not to be commenced prior to 7:00 a.m. nor after 10:00 p.m., excepting July 4th where said gatherings must end by 11:00 p.m.

4. If applicable, a temporary use permit application is submitted and approved in accordance with Chapter 19.490 FMC.

5. If an applicant wishes to restrict parking on public streets and ways during a special event, a no parking/barricade application must be submitted as part of the street closure application and must be approved by the city administrator. The no parking/barricade requirements will be enforced in accordance with this chapter and FMC 10.05.155. No parking/barricade permits are available only in conjunction with a street closure permit. (Ord. 3-2013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.060 Permit fees and deposits.

Fees shall be set by resolution of the city council and the administrator may, in addition, require payment of deposits prior to the issuance of any permit. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.070 Indemnification and insurance requirements.

An applicant shall, prior to the receipt of a permit, execute an agreement in a form approved of by the city administrator and city attorney to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city against all claims of injury or damage to persons or property, whether public or private, arising as a result of a temporary event. In addition, an applicant shall produce evidence of general liability and property damage insurance for the event in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 covering the event’s sponsor and naming the city, and the city’s officers, agents and employees as additional insured. The insurance is to cover any and all claims, demands, actions and suits for damage to property or personal injury, including death, arising from the event or street closure. A certificate of insurance evidencing these requirements including an endorsement naming the city, the city’s officers, agents and employees as an additional insured must be presented to the city along with the permit application. Failure to provide evidence of insurance may result in delay or denial of an application. This requirement may be reduced or waived by the city administrator after consultation with the city attorney. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.080 Permit denial.

The administrator may deny a street closure permit if:

A. A permit has been granted for another event at or near the same place and at or near the same time;

B. The event will occupy road(s) not under the sole jurisdiction of the city or will violate local, state or federal law;

C. A street closure may disrupt the orderly flow of vehicular and other traffic and no reasonable alternative means of addressing the disruption is, in the opinion of the administrator, available;

D. Applicant fails to provide assurances satisfactory to the city administrator that they will be able to provide for protection of participants, maintenance of public order, crowd security and/or emergency vehicle access;

E. Applicant makes a false statement of material facts on an application;

F. Applicant fails to provide proof that they have obtained all applicable license(s) or permit(s) required for conduct of the event or activities associated therewith;

G. Applicant has had a street closure permit revoked within the preceding 18 months or has failed to pay outstanding reimbursable costs to the city for prior event(s);

H. Applicant is unable to obtain indemnification and insurance consistent with FMC 10.25.070. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.090 Permit revocation.

The city administrator may revoke a permit if:

A. The applicant fails to comply with the terms of any condition(s) imposed on the permit including any applicable no parking/barricade requirements, the street closure is in violation of any provision of the Fairview Municipal Code, creates a hazardous condition, or any other applicable law;

B. The permit holder made a false statement of material fact on an application;

C. An unforeseen circumstance occurs prior to or during the event that diminishes the safety and security of the proposed event. This could include, but is not limited to, inclement weather such as a snowstorm, flood, or windstorm, natural hazard, or a fire, public safety, public works or other event. (Ord. 3-2013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


10.25.100 Appeal to city council.

Except as provided in FMC 10.25.040(A), a decision of the city administrator made concerning the application, denial or revocation of a street closure permit may be appealed to the city council. An applicant may appeal by filing with the city recorder a written statement of appeal within five working days of the date of the decision or action being appealed. The city recorder shall schedule a hearing before the city council no later than the second regular session following the filing and shall notify the applicant of the date and time for the hearing. The council may take such action(s) as it deems appropriate concerning the appeal, consistent with the limitations imposed by this chapter for issuance of street closure permits. (Ord. 6-2008 § 1)


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.05    Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair

12.10    Public Improvements

12.15    Underground Wiring District

12.20    Reimbursement Districts

12.25    Trees and Shrubs Impacting Streets, Traffic Signs and Sidewalks

12.30    Park Rules and Regulations

12.35    Telecommunications Facilities

12.40    Privilege Tax Upon Telecommunications Carriers

12.45    Structures Obstructing Public Rights-of-Way

12.50    Prohibits Smoking and Use of Tobacco on City Property


Chapter 12.05 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR

Sections:

12.05.010    Definitions.

12.05.020    Duty to repair and clear sidewalks.

12.05.030    Liability for sidewalk injuries.

12.05.040    Standards and specifications.

12.05.050    Required sidewalk repairs.

12.05.060    City may do work.

12.05.070    Assessment of costs.


12.05.010 Definitions.

Unless the context requires otherwise, the following mean:

A. “Person” means a natural person, association, firm, corporation or other legal entity.

B. “Public works director” means the city of Fairview public works director or such other person designated by the city administrator.

C. “Sidewalk” means that part of the street right-of-way between the curb-lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines that is intended for the use of pedestrians. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-1990 § 1)


12.05.020 Duty to repair and clear sidewalks.

It is the duty of an owner or occupant of land adjoining a street or right-of-way utilizing or using such street or right-of-way or portion thereof for walkway, yard or other purposes to maintain the same without hazards to the general public and, if a sidewalk or walkway exists, to maintain the same in good repair at all times. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-1990 § 2)


12.05.030 Liability for sidewalk injuries.

The owner or occupant of real property responsible for maintaining the adjacent sidewalk shall be primarily liable to any person injured because of any negligence of such owner or occupant in failing to maintain the sidewalk in good condition. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-1990 § 3)


12.05.040 Standards and specifications.

Sidewalks shall be repaired and maintained in accordance with the city’s standards and specifications as provided in the Sidewalk Maintenance Handbook – Policy and Operating Guidelines. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-1990 § 4)


12.05.050 Required sidewalk repairs.

A. When the city determines that repair of a sidewalk is necessary, the public works director (or designee) shall issue a repair notice to the owner of property adjacent to the sidewalk.

B. The notice shall require the owner of the property adjacent to the defective sidewalk to complete the repair of the sidewalk within 60 days after the service of notice. The notice shall also state that if the repair is not made by the owner, the city may do the work and the cost of the work will be assessed against the property adjacent to the sidewalk.

C. The public works director shall cause a copy of the notice to be served personally upon the owner of the property adjacent to the defective sidewalk, or the notice may be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If after diligent search the owner is not discovered, the public works director shall cause a copy of the notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, and such posting shall have the same effect as service of notice by mail or by personal service upon the owner of the property.

D. The person serving the notice shall file with the city recorder a statement stating the time, place and manner of service of notice. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-1990 § 5)


12.05.060 City may do work.

If repair of the sidewalk is not completed within 60 days after the service of notice to repair or such additional time as the city shall grant, the public works director shall cause the needed work on the sidewalk to be completed. Upon completion of the work, the public works director shall submit an itemized statement of the cost of the work to the council. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-1990 § 6)


12.05.070 Assessment of costs.

Upon receipt of the report, the council, by ordinance, shall assess the cost of the sidewalk work against the property adjacent to the sidewalk. The assessment shall become a lien against the concerned property. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-1990 § 7)


Chapter 12.10 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

12.10.010    Definitions.

12.10.020    Declaration of intention – Report of city engineer – Recommendations.

12.10.030    Council consideration of engineer’s report.

12.10.040    Public hearing on council-approved report.

12.10.050    Hearing and written remonstrances.

12.10.060    Manner of doing work, contracts, bids, bonds.

12.10.070    Special hearing when low bid exceeds estimate.

12.10.080    Proposed assessment.

12.10.090    Assessment ordinance.

12.10.100    Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.

12.10.110    Appeal.

12.10.120    Lien recording – Interest – Foreclosure.

12.10.130    Notice of assessment – Bonding.

12.10.140    Errors in assessment calculation.

12.10.150    Deficit assessment.

12.10.160    Rebate.

12.10.170    Abandonment of proceedings.

12.10.180    Curative provisions.

12.10.190    Reassessment.

12.10.200    Equitable apportionment of final assessments – Procedures – Recovery of city costs – Agreement – Filing.


12.10.010 Definitions.

A. “Owner” means the record holder of the legal title to the land in question, except that if there is a purchaser of the land whose interest therein is evidenced by a recorded land sale contract thereof, or by a written verified statement by the record holder of the legal title to the land duly filed with the recorder of the city, then such purchaser shall be deemed the “owner”.

B. “City engineer” means the duly appointed incumbent of the office of city engineer of the city of Fairview, if such office then exists and is occupied. If no such office shall exist or said office shall be vacant, the council shall designate an engineer or firm of engineers in connection with any proposed improvement in which event the term “city engineer” shall be held to refer to the engineer or firm of engineers so designated. (Ord. 1-1966 § 1)


12.10.020 Declaration of intention – Report of city engineer – Recommendations.

Whenever the council shall deem it advisable to construct, alter, repair or improve any street, sidewalk, sewer, or other public improvement, to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments according to benefits, it shall, by resolution, declare its intention to initiate such improvement and direct the city engineer to make a survey and written report of such project and file the same with the city recorder within the time set forth by the council in said resolution. Such report shall contain:

A. A plat or map showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvements and the lands to be assessed to pay all or any part of the costs thereof;

B. Plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done;

C. An estimate of the probable costs of the improvements, including legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto;

D. A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the costs of the improvement to the property specially benefitted, which recommendation shall be in accord with the provisions of FMC 12.10.100;

E. An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefitted properties, derived from applying the recommended assessment method to the estimated cost of the improvement;

F. A description of the location and assessed value of each lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, to be specially benefitted by the improvement, with the names of the record owners thereof, and, when readily available the names of other owners thereof as herein defined;

G. A statement showing outstanding assessments against the property to be assessed;

H. Any other information required by the council, who may designate the city recorder or other public official to assist the city engineer in obtaining the information required in subsections F and G of this section. (Ord. 1-1966 § 2)


12.10.030 Council consideration of engineer’s report.

After the city engineer shall have filed his report with the city recorder as above provided, the city recorder shall present said report to the council for its consideration. The council may approve the report as submitted, may amend the report and approve as amended or may direct the city engineer to furnish it with a further report or information or, on the basis of said report, may, by resolution, record its intention to abandon the proposed improvement. (Ord. 1-1966 § 3)


12.10.040 Public hearing on council-approved report.

After the council has given preliminary approval, as above provided in FMC 12.10.030, to the engineer’s report as submitted or amended the council shall:

A. Direct the city recorder to prepare a notice stating that such report is on file at the city and subject to examination by interested parties, giving the date when the same was filed and containing the following information:

1. That the report is on file for examination as above provided;

2. The date such report was filed;

3. The estimated probable cost of such proposed improvement;

4. A brief statement of the area proposed to be assessed therefor;

5. The date of public hearing by the council when any objections thereto shall be considered;

6. That written remonstrances may be filed against the proposed improvement at the office of the city recorder not later than the scheduled time for the council hearing of objections to the proposed improvement;

7. The method of assessment proposed to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the total cost of the improvement against the property specially benefitted;

8. The city engineer’s estimated unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefitted property, clearly indicating that this is an estimate and not an assessment.

B. The council shall specify in the resolution approving the city engineer’s report, if such be the case, whether the notice as above provided shall be made by publication, posting or mail, or by a combination of such methods. If the council shall declare notice be published, the city recorder shall prepare notice of publication containing the information set forth above, together with the names of the record owners of the property and a description thereof, either by street number or other legal description and cause the said notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation, either daily or weekly, within the city of Fairview; that publication if so ordered shall take place at least twice prior to the hearing provided for therein. If the council shall determine to give notice by posting, the city recorder shall prepare a notice containing the same information as provided by published notice, one copy thereof to be posted in the City Hall, one further copy shall be posted in a public place within the city in general, and at least two copies shall be posted within the confines of the area where the proposed improvement is to be carried out.

C. In addition to the publication or posting as above set forth, if such be the case, the city recorder shall cause to be mailed to the last known address of each record owner and, when readily known, to each owner, as defined herein, of property to be specially benefitted by the proposed improvement a copy of said notice; if notice be mailed as set forth herein, publication or posting need not take place.

D. Said notices, whether by publication, posting or mail, shall provide for the hearing before the city council, which may not be less than 10 days from the date of the mailing or posting whichever is later, of the said notices; if notice be by publication said hearing shall not be less than 14 days from the date of the first publication. (Ord. 1-1966 § 4)


12.10.050 Hearing and written remonstrances.

At the hearing provided in FMC 12.10.040, the council shall hear oral objections to the proposed improvement and consider all pertinent points of inquiry concerning the proposed improvement. The council shall also consider any written remonstrances filed with the city recorder to said improvements. As provided by Section 35 of the Charter, remonstrances by the owners of 60 percent of the property to be specially assessed for the proposed improvement, owner to be as herein defined, shall suspend action regarding the improvement for six months, unless such public improvement shall benefit the city as a whole or an emergency regarding the necessity for such improvement shall exist and be so declared by the council.

If the city council, after hearing objections and considering any remonstrances, finds that there is not sufficient remonstrance or the conditions as so provided by the city Charter and above set forth exist, then it may proceed with the improvement. (Ord. 1-1966 § 5)


12.10.060 Manner of doing work, contracts, bids, bonds.

The council shall provide by resolution the time and manner of doing the work of such improvement, and may provide for the city to do the work, or it may award the work on contract. In the event the work is done under contract, the contract shall be let in accordance with the city’s purchasing rules.

In no instance may such a contract as above provided be let until the notice set forth in FMC 12.10.040 be properly given, public hearing be held and the time for making or filing of remonstrances have expired and the city council determined by resolution to proceed with the proposed public improvement. (Ord. 1-1966 § 6)


12.10.070 Special hearing when low bid exceeds estimate.

If the council finds, upon the opening of bids for a public improvement requiring the assessment of property specially benefitted thereby, that the lowest responsible bid for such improvement substantially exceeds the engineer’s estimate it may, in its discretion, hold a special hearing of objections to proceeding with the improvement on the basis of such bid and may direct the city recorder to publish or post reasonable notice thereof in the manner of posting or publishing the original notice as set forth in FMC 12.10.040. (Ord. 1-1966 § 7)


12.10.080 Proposed assessment.

After the council has determined that a local improvement shall be made and when the estimated cost has been ascertained on the basis of contract awarded or city departmental costs, or after the work has been done and the cost thereof actually determined, the council shall, if it has not already done so, determine whether the property specially benefitted shall bear all or a portion of said cost and thereafter the council shall designate the city recorder or other city official to prepare the proposed assessment to the respective lots or parcels of land specially benefitted by said improvement and within the assessment district; said proposed assessment shall be filed in the office of the city recorder. Thereafter notice of said proposed assessment shall be mailed or personally delivered to the owner of each lot or parcel of land proposed to be assessed, which notice shall state the amount of proposed assessment on said property, a date by which time objections thereto shall be filed with the recorder and said notice shall indicate that any objections to said proposed assessment shall state the grounds thereof. (Ord. 1-1966 § 8)


12.10.090 Assessment ordinance.

The council shall, after the expiration of the date by which time objections shall be filed with the recorder to said proposed assessment, consider such objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments and shall thereafter determine the amount of actual assessment to be charged against the various lots, parcels and tracts of property specially benefitted by said improvement with their apportioned share of the cost of said improvement; and the council shall by ordinance spread the assessments upon the property in the manner and amounts so determined. The council may delay the passage of such an assessment ordinance until the contract for the work is let or the improvement completed and the total cost thereof determined if the council shall desire to avoid deficit assessments or rebates or for any other reason deemed sufficient. (Ord. 1-1966 § 9)


12.10.100 Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.

The council in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the public improvement may:

A. Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;

B. Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed as is just and reasonable between the properties determined to be specially benefitted.

C. Authorize payment by the city of all or any part of the cost of any such improvement when in the opinion of the council, due to topographical or physical conditions or excessive public travel, or other character of the work involved, or when the council otherwise believes the situation warrants it, provided the method selected creates a reasonable relation between the benefits derived by the property specially assessed and the benefits derived by the city as a whole.

Nothing herein contained shall preclude the council from using other available means of financing public improvements, including federal or state grants-in-aid, sewer service or other types of service charges, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or other legal means of finance. In the event any of such other means of finance are used, the council may, in its discretion, levy special assessments hereunder according to benefits to cover any part of the costs of the improvement not covered by such means. (Ord. 1-1966 § 10)


12.10.110 Appeal.

Any person feeling aggrieved by assessments made as herein provided may, within 20 days from the passage of the ordinance levying the assessment by the council, appeal therefrom to the Circuit Court of the State of Oregon for the County of Multnomah. Such appeal and the requirements and formalities thereof shall be heard and governed and determined and the judgment thereon rendered and enforced so far as practicable in the manner provided for appeals from assessments contained in Section 223.401 Oregon Revised Statutes, as now or hereafter amended. The result of such appeal shall be a final and conclusive determination of the matter of such assessment, except with respect to the city’s right of reassessment as provided herein. (Ord. 1-1966 § 11)


12.10.120 Lien recording – Interest – Foreclosure.

After the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the city recorder shall enter in the docket of city liens a statement of the respective amounts assessed upon each particular lot, tract or parcel of land with the names of the record owners thereof, and, so far as readily known, the names of the owners thereof as defined herein. Upon such entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall be a lien and charged upon the respective lots, tracts, or parcels of land against which the same are placed. Such liens shall be first and prior to all other liens or encumbrances thereon whatsoever insofar as the laws of the state of Oregon allow. Interest shall be charged at a percentage rate per annum fixed by resolution of the city council on all amounts not so paid within 30 days from the date of such entry, or entry corrected pursuant to FMC 12.10.140. The city may proceed to foreclose or enforce any lien to which it shall be entitled pursuant to the provisions of this chapter at any time after 30 days from the date on which the assessment, or assessment corrected pursuant to FMC 12.10.140, was entered in the lien docket, in the manner provided for the foreclosure and/or enforcement of liens by the general laws of the state of Oregon. (Ord. 5-1983 § 12; Ord. 5-1972 § 1; Ord. 1-1966 § 12)


12.10.130 Notice of assessment – Bonding.

Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the city recorder shall send by mail, to the last known address, a notice of assessment to the record owner and, so far as is readily known, to the owner as herein defined, of each lot, tract or parcel of land assessed. This notice shall state the time within which such assessments must be paid or bonded and that assessments which are not paid or bonded within the time stated in the notice shall bear interest at the percentage rate per annum fixed by the city council in accordance with FMC 12.10.120, and that the property so assessed is subject to foreclosure if such assessments are not paid or bonded within the time stated in the notice. Such record owner or other owner as herein defined may make application to bond such assessment pursuant to the provisions of Section 223.205 to 223.300, which is known as the “Bancroft Bonding Act,” Oregon Revised Statutes, together with amendments or future amendments thereof. (Ord. 5-1983 § 13; Ord. 5-1972 § 1; Ord. 1-1966 § 13)


12.10.140 Errors in assessment calculation.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the city recorder prior to any payment on account thereof. Said city recorder shall determine whether there is an error in fact and if he shall find that there is an error in fact, he shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. Upon the enactment of such an amendment or corrected ordinance by the council, the city recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of city liens and send by mail to the last known address of the owner a corrected notice of the assessment. (Ord. 1-1966 § 14)


12.10.150 Deficit assessment.

If assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is known and it be found that the amount assessed is insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the council may by resolution declare such deficit and prepare a proposed deficit assessment. The council shall set a time for a hearing of objections to such deficit assessment and shall direct the city recorder to publish, post or mail reasonable notice thereof in the manner heretofore set forth for publishing, posting or mailing notice. The council upon such hearing shall make a just and equitable deficiency assessment by ordinance. Such deficit assessment shall be consolidated with the assessment in the lien docket in accordance with the provisions of FMC 12.10.120. Thereafter, the provisions of FMC 12.10.130 and 12.10.140 herein shall be applicable with regard to such deficit assessment. (Ord. 1-1966 § 15)


12.10.160 Rebate.

If, upon the completion of the project it is found that any sum theretofore assessed therefor upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the cost thereof, the council must ascertain and declare the same by ordinance, and when so declared, it must be entered in the docket of city liens as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. If any such assessment has been paid, the person who paid the same, or his legal representative, shall be entitled to the payment of any portion of the rebate credit which exceeds the assessment, by a warrant on the city treasury. (Ord. 1-1966 § 16)


12.10.170 Abandonment of proceedings.

The council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for improvements hereunder at any time prior to the final consummation of such proceedings, and if liens have been assessed upon any property under this procedure, they shall be cancelled, and any payments made thereon shall be refunded to the payor, his assigns, or legal representatives. (Ord. 1-1966 § 17)


12.10.180 Curative provisions.

No improvement assessment shall be held invalid by reason of a failure to give, in any report, in the proposed assessment, in the assessment ordinance or ordinances, in the lien docket or elsewhere in the proceedings, the name of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land or part thereof or the name of any person having a lien upon or interest in such property, or by reason of any error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps hereinabove specified, unless it appears that the assessment as made, insofar as it affects the person complaining, is unfair and unjust, and the council shall have power and authority to remedy and correct such matters by suitable action and proceedings.

If any article, section, subsection, subdivision, phrase, clause, sentence or word in this chapter, shall for any reason whatsoever, be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not nullify the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined to the article, section, subsection, subdivision, clause, sentence, phrase or word so held invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1-1966 § 18)


12.10.190 Reassessment.

Whenever an assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment for any improvement which has been or may be hereafter made by the city has been or shall be hereafter set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void or its enforcement refuted by any court of this state or any federal court having jurisdiction thereof, whether directly or by virtue of any decision of such court, or when the council shall be in doubt as to the validity of such assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment or any part thereof, the council may make a new assessment or reassessment. Such reassessment shall be made in the manner provided by Section 223.405 through 223.485, Oregon Revised Statutes, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 1-1966 § 19)


12.10.200 Equitable apportionment of final assessments – Procedures – Recovery of city costs – Agreement – Filing.

A. In the event an owner, mortgagee or other lienholder as to a parcel of property formed from the partition or other division of a larger tract against which a final assessment is levied requests in writing, the city shall apportion the final assessment in such a way that the smaller parcel is assessed an equitable and pro rata share of said final assessment. Any apportionment shall be done such that it is consistent with the assessment method utilized by the council in establishing the final assessment under FMC 12.10.100.

B. A request for said equitable apportionment shall be made in writing and addressed to the city administrator and set out the legal and factual basis for the requested apportionment; provided, the city administrator shall then direct the city’s finance director to determine the appropriate apportionment based on the division of the property in question. The city’s finance director, in consultation with the city’s public works director and planning director, shall then make his/her determination on the terms and conditions under which the equitable apportionment is to be done such that it results in a fair division of the assessment as against all properties affected by the request.

C. The finance director shall determine the costs associated with the apportionment and cause an agreement to be developed and/or approved by the city attorney which agreement shall include the conditions under which the equitable apportionment is to take place and imposing on the requesting party(ies) liability for all city costs associated with the apportionment process, be those costs current or projected. Once an agreement is found to be satisfactory by the city and the requesting party(ies), it is to be presented to the council by the finance director along with a resolution authorizing the mayor and city administrator to sign it on behalf of the city.

D. The agreement and authorizing resolution shall be filed with the city recorder as well as with Multnomah County so that a permanent record of the final assessments and payment schedules and amounts therefore is available.

E. The above provisions shall also be available to estimated assessments with respect to any tract or parcel divided into smaller parcels prior to the levy of a final assessment. (Ord. 9-2001 § 1)


Chapter 12.15 UNDERGROUND WIRING DISTRICT

Sections:

12.15.010    Establishment of underground wiring assessment district.

12.15.020    Overhead wires prohibited.

12.15.030    Exemptions.

12.15.040    Joint use of conduits permitted.

12.15.050    Control of electrical currents.

12.15.060    Traffic signal installations.

12.15.070    Specifications – Permits – Approval.

12.15.080    Inspection and compliance with permits.

12.15.090    Notice and violation.

12.15.100    Property owner obligation.

12.15.110    Coordination and appeal.

12.15.120    Enforcement.


12.15.010 Establishment of underground wiring assessment district.

An underground wiring district be, and it hereby is, established pursuant to pertinent statutes and Charter authority for the city of Fairview, the boundaries of which include and embody the area and properties set forth in Exhibit A* attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and by this reference made a part hereof at this point. (Ord. 7-1996 § 2)

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibit A is on file in the city clerk’s office.


12.15.020 Overhead wires prohibited.

It shall be unlawful, except as otherwise provided herein, for any person, public utility or other entity to erect, construct or maintain on or over the surface of any of the areas within said underground wiring district any wires, poles, cables, appliances, or apparatus of any kind except as provided in FMC 12.15.030, by or through which any form of electric current is transmitted. (Ord. 7-1996 § 3)


12.15.030 Exemptions.

A. Wires, cables and appliances for electric signs, advertisements and decorative lighting, connected with wires or cables in approved conduits, subways or trenches; provided, that all wires for electric signs, advertisements, and decorative lighting shall be carried from or connected with a premises building and as otherwise permitted. If such wires are placed on the sides or front of any such building, they shall be placed in approved protective tubes or conduits so as not to be dangerous to life or property, and be connected underground from the foundations or basement of the building providing the energy source directly, with the nearest wires or cables placed in such conduits, subways or trenches. No wiring for electric signs, advertisements or decorative lighting shall cross any street or open area above ground.

B. Enclosed electric transformers and pedestals required and used in connection with underground wiring and mounted on the surface of the streets and public property.

C. Transmission Lines. Facilities used or intended to be used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 35,000 volts. (Ord. 7-1996 § 4)


12.15.040 Joint use of conduits permitted.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent agreement among any parties affected by this chapter designed to provide for joint ownership, control, or use of conduits, subways or trenches if consistent with the requirements of applicable statute and regulation of the concerned utilities. (Ord. 7-1996 § 5)


12.15.050 Control of electrical currents.

It shall be the duty of all persons using or employing electrical currents to provide and put in use such means and appliances as will, as far as practicable, control and effectually contain such currents in their proper channels and on their own wires, cables and other structures so as to prevent damage to pipes and structures of the city of Fairview or other public entity or other persons; to repair and renew said means and appliances; and as required to change and improve the same as may be necessary to accomplish said purpose, all at his/her charge and expense, and at his/her own risk concerning the selection, adopting such means and appliances as shall prevent damage to pipes and other structures belonging to the city, other public entity, or to any other party. (Ord. 7-1996 § 6)


12.15.060 Traffic signal installations.

The provisions of this chapter relating to underground wiring shall not be applicable to traffic signal installations maintained by the city of Fairview or Multnomah County required to provide for the operating integrity thereof. (Ord. 7-1996 § 7)


12.15.070 Specifications – Permits – Approval.

All wiring applicable hereto must meet applicable state statutes, the city’s building and wiring codes and the requirements of the concerned utilities, and the city council is authorized to establish specific procedures to accomplish the same as needed by resolution. (Ord. 7-1996 § 8)


12.15.080 Inspection and compliance with permits.

The applicant must apply to the city for inspection of the work to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter, prior to final acceptance of the work. Applicant shall not be relieved of any performance obligations or requirements until all work is completed in accordance with the terms of permits granted and accepted by the city. The city may require changes in the approved plans if unusual conditions arise during construction which warrant such changes in the public interest. (Ord. 7-1996 § 9)


12.15.090 Notice and violation.

The city shall provide written notice to all concerned parties including the property occupant, and known and legal owners of record, including contract purchasers of record, of date of the actual commencement of project construction advising that if undergrounding of private property utility lines necessary to complete the street widening and undergrounding wiring project on Halsey Street is not completed by the dates set for the actual commencement of construction thereof or other arrangement, approved by the concerned utilities and city, made, the city shall notify the occupants and legal owners of record, including contract purchasers of record, of the concerned real property within the UWD where undergrounding is required, by certified or registered mail, that they are in violation of this chapter, advising that if such underground wiring does not occur within 15 days of said notice that the city may do so and charge the cost thereof, plus an administrative fee, not to exceed 30 percent, to the property owner and that a city lien may be placed against the concerned property for the total amount. (Ord. 7-1996 § 10)


12.15.100 Property owner obligation.

The city will provide concerned parties with written notice of all pertinent actual construction dates and deadlines at the earliest times possible. However, construction of and payment for the underground wiring required herein within the time frame set shall be the sole responsibility and obligation of the concerned property owner. (Ord. 7-1996 § 11)


12.15.110 Coordination and appeal.

A coordination and appeal committee is established, consisting of the director of public works and a representative of the city administrator, to provide concerned property owners with a reference and/or appeal source for prompt resolution of problems incurred by concerned property owners in meeting their respective obligations hereunder. Such committee shall receive and hear written referrals or appeals by property owners within 48 hours of receipt and provide response within 24 hours thereafter. This committee is authorized to recommend appropriate assistance technically and financially in the resolution of such concerns with final decision to be made by the city administrator. (Ord. 7-1996 § 12)


12.15.120 Enforcement.

In the event the undergrounding as described above is not completed within the time set forth in the notice, or such extension of time as may be granted by the city therefor, the city, through its agents or employees, shall have the right to enter upon the premises concerned and complete the undergrounding project. In the event the city is required to take such action and complete the undergrounding, the cost plus administrative fee, as indicated in FMC 12.15.090, shall be recovered from the concerned property and shall, upon council resolution, become a lien upon and against the property. Such lien, if created, may be foreclosed in the manner provided by law or city ordinance for the collection of municipal or public liens upon properties within the corporate limits of the city of Fairview. The city shall also have available as means of enforcement and collection of the costs and charges incurred, any and all other methods provided by law including the institution of a civil suit against the parties concerned or responsible as herein defined. (Ord. 7-1996 § 13)


Chapter 12.20 REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

12.20.010    Definitions.

12.20.020    Application for a reimbursement district.

12.20.030    Director of public works’ report.

12.20.040    Amount to be reimbursed.

12.20.050    Public hearing.

12.20.060    Notice of public hearing.

12.20.070    City council action.

12.20.080    Notice of adoption of resolution.

12.20.090    Recording the resolution.

12.20.100    Contesting the reimbursement district.

12.20.110    Obligation to pay reimbursement fee.

12.20.120    Public improvements.

12.20.130    Multiple public improvements.

12.20.140    Collection and payment – Other fees and charges.

12.20.150    Fees not subject to property tax limitations.


12.20.010 Definitions.

The following terms are defined as follows for the purposes of this chapter:

A. “Director of public works” or “director” means the person holding the position of director of public works or any officer or employee designated by that person to perform duties stated within this chapter.

B. “City” means the city of Fairview.

C. “Person” means a natural person, the person’s heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns; a firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity, its or their successors or assigns; and any agent, employee or any representative thereof.

D. “Applicant” means a person who is required or chooses to finance some or all of the cost of a street, water or sewer improvement which is available to provide service to property, other than property owned by the person, and who applies to the city for reimbursement for the expense of the improvement. The “applicant” may be the city.

E. “Street improvement” means a street improvement conforming with the standards of the city of Fairview, and including but not limited to streets, storm drains, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike paths, traffic control devices, street trees, lights and signs and public right-of-way.

F. “Water improvement” means a water improvement conforming with the standards of the city of Fairview, and including but not limited to extending a water line to property, other than property owned by the applicant, so that water service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line.

G. “Sewer improvement” means a sanitary sewer or storm sewer improvement conforming with the standards of the city of Fairview, and including but not limited to extending a sewer line to property, other than property owned by the applicant, so that sewer service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line.

H. “Public improvement” means any construction, reconstruction, or upgrading of water, sewer or street improvements.

I. “Front footage” means the linear footage of a lot or parcel owned by an intervening property owner which is served by a reimbursement district public improvement and on which the intervening property owner’s portion of the reimbursement may be calculated. Front footage shall be the amount shown on the most recent county tax assessor maps for the intervening property or, in the event such information is not available, any other reasonable method established by the director of public works for calculating front footage. Front footage includes the property owned by the applicant, but excludes the front footage of property owned by the city, including rights-of-way.

J. “Reimbursement agreement” means the agreement between an applicant and the city which is authorized by the city council and executed by the city administrator, providing for the installation of and payment for reimbursement district public improvements.

K. “Reimbursement district” means the area which is determined by the city council to derive a benefit from the construction of street, water or sewer improvements, financed in whole or in part by the applicant and includes property which has the opportunity to utilize such an improvement.

L. “Reimbursement fee” means the fee required to be paid by a resolution of the city council and the reimbursement agreement. The city council resolution and reimbursement agreement shall determine the boundaries of the reimbursement district and shall determine the methodology for imposing a fee which considers the cost of reimbursing the applicant for financing the construction of a street, water or sewer improvement within the reimbursement district.

M. “Utilize” means to apply for a building permit which will use or increase the use of a public improvement, to connect to a public improvement, or to otherwise increase the use of an improvement. (Ord. 12-1997 § 1)


12.20.020 Application for a reimbursement district.

A. Any person who is required to or chooses to finance some or all of the cost of a street, water or sewer improvement which is available to provide service to property, other than property owned by the person, may, by written application filed with the director of public works, request that the city establish a reimbursement district. The street, water and sewer improvements must include improvements in a size greater than those which would otherwise ordinarily be required in connection with an application for permit approval or must be available to provide service to property other than property owned by the applicant. Examples include but shall not be limited to full street improvements instead of half street improvements, off-site sidewalks, connection of street sections for continuity, pump stations, and the extension of water and sewer lines. The city may also initiate formation of a reimbursement district. The application shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by resolution, sufficient to cover the cost of administrative review and notice pursuant to this chapter.

B. The application shall include the following:

1. A description of the location, type, size and cost of each public improvement which is to be eligible for reimbursement.

2. A map showing the properties to be included in the proposed reimbursement district; the zoning district for the properties; the front footage or square footage of said properties, or similar data necessary for calculating the apportionment of the cost; and the property or properties owned by the applicant.

3. Post-construction: The actual cost of the improvements as evidenced by receipts, invoices or other similar documents.

Pre-construction: The estimated cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids, projection of the cost of labor and materials, or other evidence satisfactory to the director of public works.

4. Post-construction: The date the city accepted the public improvements.

Pre-construction: The estimated date of completion of the public improvements.

C. The application may be submitted to the city prior to the installation of the public improvement but not later than 180 days after completion and acceptance of the street, water or sewer improvements. However, the director of public works may waive this requirement upon the showing by the applicant of good cause of the delay, that the delay was not created by the applicant, and that the delay was unavoidable due to unanticipated or unforeseen circumstances. (Ord. 12-1997 § 2)


12.20.030 Director of public works’ report.

The director of public works shall review the application for the establishment of a reimbursement district and evaluate whether a district should be established. The director may require the submission of other relevant information from the applicant in order to assist in the evaluation. The director shall prepare a written report for the city council, considering and making recommendations concerning the following factors:

A. Whether the applicant will finance or has financed some or all of the cost of a street, water or sewer improvement, thereby making service available to property, other than property owned by the applicant.

B. The area to be included in the reimbursement district.

C. The actual or estimated cost of the street, water or sewer improvements within the area of the proposed reimbursement district and the portion of the cost for which the applicant should be reimbursed for each improvement.

D. A methodology for spreading the cost among the parcels within the reimbursement district and where appropriate defining a “unit” for applying the reimbursement fee to property which may, with city approval, be partitioned, altered, modified, or subdivided at some future date.

E. The amount to be charged by the city for administration of the agreement by the city. The administration fee shall be fixed by the city council and will be included in the resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district. The administration fee is due and payable to the city at the time the agreement is signed.

F. The period of time that the right to reimbursement exists if the period is less than five years.

G. Whether the street, water and sewer improvements will or have met city standards. (Ord. 12-1997 § 3)


12.20.040 Amount to be reimbursed.

A. A reimbursement fee shall be computed by the city for all properties, excluding property owned by or dedicated to the city, which have the opportunity to utilize the improvements, including the property of the applicant for formation of a reimbursement district. The fee shall be calculated separately for each type of improvement. The applicant for formation of the reimbursement district shall not be reimbursed for the portion of the reimbursement fee computed for the property of the applicant.

B. The cost to be reimbursed to the applicant shall be limited to the cost of construction, engineering, and off-site right-of-way. Engineering shall include surveying and inspection and shall not exceed 13.5 percent of eligible construction cost. Costs to be reimbursed for right-of-way shall be limited to the reasonable market value of land or easements purchased by the applicant from a third party to complete off-site improvements.

C. No reimbursement shall be allowed for financing costs, permits or fees required for construction permits, land or easements dedicated by the applicant, costs which are eligible for systems development charge credits, or any costs which can not be clearly documented.

D. Reimbursement for legal expenses shall be allowed only to the extent that such expenses relate to the preparation and filing of an application for reimbursement, and to working with the city through the director’s report and informational public hearing stages of an application.

E. The city council may grant an annual fee adjustment at the time of application for formation of a reimbursement district as provided in this subsection.

1. An annual fee adjustment shall be applied to the reimbursement fee beginning on the first anniversary of the date of the reimbursement agreement as a return on the investment for the person or the city. The annual fee adjustment shall be fixed and computed against the reimbursement fee as simple interest and will not compound. The amount of the fee adjustment shall be determined at the time that a district is formed and shall be the same each year.

2. Each fiscal year, the finance director shall recommend to the city council an interest rate to be used in determining the annual fee adjustment for reimbursement districts. The city council shall consider the recommendation of the finance director and shall adopt an interest rate to be used in determining the annual fee adjustment. The interest rate adopted by the city council shall be applied to all reimbursement districts formed during the fiscal year, for which annual fee adjustments are approved. (Ord. 12-1997 § 4)


12.20.050 Public hearing.

A. Within a reasonable time after the director of public works has completed the report required in FMC 12.20.030, the city council shall hold an informational public hearing in which any person shall be given the opportunity to comment on the proposed reimbursement district. Because formation of the reimbursement district does not result in an assessment against property or lien against property, the public hearing is for informational purposes only and is not subject to mandatory termination because of remonstrances. The city council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether a resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district shall be adopted.

B. If a reimbursement district is formed prior to construction of the improvement(s), a second public hearing shall be held after the improvement has been accepted by the city. At that time, the city council may modify the resolution to reflect the actual cost of the improvement(s). (Ord. 12-1997 § 5)


12.20.060 Notice of public hearing.

Not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to any public hearing held pursuant to this chapter, the applicant and all owners of property within the proposed district shall be notified of such hearing and the purpose thereof. Such notification shall be accomplished by certified mail. If notification is accomplished by certified mail, notice shall be mailed not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be deemed effective on the date that the letter of notification is mailed. Failure of the applicant or any affected property owner to be so notified shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any reimbursement district resolution or the city council’s action to approve the same. (Ord. 3-2001 § 1; Ord. 12-1997 § 6)


12.20.070 City council action.

A. After the public hearing held pursuant to FMC 12.20.050(A), the city council shall approve, reject or modify the recommendations contained in the director of public works’ report. The city council’s decision shall be embodied in a resolution. If a reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include the director of public works’ report as approved or modified, and specify that payment of the reimbursement fee, as designated for each parcel, is a precondition of receiving city permits applicable to development of that parcel as provided for in FMC 12.20.110.

B. When the applicant is other than the city, the resolution shall instruct the city administrator to enter into an agreement with the applicant pertaining to the reimbursement district improvements. If the agreement is entered into prior to construction, the agreement shall be contingent upon the improvements being accepted by the city. The agreement, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions:

1. The public improvement(s) shall meet all applicable city standards.

2. The total amount of potential reimbursement to the applicant.

3. The total amount of potential reimbursement shall not exceed the actual cost of the public improvement(s).

4. The annual fee adjustment set by the city council, if any.

5. The applicant shall guarantee the public improvement(s) for a period of 24 months after the date of installation.

6. The applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments or other costs or expense arising as a result of or related to the city’s establishment of the district, including the city’s costs or expenses related to collection of the reimbursement fee pursuant to FMC 12.20.110(H).

7. Other provisions as the city council determines necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter.

C. If a reimbursement district is established by the city council, the date of the formation of the district shall be the date that the city council adopts the resolution forming the district. (Ord. 3-2001 § 2; Ord. 12-1997 § 7)


12.20.080 Notice of adoption of resolution.

The city shall notify all property owners within the district and the applicant by certified mail of the adoption of a reimbursement district resolution. The notice shall include a copy of the resolution, the date it was adopted and a short explanation of when the property owner is obligated to pay the reimbursement fee and the amount of the fee. (Ord. 3-2001 § 3; Ord. 12-1997 § 8)


12.20.090 Recording the resolution.

The city recorder shall cause notice of the formation and nature of the reimbursement district to be filed in the office of the county recorder so as to provide notice to potential purchasers of property within the district. Said recording shall not create a lien. Failure to make such recording shall not affect the legality of the resolution or the obligation to pay the reimbursement fee. (Ord. 12-1997 § 9)


12.20.100 Contesting the reimbursement district.

No legal action intended to contest the formation of the district or the reimbursement fee, including the amount of the charge designated for each parcel, shall be filed after 60 days following the adoption of a resolution establishing a reimbursement district. (Ord. 12-1997 § 10)


12.20.110 Obligation to pay reimbursement fee.

A. The applicant for a permit related to property within any reimbursement district shall pay to the city, in addition to any other applicable fees and charges, the reimbursement fee established by the city council, together with the annual fee adjustment if any, if within the time specified in the resolution establishing the district, the person applies for and receives approval from the city for any of the following activities:

1. To apply for a building permit which will use or increase the use of a public improvement;

2. To connect to a public improvement or otherwise increase the use of a public improvement.

B. “Increase the use” means:

1. For sanitary sewer or storm sewer improvements: to make a physical change requiring a building or development permit on the intervening property which increases the volume discharged into the line.

2. For water improvements: to make a physical change requiring a building or development permit on the intervening property which increases the amount of water used.

3. For street improvements: to make a physical change requiring a building or development permit on the intervening property which increases the trips on the street or creates a new entrance onto the street.

C. The city’s determination of who shall pay the reimbursement fee is final. Neither the city nor any officer or employee of the city shall be liable for payment of any reimbursement fee, annual fee adjustment, or portion thereof as a result of this determination.

D. A permit applicant whose property is subject to payment of a reimbursement fee receives a benefit from the construction of street improvements, regardless of whether access is taken or provided directly onto such street at any time. Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or limit the authority of the city to provide or require access management.

E. No person shall be required to pay the reimbursement fee on an application or upon property for which the reimbursement fee has been previously paid, unless such payment was for a different type of improvement. No permit shall be issued for any of the activities listed in FMC 12.20.110(A) unless the reimbursement fee, together with the annual fee adjustment, has been paid in full. Where approval is given as specified in FMC 12.20.110(A), but no permit is requested or issued, then the requirement to pay the reimbursement fee lapses if the underlying approval lapses.

F. The date when the right of reimbursement ends shall not extend beyond five years from the district formation date. Upon application for an extension by the applicant, the city council may, by resolution, authorize up to two five-year extensions of the right of reimbursement under the agreement.

G. The reimbursement fee is immediately due and payable to the city by intervening property owners upon utilization of a public improvement. If connection is made or construction commenced without required city permits, then the reimbursement fee is immediately due and payable upon the earliest date that any such permit was required. No city permit of any kind for the intervening property shall be issued until the reimbursement fee is paid in full.

H. Whenever the full reimbursement fee has not been paid and collected for any reason after it is due, the city administrator shall report to the city council the amount of the uncollected reimbursement, the legal description of the intervening property on which the reimbursement is due, the date upon which the reimbursement was due and the intervening property owner’s name or names. The city council shall then, by motion, set a public hearing date and direct the city administrator to give notice of that hearing to each of the identified intervening property owners, together with a copy of the city administrator’s report concerning the unpaid reimbursement fee. Such notice shall be made by certified mail. At the public hearing, the city council may accept, reject or modify the city administrator’s report. If the city council accepts or rejects the city administrator’s report and determines that the reimbursement fee is due but has not been paid for whatever reason, the city may take any action including all legal or equitable means necessary to collect the unpaid amount. An unpaid reimbursement fee shall prohibit any issuance of permits by the city for the intervening property. (Ord. 3-2001 § 4; Ord. 12-1997 § 11)


12.20.120 Public improvements.

Public improvement installed pursuant to reimbursement district agreements shall become and remain the sole property of the city. (Ord. 12-1997 § 12)


12.20.130 Multiple public improvements.

More than one public improvement may be the subject of a reimbursement district. (Ord. 12-1997 § 13)


12.20.140 Collection and payment – Other fees and charges.

A. Developers shall receive all reimbursement collected by the city for their public improvements. Such reimbursement shall be delivered to the developer for as long as the reimbursement district agreement is in effect. Such payments shall be made by the city within 90 days of receipt of the reimbursements.

B. The reimbursement fee is not intended to replace or limit, and is in addition to, any other existing fees or charges collected by the city. (Ord. 12-1997 § 14)


12.20.150 Fees not subject to property tax limitations.

The city council finds that the fees imposed by this chapter are not taxes subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 12-1997 § 15)


Chapter 12.25 TREES AND SHRUBS IMPACTING STREETS, TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIDEWALKS

Sections:

12.25.010    Limited plantings.

12.25.020    Permission to plant or remove trees or shrubs within public streets or rights-of-way.

12.25.030    Prohibited trees.

12.25.040    Declared nuisance.

12.25.050    Tree and shrub standards.

12.25.060    Property owner obligation.

12.25.070    Abuse or mutilation of trees.


12.25.010 Limited plantings.

It shall be unlawful (without first obtaining the written approval of the public works director (or their authorized designees)) to plant anywhere within the city of Fairview the following trees: willow, cottonwood or poplar. Planting of such trees shall be approved by the public works director if the proposed planting site is located such that the roots of said trees should not, in time, interfere with or damage a public sewer or underground utility line or the public right-of-way. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 13-2006 § 1; Ord. 7-1983 § 3. Formerly 12.25.030)


12.25.020 Permission to plant or remove trees or shrubs within public streets or rights-of-way.

No tree(s) shall be planted within or removed from any public streets or rights-of-way within Fairview without permission of the city public works director and an approved tree planting or removal permit obtained. A city right-of-way permit shall also be obtained. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 13-2006 § 1; Ord. 7-1983 § 1. Formerly 12.25.010)


12.25.030 Prohibited trees.

It shall be unlawful (without first obtaining the written approval of the public works director (or his/her authorized designee)) to plant in any public parking strip, street or right-of-way the following trees: poplar, willow, conifer, cottonwood, birch, ailanthus, fruit-bearing or nut-bearing trees (except ornamental species). (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 13-2006 § 1; Ord. 7-1983 § 2. Formerly 12.25.020)


12.25.040 Declared nuisance.

Any tree or shrub growing in any public property, on private property or in a planting strip located in a public right-of-way, which does or may endanger the security, maintenance or usefulness of any public street, sewer, sidewalk or public or private utility, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and subject to abatement. The city’s Sidewalk Maintenance Handbook – Policy and Operating Guidelines will apply. Failure of the adjacent property owner to comply with the policy and guidelines will result in the application of Chapter 8.10 FMC to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 13-2006 § 1; Ord. 7-1983 § 4)


12.25.050 Tree and shrub standards.

Any tree or shrub located in the public right-of-way or any tree located on private property encroaching into the public right-of-way shall be trimmed, pruned, and maintained to the following standards:

A. Streets. Trees and shrubs shall be trimmed to provide a minimum clearance (free of branches) a distance of 10 feet as measured from the street adjacent to the curb. For streets without curbing, the measurement shall be made from the widest point of the street (i.e., edge of pavement or edge of gravel).

B. Sidewalks. Trees and shrubs shall be trimmed to provide a minimum clearance (free of branches) a distance of six and one-half feet as measured on all points on the sidewalk. For public areas without sidewalks, but used for pedestrian travel, measurement shall be made for all points in the assumed pedestrian way.

C. Alleys. Trees and shrubs shall be trimmed to provide a minimum clearance (free from branches) a distance of 10 feet as measured on all points of the public alley.

D. Stop Signs and Other Traffic Control Devices. Trees and shrubs shall be maintained to allow clear, unobstructed view of all traffic control signs.

E. Intersections. Standards shall include a sight triangle at intersections a minimum clearance of 25 feet in each direction of visibility along each property line. Trees and shrubs shall be trimmed to a maximum height of not more than 30 inches above the pavement. Low or overhanging branches must also be moved to provide visual clearance allowing drivers an unobstructed view of traffic. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 13-2006 § 1)


12.25.060 Property owner obligation.

A. It is the obligation of the property owner to maintain trees and shrubs located on their property to the standards set forth in this chapter and as required in the Sidewalk Maintenance Handbook – Policy and Operating Guidelines at their expense.

B. It shall be the obligation of the property owner owning the property adjacent to the right-of-way, street, or public area to maintain the street trees and shrubs located therein to the standards set forth in this chapter and as required in the Sidewalk Maintenance Handbook – Policy and Operating Guidelines at their expense.

C. The city will notify affected property owners in writing for the need to trim or abate any tree(s) or shrub(s) not maintained in conformity with the terms of this chapter. Failure to comply with the city’s request to have the tree(s) or shrub(s) trimmed so as to not violate the requirements imposed may then be deemed a nuisance and be addressed consistent with Chapter 8.10 FMC. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 13-2006 § 1; Ord. 7-1983 § 7. Formerly 12.25.070)


12.25.070 Abuse or mutilation of trees.

It shall be unlawful for any person, without prior written permission from the public works director, to remove, destroy, cut, break or injure any tree or shrub or to remove (except as provided consistent with this chapter) any tree or shrub planted or growing in or upon any street, right-of-way or public area or cause or authorize or procure any person to do so. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to injure, misuse or remove any device set for the protection of any tree or shrub in or upon any street, public area or right-of-way. Trees or shrubs harmed in any manner shall be replaced by the adjacent property owner within 60 days of notification by the city. (Ord. 7-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 13-2006 § 1; Ord. 7-1983 § 10. Formerly 12.25.100)


Chapter 12.30 PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS

Sections:

12.30.010    Definitions.

12.30.020    Council authority.

12.30.030    Rules and regulations.

12.30.040    Public use encouraged.

12.30.050    Park permits.

12.30.060    Prohibited conduct.

12.30.070    Penalties.

12.30.080    Trespass.


12.30.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Park” means any publicly or privately owned real property placed under the jurisdiction of the city, the city parks committee or designate for park or recreational purposes, including all land granted to the city for such purposes.

B. “Parks committee” means the parks and recreation advisory committee established by Chapter 2.16 FMC. (Ord. 1-2014 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 10-2010 § 2 (Att. 2); Ord. 7-2002 § 1; Ord. 4-1984 § 1)


12.30.020 Council authority.

The Fairview city council, except as herein otherwise provided, shall have the general management and supervision of all parks, squares, openings and public grounds surrounding public buildings now owned or hereafter acquired by the city, and also the power to regulate and control the planting, trimming, growing, use, preservation and maintenance of all shade or ornamental trees, shrubs, plants or flowers in, upon or over any street, boulevard, path or sidewalk of the city. (Ord. 1-2014 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 10-2010 § 2 (Att. 2); Ord. 7-2002 § 1; Ord. 4-1984 § 2)


12.30.030 Rules and regulations.

The city council may by resolution adopt such rules and regulations for the use, management and supervision of the parks, squares, openings, public grounds and grounds surrounding public buildings or other places of recreation now belonging or hereafter acquired by the city as may be reasonable or necessary. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of the City Charter and other pertinent city ordinances and in accordance with Chapter 2.16 FMC. (Ord. 1-2014 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 10-2010 § 2 (Att. 2); Ord. 7-2002 § 1; Ord. 4-1984 § 3)


12.30.040 Public use encouraged.

City parks are maintained for the recreation of the public and for the benefit of the citizens and inhabitants of the city of Fairview and the greatest possible use thereof is encouraged, subject only to such regulations as will preserve the parks and public areas for purposes for which they are laid out and the enjoyment, convenience and safety of all concerned. (Ord. 1-2014 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 10-2010 § 2 (Att. 2); Ord. 7-2002 § 1; Ord. 4-1984 § 4)


12.30.050 Park permits.

It shall be unlawful for any person or organization or association to conduct or participate in any organized entertainment, demonstration or public gathering or to make any address in a park without the written permission of the city administrator or designate being first obtained. Specific provisions relating to application for such permit shall be as established.

The city administrator or designate may issue permits for activities otherwise prohibited, where approval has been obtained from the city administrator or designate in advance and sufficient protection of city facilities and the public’s health and safety is provided. (Ord. 9-2014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 1-2014 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 10-2010 § 2 (Att. 2); Ord. 7-2002 § 1; Ord. 4-1984 § 6. Formerly 12.30.060)


12.30.060 Prohibited conduct.

The following conduct unless otherwise exempted shall be prohibited within all parks under the ownership, jurisdiction, or operation of the city; these regulations do not apply to parks operated by public agencies other than the city unless expressly adopted thereby:

A. Unless specifically authorized by city permit and subject to the further requirement, if any, of the OLCC, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in any park or part thereof where such area has been posted identifying such prohibition. Unless specifically authorized by permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverage in any park or part thereof.

B. Park Hours – Closure. All Fairview city parks shall be open only from dawn to dusk. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a park at any other time.

C. Additional Park Closures. Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the city administrator or designate, or an officer of the city police department, may close any park or any part thereof, at any time, by erecting barricades prohibiting access thereto at appropriate locations. Notices that any park or part thereof is closed shall be posted at appropriate locations during the period of such closure, if feasible; however, failure to post such notices shall not invalidate such closure nor shall it be a defense to the charge of violating this section. The closure as indicated shall be done only in the interest of public safety and health and such decision for closure shall be based upon one or more of the following criteria or conditions existing in or near that park:

1. Life or property appears to be endangered and other means cannot reasonably be utilized to eliminate the danger.

2. The overcrowding of persons or vehicles has occurred so that necessary access to emergency assistance or emergency vehicles is unavailable.

3. Park property or other property located near the park reasonably appears to be endangered.

4. That loud and unreasonable noise, fighting, violence or threatening behavior or abusive or obscene language or gestures is occurring and is caused by sufficient numbers of persons so that other means cannot reasonably be utilized to eliminate the condition.

5. A hazardous condition exists.

6. Violations of criminal offenses or ordinances are occurring and are caused by sufficient numbers of persons so that other means cannot reasonably be utilized to eliminate the conditions.

7. That other conditions exist such that the safety of persons or property cannot reasonably be assured and a present danger thereto exists.

D. Park Closure Control. During the period of closure of a park in accordance with the above provisions, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter such park or any part thereof that has been closed or remain in such park or part thereof after having been notified of the closure and having been requested to leave by the city administrator or designate or an officer of the police department. Such closure shall not exceed 18 hours without the written approval of the city administrator. No person shall ride, drive, or walk on such part or portions of parks or pavements as may be closed to public travel or interfere with barriers erected against the public. And no person shall enter any building, enclosure, or place within any of the parks upon which the words “No Admittance” shall be displayed or posted by sign, placard or otherwise without the consent of the official in charge or police officer. No person shall refuse the request to obey any reasonable direction of the city administrator or designate or police officer.

E. Animals in Parks. It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, or keeper of any animal to permit the same to enter upon or to roam at large in any park and if such animal is found in any pond or fountain or in any park it may be impounded.

Owners of dogs or other animals damaging and destroying park property will be held liable for the full value of the property damaged or destroyed in addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of this section. Dogs shall be permitted in the park only when under leash. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or to permit a horse to enter into any park, except in places designated by park authorities for horseback riding. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any weapon, stick, stone, or missile of any kind to destroy, injure, disturb, or molest any wild or domestic animal, fowl, or fish within park limits, except for purposes of self-defense.

F. Bathing/Swimming. It shall be unlawful for any person to wade, swim, or bathe in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to a city park, except in places designated by park authorities for such purposes.

G. Motorized Vehicles. No motorized vehicles shall be permitted in any park or portion thereof within the city except for duly authorized vehicles.

H. Bicycles. It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle off of paths or streets, on paths designated by park officials as closed to bicycles, or in areas reserved for pedestrian use in any park. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their bicycles with reasonable regard to the safety of others.

I. Use of Skateboards and Skates. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a skateboard or skates on any brickwork, cobblestone or ornamental surface, railing, picnic table, bench, fountain area, planter, or sculpture located in a public area.

J. Floating Devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, occupy, or otherwise use a floating device (e.g., boat, canoe, raft, inner tube, model boat, etc.) in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to a city park, except in places designated for such purposes.

K. No overnight camping or campfires shall be permitted within or upon any public park within the city.

L. No firearms or explosive devices of any kind shall, without permit, be permitted upon or within any public park or premises within the city.

M. Uses of Certain Devices or Equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a beanshooter, slingshot, javelin, shotput, discus, golf equipment, archery equipment, or paintball equipment in or upon any park, except that any of the above equipment or devices may be used in areas specifically designated or provided for the particular use.

N. Advertising – Conducting Business. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit for or conduct any business or to sell or to offer to sell any article or service or solicit for a charitable contribution in a public park unless such person has been granted a concession or park permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or carry any structure, sign, bulletin board, and advertising device of any kind whatsoever or erect any post or pole or make attachment of any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, fountain, pole, post or structure or place any advertising or like device upon any portion of a public park; provided, however, that the city parks committee or its designate may by written permit allow erection of temporary decoration on occasions of public celebrations or holidays.

O. Toilet Facilities. It shall be unlawful to urinate or defecate in any park except in a toilet facility designed for that purpose.

P. Rubbish and Litter. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the free use and enjoyment of any park or place any straw, dirt, chips, paper shavings, shells, ashes, swill or garbage or other rubbish or refuse or debris in or upon any park or to dump any refuse or debris, rubbish, swill, garbage or the like which has originated from outside the park for the purposes of disposing thereof upon park premises.

Q. Vandalism. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, break, injure, mutilate or deface in any way any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, pond, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower or other property in any park.

R. Annoying Children and Others. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit the acquaintance of another in any park or annoy or follow children or distribute obscene literature or in any way annoy one another. No one shall use loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or behave in a disorderly manner or do any act tending to be a breach of the public peace within or upon a park or premises of the city.

S. Damaging Park Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully cut, remove, deface, injure, damage or destroy any property in any city park or public place or any fence, gate or other enclosure or part thereof around any city park.

T. Structures in Parks. Unless authorized by the city council or its park committee or designate, and subject to the terms of such permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to excavate for, erect, install or do any act as a part of or commencement of excavation, erection or installation for a permanent or temporary structure or facility in or upon any park or public property.

U. Smoking. Smoking as set forth under Chapter 12.50 FMC is prohibited.

V. Fishing. Fishing at the West Pond at Salish Ponds Wetland Park is limited to those areas identified as “designated fishing areas” and is limited to the number of fishers who can safely be on designated fishing platforms at any one time and as noted on signs. Fishers must follow all signage located at Salish Ponds Wetland Park. (Ord. 6-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 8-2015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 1-2014 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 10-2010 § 2 (Att. 2); Ord. 13-2007 § 1; Ord. 7-2002 § 1; Ord. 4-1984 § 7. Formerly 12.30.070)


12.30.070 Penalties.

Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter as herein set forth shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction before the municipal judge be subject to a fine of not more than $250.00 for each violation thereof. Each day or portion of a day such violation continues or occurs shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 1-2014 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 10-2010 § 2 (Att. 2); Ord. 13-2007 § 1; Ord. 7-2002 § 1; Ord. 4-1984 § 8. Formerly 12.30.080)


12.30.080 Trespass.

In addition to other measures provided for violation of this chapter, a Fairview police officer shall have the right to exclude any person who violates any provision thereof for a period of not more than 60 consecutive days.

A. Such an exclusion order shall be in writing signed by the officer issuing the same and shall be issued and served in the form of a citation with return made to the Fairview police department.

B. Such exclusion order may be appealed to the city council or its designate as hereinabove set forth but shall remain in effect until such appeal be heard. Any appeal shall be in writing and made within 10 calendar days of the issuance of the exclusion order and set out why said exclusion is unlawful or otherwise improper.

C. Violation of a valid exclusion order when in effect shall be considered a criminal trespass. (Ord. 1-2014 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 10-2010 § 2 (Att. 2); Ord. 13-2007 § 1; Ord. 7-2002 § 1; Ord. 4-1984 § 9. Formerly 12.30.090)


Chapter 12.35 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:

12.35.010    Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

12.35.020    Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

12.35.025    Definitions.

12.35.030    Registration of telecommunications carriers.

12.35.035    Construction standards.

12.35.040    Location of telecommunications facilities.

12.35.045    Telecommunications franchise.

12.35.050    General franchise terms.

12.35.055    General provisions.


12.35.010 Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

A. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the city Charter and state law.

B. Public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas.

C. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory management of each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

D. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises and permits.

E. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

F. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to a public health or safety emergency. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


12.35.020 Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

A. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local, and city charges as may be levied, imposed, or due from a telecommunications carrier, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of telecommunications services.

B. The city has determined that any fee provided for by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property owners, and these fees are not new or increased fees.

C. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter are subject to applicable federal and state laws. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


12.35.025 Definitions.

For the purpose of this code the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

1. “Aboveground facilities,” see “overhead facilities.”

2. “Affiliated interest” shall have the same meaning as ORS 759.010.

3. “Cable Act” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 521, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.

4. “Cable service” is to be defined consistent with federal laws and means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

5. “City” means the city of Fairview, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.

6. “City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Fairview, Oregon.

7. “City property” means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this code.

8. “Conduit” means any structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts, or other facilities used for any telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications conductors, or cable right-of-way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by one or more public utilities.

9. “Construction” means any activity in the public rights-of-way resulting in physical change thereto, including excavation or placement of structures, but excluding routine maintenance or repair of existing facilities.

10. “Control or controlling interest” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

11. “Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.

12. “Duct” means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.

13. “Emergency” has the meaning provided for in ORS 401.025.

14. “Federal Communications Commission” or “FCC” means the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.

15. “Franchise” means an agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a privilege to use public rights-of-way and utility easements within the city for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.

16. “Grantee” means the person to which a franchise is granted by the city.

17. “Oregon Public Utility Commission” or “OPUC” means the statutorily created state agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and administration of certain telecommunications carriers as set forth in Oregon Law, or its lawful successor.

18. “Overhead or aboveground facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

19. “Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.

20. “Private telecommunications network” means a system, including the construction, maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person for their use and not for resale, directly or indirectly. “Private telecommunications network” includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

21. “Public rights-of-way” include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements, and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas. This definition applies only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such areas for telecommunications facilities. “Public rights-of-way” shall also include utility easements as defined below.

22. “State” means the state of Oregon.

23. “Telecommunications” means the transmission between and among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

24. “Telecommunications Act” means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) and as hereafter amended.

25. “Telecommunications carrier” means any provider of telecommunications services and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages telecommunications facilities within the city.

26. “Telecommunications facilities” means the plant and equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications carrier to provide telecommunications services.

27. “Telecommunications service” means two-way switched access and transport of voice communications but does not include: (a) services provided by radio common carrier; (b) one-way transmission of television signals; (c) surveying; (d) private telecommunications networks; or (e) communications of the customer which take place on the customer side of on-premises equipment.

28. “Telecommunications system,” see “telecommunications facilities.”

29. “Telecommunications utility” has the same meaning as ORS 759.005(1).

30. “Underground facilities” means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for “overhead facilities.”

31. “Usable space” means all the space on a pole, except the portion below ground level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits. There is a rebuttable presumption that six feet of a pole is buried below ground level.

32. “Utility easement” means any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes.

33. “Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


12.35.030 Registration of telecommunications carriers.

A. Purpose. The purpose of registration is to:

1. Assure that all telecommunications carriers who have facilities and/or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

2. Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers who offer to provide telecommunications services within the city, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the city.

3. Assist the city in the enforcement of this code and the collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.

B. Registration Required. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, all telecommunications carriers having telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the city, and all telecommunications carriers that offer or provide telecommunications service to customer premises within the city, shall register. The appropriate application and license from: (a) the Oregon Public Utility Commission (PUC); or (b) the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) qualify as necessary registration information. Applicants also have the option of providing the following information:

1. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including the name, address, and telephone number of the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration information.

2. The name, address, and telephone number for the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee to be contacted in case of an emergency.

3. A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the city, a description of the telecommunications facilities that the registrant intends to construct, and a description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the city.

4. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided, or to be provided, by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any business license requirements. A copy of the business license or the license number must be provided.

C. Registration Fee. Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee in the amount of $35.00, or as otherwise established by resolution of the city council.

D. Exceptions to Registration. The following telecommunications carriers are excepted from registration:

1. Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated exclusively for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state.

2. A private telecommunications network, provided that such network does not occupy any public rights-of-way of the city. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


12.35.035 Construction standards.

A. General. No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way except as provided in this code and in compliance with all applicable codes, rules, and regulations.

B. Construction Codes. Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code.

C. Construction Permits. No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee established pursuant to subsection G of this section. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way:

1. Unless the telecommunications carrier has first filed a registration statement with the city pursuant to FMC 12.35.030(B); and if applicable,

2. Unless the telecommunications carrier has first applied for and been granted a franchise pursuant to FMC 12.35.045.

D. Permit Applications. Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

1. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

2. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.

3. The location and route of all facilities to be installed aboveground or on existing utility poles.

4. The location and route of all new facilities on or in the public rights-of-way to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public rights-of-way. Existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction.

5. The location of all of applicant’s existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public rights-of-way along the underground route proposed by the applicant. A cross-section shall be provided showing new or existing facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way.

6. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way, and description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

E. Applicant’s Verification. All permit applications shall be accompanied by the verification of a registered professional engineer, or other qualified and duly authorized representative of the applicant, that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations.

F. Construction Schedule. All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the city.

G. Construction Permit Fee. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount consistent with this code or as otherwise determined by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be designed to defray the costs of city administration of the requirements of this code.

H. Issuance of Permit. If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this code and the franchise agreement, the city shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.

I. Notice of Construction. Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the city not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or construction in the public rights-of-way.

J. Compliance with Permit. All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The city and its representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.

K. Noncomplying Work. Subject to the notice requirements in FMC 12.35.040(C), all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this code, shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee.

L. Completion of Construction. The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within city rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been approved pursuant to the schedule submitted and approved by the appropriate city official as contemplated by subsection F of this section.

M. As-Built Drawings. If requested by the city, the permittee shall furnish the city with two complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. These plans shall be submitted to the city engineer or designee within 60 days after completion of construction, in a format mutually acceptable to the permittee and the city.

N. Restoration of Public Rights-of-Way and City Property.

1. When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to good order and condition unless otherwise directed by the city and as determined by the city engineer or designee.

2. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule shall be subject to approval by the city.

3. If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to good order and condition, the city shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after said notice, the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.

4. A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such rights-of-way or property.

O. Performance and Completion Bond. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the city equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of constructing permittee’s telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city, shall be provided before construction is commenced.

1. The surety shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.

2. The surety shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

a. Timely completion of construction;

b. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

c. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;

d. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction; and

e. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material, or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


12.35.040 Location of telecommunications facilities.

A. Location of Facilities. All facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement:

1. Whenever all existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public right-of-way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.

2. Whenever all new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground concurrently with the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public right-of-way, absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city and consistent with applicable state and federal law.

B. Interference with the Public Rights-of-Way. No grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations.

C. Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Except in the case of an emergency, within 90 days following written notice from the city, a grantee shall, at no expense to grantor, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way whenever the city shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

1. The construction, repairs, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way;

2. The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way;

3. The public interest.

D. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility, or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the city shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way of the city. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

1. One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee’s telecommunications franchise.

2. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the city. A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced.

3. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the appropriate prior authority at the time of installation.

4. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee’s telecommunications franchise or other legally sufficient permit.

E. Coordination of Construction Activities. All grantees are required to make a good faith effort to cooperate with the city.

1. By January 1st of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public rights-of-way.

2. If requested by the city, each grantee shall meet with the city annually or as determined by the city, to schedule and coordinate construction in the public rights-of-way. At that time, city will provide available information on plans for local, state, and/or federal construction projects.

3. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the city engineer or designee, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


12.35.045 Telecommunications franchise.

A. Telecommunications Franchise. A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the city.

B. Application. Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise must register as a telecommunications carrier and shall file an application with the city which includes the following information:

1. The identity of the applicant;

2. A description of the telecommunications services that are to be offered or provided by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities;

3. Engineering plans, specifications, and a network map in a form customarily used by the applicant of the facilities located or to be located within the public rights-of-way in the city, including the location and route requested for applicant’s proposed telecommunications facilities;

4. The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area;

5. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services proposed;

6. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease.

C. Application and Review Fee.

1. Subject to applicable state law, applicant shall reimburse the city for such reasonable costs as the city incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.

2. An application and review fee of $2,000 shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to subsection B of this section. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise.

D. Determination by the City. The city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial.

E. Rights Granted. No franchise granted pursuant to this code shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the franchise agreement.

F. Term of Grant. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.

G. Franchise Territory. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchise grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas, and may include the entire city.

H. Franchise Fee. Each franchise granted by the city is subject to the city’s right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the privileges granted; provided, nothing in this code shall prohibit the city and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. The compensation shall be subject to the specific payment terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement and applicable state and federal laws.

I. Amendment of Grant. Conditions for amending a franchise:

1. A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way of the city which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this code.

2. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.

3. A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this code.

J. Renewal Applications. A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this code shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:

1. The information required pursuant to subsection B of this section.

2. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee.

K. Renewal Determinations. Within 90 days after receiving a complete application, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.

1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant;

2. The legal ability of the applicant;

3. The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s existing and proposed facilities;

4. The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this code and the franchise agreement;

5. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies;

6. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest.

L. Obligation to Cure As a Condition of Renewal. No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the agreement, or of the requirements of this code, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city.

M. Assignments or Transfers of System or Franchise. Ownership or control of a majority interest in a telecommunications system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.

1. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system shall agree, in writing, to assume and abide by all of the provisions of the franchise.

2. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this code.

3. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications franchise.

4. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications franchise, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the city under this code or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the franchise.

N. Revocation or Termination of Franchise. A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way of the city may be revoked for the following reasons:

1. Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way of the city without a construction permit;

2. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location;

3. Failure to comply with subsection M of this section with respect to sale, transfer or assignment of a telecommunications system or franchise;

4. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city;

5. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way;

6. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this code;

7. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the city under this code;

8. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee;

9. Violation of material provisions of this code;

10. Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement.

O. Notice and Duty to Cure. In the event that the city believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the city shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not exceeding 30 days, to furnish evidence that:

1. Corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;

2. Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or

3. It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.

P. Public Hearing. In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city of its compliance with the franchise or with this code, the city staff shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the city council. The council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.

Q. Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions. If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this code, or of a franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors. Whether:

1. The misconduct was egregious;

2. Substantial harm resulted;

3. The violation was intentional;

4. There is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements;

5. There is a history of overall compliance;

6. The violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.

R. Other City Costs. All grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all reasonable direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement consistent with applicable state and federal laws. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


12.35.050 General franchise terms.

A. Facilities. Upon request, each grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all of its telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually.

B. Damage to Grantee’s Facilities. Unless directly and proximately caused by willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public rights-of-way of the city as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom.

C. Duty to Provide Information. Within 10 business days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:

1. That grantee has complied with all requirements of this code.

2. All books, records, maps, and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable time and intervals.

D. Service to the City. If the city contracts for the use of telecommunication facilities, telecommunication services, installation, or maintenance from the grantee, the grantee shall charge the city the grantee’s most favorable rate offered at the time of the request charged to similar users within Oregon for a similar volume of service, subject to any of grantee’s tariffs or price lists on file with the OPUC. With the city’s permission, the grantee may deduct the applicable charges from fee payments. Other terms and conditions of such services may be specified in a separate agreement between the city and grantee.

E. Compensation for City Property. If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the city.

F. Cable Franchise. Telecommunication carriers providing cable service shall be subject to the separate cable franchise requirements of the city and other applicable authority.

G. Leased Capacity. A grantee shall have the right, without prior city approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided that the grantee shall notify the city that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee.

H. Grantee Insurance. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsured:

1. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:

a. Three million dollars ($3,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;

b. Three million dollars ($3,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and

c. Three million dollars ($3,000,000) for all other types of liability.

2. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.

3. Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

4. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000.

5. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City of such intent to cancel or not to renew.

6. Within 60 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence that the grantee otherwise meets the requirements of this section.

7. As an alternative to the insurance requirements contained herein, a grantee may provide evidence of self-insurance subject to review and acceptance by the city.

I. General Indemnification. Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this code or by a franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this code.

J. Performance Surety. Before a franchise granted pursuant to this code is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this code, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in addition to the performance surety required for construction of facilities. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


12.35.055 General provisions.

A. Governing Law. Any franchise granted under this code is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the state of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the city.

B. Written Agreement. No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the agreement is in writing.

C. Nonexclusive Grant. No franchise granted under this code shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.

D. Severability and Preemption. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of the code shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this code shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this code, then the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and or the time required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rules or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city, and any amendments hereto.

E. Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this code shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs. The enforcement of this provision shall be consistent with the provisions of this code regulating code enforcement.

F. Other Remedies. Nothing in this code shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this code.

G. Captions. The captions to sections throughout this code are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this code.

H. Compliance with Laws. Any grantee under this code shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term any franchise granted under this code, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system.

I. Consent. Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantee is specifically required by this code or in a franchise granted, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld.

J. Application to Existing Ordinance and Agreements. To the extent that this code is not in conflict with and can be implemented with existing code and franchise agreements, this code shall apply to all existing ordinance and franchise agreements for use of the public right-of-way for telecommunications.

K. Confidentiality. The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 4-1999 § 1)


Chapter 12.40 PRIVILEGE TAX UPON TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS

Sections:

12.40.010    Privilege tax imposed.

12.40.020    Definitions.

12.40.030    Payment dates.

12.40.040    Interest on late payments.

12.40.050    Audits.

12.40.060    Additional requirements.

12.40.070    Penalty for violations.

12.40.080    Appeals.

12.40.090    Severability.


12.40.010 Privilege tax imposed.

A privilege tax of seven percent is imposed on the gross revenues of any telecommunications carrier that has equipment in rights-of-way within the city. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


12.40.020 Definitions.

A. “Equipment” is any tangible component, whether referred to singly or collectively, installed, maintained, or operated by a telecommunications carrier.

B. “Gross revenues” are revenues earned within the boundaries of the city from exchange access services, as defined in ORS 401.710, less net uncollectibles.

C. “Rights-of-way” are the spaces in, upon, above, along, across, over or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, and places used or intended to be used by the general public for travel.

D. “Telecommunications carrier” is a telecommunications utility as defined in ORS 759.005 or a cooperative corporation organized under ORS chapter 62 that provides telecommunications services. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


12.40.030 Payment dates.

The privilege tax imposed in this chapter is due quarterly on or before the fifteenth day after the end of the preceding quarter (April 15th, July 15th, September 15th, and January 15th). The privilege tax must be paid to the city on or before the due date for each quarter and must be accompanied by a written report. The written report must be verified and executed by an officer or other authorized representative of the telecommunications carrier. The report must contain an accurate statement of the gross revenues from exchange access services for the period covered by the payment. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


12.40.040 Interest on late payments.

If the privilege tax is not paid on or before the due date, eight percent interest must be paid on the tax from the date due to the date on which payment is received by the city, compounded daily. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


12.40.050 Audits.

A. The city has the right to conduct or have conducted an audit of gross revenues as defined in this chapter to determine if the tax required by this chapter has been paid by a telecommunications carrier.

B. Upon receipt of a written request, a telecommunications carrier must provide the city copies of documents requested by the city that are necessary to conduct an audit. If the telecommunications carrier believes the requested documents contain confidential information that is not subject to public disclosure, the telecommunications carrier may mark the documents as confidential and exempt from public disclosure. The city will not disclose such documents to third parties unless such disclosure is required to comply with state law.

C. After an audit, any undisputed under tax payment due the city or over tax payment due the telecommunications carrier is payable 30 days after written notice of the amount due. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


12.40.060 Additional requirements.

A. Nothing in this chapter excuses a telecommunications carrier from the obligation to obtain any permit required by the Fairview Municipal Code or any other law, ordinance or resolution. Acceptance of privilege tax payments under this chapter is not a waiver by the city of any other legal requirements.

B. If a telecommunications carrier fails to pay the privilege tax under this chapter, fails to obtain any permit or fails to comply with any other law, ordinance or resolution, the city may demand that the telecommunications carrier make the payment, obtain the permit or comply with the law, ordinance or resolution, or remove its equipment from city rights-of-way. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


12.40.070 Penalty for violations.

A telecommunications carrier that violates any provision of the chapter may be ordered to pay a fine of up to $5,000 for each day of the violation. The telecommunications carrier may also be ordered to remove its equipment from city rights-of-way after the city gives written notice of the violation and 30 days to remedy the violation. In the alternative, the telecommunications carrier may enter into a compliance agreement with the city. The city retains authority to initiate legal action to enforce the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


12.40.080 Appeals.

A telecommunications carrier that receives notice of a violation or that receives notice that a fine has been imposed may appeal to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city administrator within 10 days of receipt of the notice of violation or fine. The appeal must state the reasons the telecommunications carrier does not believe a violation has occurred or the reason it believes the fine is unreasonable. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the city administrator will schedule an appeal hearing before the city council. The hearing will be set no less than 10 days after the timely appeal is filed. The city council will affirm the determination that a violation occurred and impose a penalty or reverse that determination. If the appeal challenges a penalty, the city council will affirm or modify the penalty. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


12.40.090 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter is held invalid, pre-empted or found unconstitutional by a state or federal court, such portion is a separate, distinct and independent provision and the holding does not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the chapter. (Ord. 14-2006 § 1)


Chapter 12.45 STRUCTURES OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

12.45.010    Specific nuisance prohibited.

12.45.020    Exceptions.

12.45.030    Enforcement.

12.45.040    Abatement – General procedures.

12.45.050    Abatement – Emergency situations.

12.45.060    Appeal and hearing procedures – General requirements.

12.45.070    Appeal and hearing procedures – Review of decision.

12.45.080    Abatement by owner – Required.

12.45.090    Abatement by city – Assessment.

12.45.110    Liens against property.

12.45.120    Penalties.


12.45.010 Specific nuisance prohibited.

It shall be unlawful to erect, install, construct, maintain, repair, alter or otherwise allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of any building, or other structure, sign, fence, site distance obstructions or other obstruction within or upon a duly dedicated or platted street, alley or other public right-of-way in the city of Fairview, which shall be deemed a nuisance. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.020 Exceptions.

The following features are allowed in the right-of-way subject to obtaining a right-of-way permit unless expressly exempt from permit requirements under other provisions of the Fairview Municipal Code:

A. Above- and below-ground municipal and franchise utility structures including pipes, conduits, manholes, signs, fire hydrants, utility poles and vaults.

B. Mailboxes.

C. Signs authorized to be placed in the right-of-way by an approved sign permit and right-of-way permit.

D. Public safety and traffic control devices.

E. Public transit facilities when authorized under an approved right-of-way permit.

F. Residential refuse containers when placed in the right-of-way for no more than three consecutive days.

G. Commercial refuse containers when placed in the right-of-way under an approved right-of-way permit.

H. Structures associated with an approved street closure when located within the area of the approved closure.

I. Government owned or managed signs.

J. Items similar to the above as determined by the public works director. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.030 Enforcement.

This chapter shall be enforced by the public works director or designate. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.040 Abatement – General procedures.

A. In the event it is determined by the public works director that a right-of-way obstruction nuisance exists as defined in FMC 12.45.010, the public works director shall give written notice to the property owner of record whose property is immediately contiguous or adjacent to the nuisance and demand abatement within 10 days from the date of the written notice or such lesser time to protect public health, safety and welfare.

B. In the event the person responsible for the creation or maintenance of the nuisance cannot be satisfactorily determined and/or in the event a property owner cannot be satisfactorily determined, a posting of said notice to abate the nuisance shall be placed upon the adjacent property concerned and shall be deemed sufficient and adequate notice to said person and/or property owner, as the case may be. In all cases where a nuisance as defined in this chapter exists, a notice to abate the same shall be posted on the premises affected.

C. The notice shall conform with FMC 8.10.070(B).

D. The notice required shall be furnished in a manner best calculated to give actual notice. Notice may be given by certified mail or by personal delivery to the premises concerned. In any event the city official giving notice shall make a return of service indicating the date and manner in which the notice was given. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.050 Abatement – Emergency situations.

In an emergency, the public works director may order the immediate abatement of a nuisance or immediately abate the nuisance as set forth under FMC 8.10.080. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.060 Appeal and hearing procedures – General requirements.

A. Any person receiving notice under FMC 12.45.040 may request a hearing by writing the public works director within seven days of the date of notice.

B. The public works director shall, upon receipt of request for a hearing, notify the municipal court and thereafter shall, consistent with the terms of FMC 2.27.070, notify the person requesting the hearing as to the hearing’s time and place.

C. The person requesting the hearing and the public works director shall have the rights accorded parties under Chapter 2.27 FMC. Any party may be represented by legal counsel.

D. After the hearing, the judge shall issue and mail a copy of the order determining the question to the person requesting the hearing, the public works director and other designated persons.

E. If the municipal court finds a nuisance, as defined in this chapter, to exist, the order shall set a date for abatement to be accomplished by the owner.

F. If the municipal court determines that there was a wrongful abatement under FMC 12.45.050, the judge may order the public works director to make reasonable restitution. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.070 Appeal and hearing procedures – Review of decision.

Review of any action of the municipal court taken under this chapter and the rules adopted herewith shall be taken solely and exclusively in the manner set forth in ORS 34.010 through 34.100. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.080 Abatement by owner – Required.

Failure of the owner to abate the nuisance within 10 days as provided by FMC 12.45.040, or within the time set by the municipal court under FMC 12.45.060 shall be an additional violation of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.090 Abatement by city – Assessment.

A. If an owner fails to abate a nuisance as required under this chapter, the public works director shall, prior to abating anything made a nuisance under this chapter, file an action against the owner pursuant to Chapter 2.27 FMC and obtain an order therefrom authorizing the abatement.

B. If the city abates the nuisance, an accurate record of the abatement costs shall be kept and shall include a surcharge of 40 percent of the cost of the abatement for administrative overhead and the costs associated with bringing the action under Chapter 2.27 FMC. A billing for the amount of the costs shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner. Payment shall be due to the city within 15 days from the date of the billing. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.110 Liens against property.

A. The public works director may cause a lien to be filed against the concerned property if payment is not made as provided in FMC 12.45.090.

B. The lien provided for in subsection A of this section shall be given priority over all liens except those for taxes and assessments and shall include interest at the legal rate accruing from the date billing is sent to the owner of the property.

C. The lien provided for in subsection A of this section shall be foreclosed in the manner prescribed by state law for the enforcement of liens and collection of assessments. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


12.45.120 Penalties.

Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter as herein set forth shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction before the municipal judge be subject to a fine of not more than $250.00 for each violation thereof. Each day or portion of a day such violation continues or occurs shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 8-2009 § 6 (Att. 3))


Chapter 12.50 PROHIBITS SMOKING AND USE OF TOBACCO ON CITY PROPERTY

Sections:

12.50.010    Definitions.

12.50.020    Smoking and tobacco use prohibited.

12.50.030    Penalty.


12.50.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meaning:

A. “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette pipe, hookah, plant or any other smoking, tobacco, nicotine or tobacco-like product or substance in any manner or any form.

B. “Tobacco use” means smoking, chewing, vaping, inhaling, or any other means of ingestion or consumption of any tobacco product.

C. “Tobacco” means any tobacco product, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, electronic cigarettes and any other form of tobacco or nicotine product that may be utilized for smoking, chewing, vaping, inhaling, or any other means of ingestion or consumption.

Note: This policy does not prohibit use of FDA-approved nicotine replacement therapy products such as nicotine patches, gum and lozenges which are intended to help quit tobacco use and minimize symptoms of nicotine addiction. (Ord. 8-2015 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.50.020 Smoking and tobacco use prohibited.

Smoking and tobacco use is prohibited on and around all city-owned, leased, and maintained properties, as well as at all city-sponsored events except for those areas as designated by the city administrator or designee. This includes but is not limited to city-owned buildings, within 10 feet of any buildings, parking lots, adjacent sidewalks, park and recreation areas, vehicles, and other real and personal property. (Ord. 8-2015 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.50.030 Penalty.

Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter as herein set forth shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction before the municipal judge be subject to a fine of not more than $250.00 for each violation thereof. Each day or portion of a day such violation continues or occurs shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 8-2015 § 1 (Exh. A)) 


Title 13 WATER AND SEWERS

Chapters:

13.05    Water Department

13.10    Sewer Department

13.13    Public Works Facility Fee

13.15    Cross-Connection Control

13.20    Fair Share Contribution

13.25    Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Program

13.27    Wastewater Treatment Capacity Allocation Policy

13.30    Storm Drainage

13.40    Control of Non-Stormwater Discharge


Chapter 13.05 WATER DEPARTMENT

Sections:

13.05.010    Rules and regulations.

13.05.020    Definitions of general terms.

13.05.030    Service area.

13.05.040    Description of service.

13.05.050    Application for service – Owner liability.

13.05.060    Services.

13.05.070    Meters.

13.05.080    Water rates.

13.05.081    Fee imposed – Use of proceeds.

13.05.082    Classes of users.

13.05.083    Fee adjustments.

13.05.090    Notices.

13.05.100    Billing and payment.

13.05.110    Meter error.

13.05.120    Discontinuance of service.

13.05.130    Restoration of service.

13.05.140    Unusual demands.

13.05.150    Access to property.

13.05.160    Responsibility for equipment.

13.05.170    Fire hydrants.

13.05.180    Underground utilities.

13.05.190    Penalties.

13.05.200    Amendments.

13.05.210    Prohibiting any free service.


13.05.010 Rules and regulations.

A. This chapter shall be known as “the Rules and Regulations Ordinance for the Operation of the Water Department of the City of Fairview.”

B. The water department and all customers receiving service from the water department, whether inside or outside the city limits, are bound by these rules and regulations for the operation of the water department of the city. (Ord. 7-1988 § 1)


13.05.020 Definitions of general terms.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

A. “Applicant” means the person or persons, firm or corporation making application for water service from the water department under the terms of these rules and regulations.

B. “City” means the city of Fairview.

C. “Coliform” means a bacteriological organism whose count is used to determine the presence of pollution in water.

D. “Council” means the governing body of the city.

E. “Customer” means an applicant who has been accepted under the terms of these rules and regulations and who receives water service from the water department.

F. “Customer service line” means that part of the piping on the customer’s property that connects the service connection to the customer’s distribution system.

G. “Rules and regulations” means the rules and regulations for the operation of the water department.

H. “Service connection” means that part of the water distribution system that connects the meter to the main and normally consists of corporation stop, service pipe, curb stop and box, meter, meter yoke, and meter box.

I. “Superintendent” means the person appointed by the city administrator to manage the affairs of the water department.

J. “Water” means potable drinking water.

K. “Water department” means the water department of the city. (Ord. 7-1988 § 2)


13.05.030 Service area.

The area served by the water department shall be that area included within the corporate limits of the city and such other contiguous or neighboring territory as the council shall, from time to time, determine to serve. (Ord. 7-1988 § 3)


13.05.040 Description of service.

A. Supply of Potable Water.

1. The water department will exercise reasonable diligence and care to deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to the customer at a proper pressure and to avoid any shortage or interruption in delivery.

2. Temporary suspension of service by the water department for improvements and repairs will be necessary occasionally. Whenever possible, and when time permits, all customers affected shall be notified prior to shut-downs. The city shall not be liable for damage resulting from the interruption in service or from lack of service.

B. Quality. The water department shall exercise reasonable diligence to supply safe and potable water at all times, shall submit samples for bacteriological testing as required by the Oregon State Health Division, and shall otherwise meet requirements of the Division.

C. Ownership of System. All water mains, valves, fittings, hydrants, service connections, and all other appurtenances, except customer service lines, are the property of the city of Fairview.

D. Special Contracts. When the applicant’s requirements for water are unusual or large, or necessitate considerable special or reserve equipment of capacity, the water department reserves the right to make special contracts, the provisions of which are different from and have exceptions to the regularly published water rates, and rules and regulations. These special contracts shall be in writing and signed by the applicant and the superintendent. The superintendent shall not sign a special contract until specific approval of the contract has been obtained from the council.

E. Resale of Water. Resale of water shall only be permitted under special contract.

F. Service Preference. In case of shortage of supply, the water department reserves the right to give preference in the matter of furnishing service to customers from the standpoint of public convenience or necessity. Water service to users outside the city limits shall, at all times, be subject to the prior and superior rights of the customers within the city. (Ord. 7-1988 § 4)


13.05.050 Application for service – Owner liability.

A. Application. Each applicant for water service shall sign an application form provided by the city which shall include the date of application, location or premises, whether the applicant has been served before, the date on which service is to begin, the purpose for which service is to be used, the address for mailing or delivery of bills, the applicant’s address, the class and size of water service, and such other information as the city may reasonably require. In signing the application, an applicant agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the city for use of its water and sewer systems. The application is merely a written request for service and does not bind the city to provide water or sewer services. When application is made for water service at a nonowner-occupied premises, the owner thereof shall sign an agreement, in a form approved by the city finance director, that they shall, in the event of nonpayment or delinquency of any fee(s) or charge(s), expenses, losses, damages and/or fines incurred by the occupant/applicant for water and/or sewer service, be jointly and severally liable to the city for the full payment thereof, including any late and/or penalty fees. The council may establish by resolution a process for collecting outstanding water/sanitary sewer charges, expenses, losses, damages and/or fines from the responsible parties.

B. Deposits.

1. At the time application for service is made, the applicant shall pay a deposit as specified by council resolution. At the time the deposit is given to the water department, the applicant shall be given a receipt for the deposit. The deposit is not to be considered as a payment on account. The deposit will be returned to the customer when the service to the customer is discontinued; provided, that all outstanding bills have been paid, or, in the case of a property owner, after two years (24 months) of consecutive service of no past due amounts owing. Interest shall not be paid on deposits.

2. Forfeiture of Deposit. If an account becomes delinquent and it is necessary to turn off the service, the deposit shall be applied to the unpaid balance due. Water service shall not be restored to that customer at the same or different premises until all outstanding bills due the water department have been paid and the cash deposit replaced.

C. Application of Amendments. Customer desiring a material change in the size, character, or extent of equipment or operation that would result in a material change in the amount of water used shall give the water department written notice of such change prior to the change, and the application for service shall be amended. Customers desiring a change in the size, location, or number of services shall fill out an amended application. (Ord. 10-2006 § 1; Ord. 10-1988 § 1; Ord. 7-1988 § 5)


13.05.060 Services.

A. Ownership – Installation – Maintenance. The water department shall own, install, and maintain all services and installations according to Oregon State Health Division Standards, and maintenance shall only be performed by authorized employees of the water department. The customer shall own, install, maintain the customer service line.

B. Service Connection. A service connection charge shall be charged to any applicant who files for service where no service previously existed, or who files for a change in service size or location. The applicant shall submit with the application the minimum service connection charge. The charge is to cover the actual cost to the water department to install the service from the main to and including the meter and the meter housing. In addition to the cost of the installation, the service connection charge shall include a system improvement fee for all new services. This fee will not be charged for a change in service size or location. The amount of the charges shall be set by council resolution.

C. Size of Service. The water department shall furnish and install a service of a size and at a location that the applicant requests; provided, that the request is reasonable and that the size request is one that is listed by the water department. The minimum size of service pipe shall be three-quarter inch. The water department may refuse to install a service line that is undersized, as determined by a study and report of the superintendent to the council.

D. Changes in Service Size. Permanent changes in the size of the service line requested by the customer shall be paid by the customer on the basis of actual cost to the water department for making the change.

E. Length of Service.

1. Where the main is in a public right-of-way, the meter shall be placed at the right-of-way line nearest the property to be served for the standard connection fee; provided, that the length of service does not exceed the width of the right-of-way.

2. Where the main is on an easement or publicly owned property other than designated public right-of-way, the service shall be installed to the boundary of the easement or public property by the water department; provided, that the length of service does not exceed 30 feet.

3. If, in either case cited in subsections (E)(1) and (E)(2) above, the length of service line to the meter location exceeds the maximum distance stated, the applicant shall pay the extra cost of the line on the basis of actual cost to the water department for labor, materials, and equipment rental, plus 20 percent of the total.

F. Joint Service Connections. The water department may, at its option, serve two or more premises with one service connection, but shall not allow more than one applicant for service to be connected to the same meter. The inside diameter of joint service lines shall be sufficient to provide a carrying capacity not less than the combined capacity of the individual service lines of the same size as the meters installed. Service extensions from an existing service to occupancies or ownership other than those for which the existing service was intended shall not be permitted.

G. Number of Service Connections on Premises. The owner of a single parcel of property may apply for and receive as many services as the owner and tenants require; provided, that the application or applications meet the requirements of the rules and regulations.

H. Standby Fire Protection Service Connections.

1. Purpose. Standby fire protection service connections of two-inch size and larger shall be installed only if adequate provisions are made to prevent the use of water from the services for purposes other than fire extinguishing. Sealed fire sprinkler systems with water-operated alarms shall be considered to have such provisions. The water department shall require that an approved detector-check meter be installed in the standby fire protection service connections to which hose lines or hydrants are connected. All piping on the customer’s premises shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code of the city.

2. Charges for Service. Charges for standby fire protection service shall be as established by council resolution. No charge will be made for water used in the standby fire protection services to extinguish accidental fires or for routine testing of the fire protection system upon appropriate submittal of proof. The customer shall pay the full cost of the standby fire protection service connection, any required detector-check meters, and any required special water meter or other device installed solely for the service to the standby connection.

3. Violation of Regulations. If water is used from a standby connection service in violation of these regulations, an estimate of the amount used shall be computed by the water department. The customer shall pay for the water used at the regular rates, including the minimum charge based on the size of the service connection and subsequent bills rendered on the basis of the regular water rates.

I. Fire Service Connections Other Than Standby. A service having fire protection facilities on the premises and water for other purposes flowing through the same service connection shall be considered an ordinary service and shall be metered. All water used through that service, regardless of its use, shall be charged at the regular rates.

J. Temporary Service Connections. For water service of a temporary nature applicants shall be required to pay in advance the estimated cost of installation and removal of metering equipment and materials, plus a reasonable depreciation charge for the use of equipment and material owned and furnished by the water department. The applicant shall pay the water bill in advance, based on an estimate of the quantity to be used.

1. Time Limit. Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six months after installation unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the water department.

2. Charge for Water Served. Charges for water furnished through a temporary service connection shall be at the established monthly rates for regular users set forth in the current water rate resolution.

3. Installation Charge and Deposits. The applicant for temporary service shall:

a. Pay the water department, in advance, the estimated cost of installing and removing all facilities necessary to furnish each service.

b. Deposit an amount sufficient to cover bills for water during the entire period such temporary service may be used.

c. Deposit with the water department an amount equal to the value of any equipment loaned by the water department to the applicant for use on temporary service. This deposit is refundable under the terms of subsection (J)(4) of this section.

4. Responsibility for Meters and Installations. The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned facilities of the water department. If the meter of other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be deducted from the deposit refund. If the loaned materials are returned in satisfactory condition and all bills paid, the full amount of the equipment deposit shall be returned to the temporary customer at the termination of service.

K. Customer’s Plumbing.

1. Plumbing Code. The customer’s plumbing, which shall include the customer’s service line and all plumbing, piping, fixtures, and other appurtenances carrying or intended to carry potable water, sewage, or drainage, shall comply with the state plumbing code.

2. Control Valves. Customer shall install an approved gate and check valve in the customer service line as close to the meter as possible, the operation of which shall control the entire water supply to the premises served and to prevent the backflow of water into the city mains. The customer shall install such additional pressure-reducing valves, pressure relief valves, check valves, pop-off valves, or other control valves, as the customer may desire or the water department may consider it necessary to protect the customer’s piping from abnormal high or low pressures or from interruptions of service. Repair and replacement of the control valves shall be the responsibility of the customer. A customer shall not operate or cause unauthorized operation of the meter stop or any other appurtenances on the service connection.

3. Pumps. Where pumping is required to serve a customer at too high an elevation to be served by gravity, the water department may, at its option, require the customer to provide a suitable pump as a condition of service. The installation shall be subject to approval by the superintendent. (Ord. 7-1988 § 6)


13.05.070 Meters.

A. Ownership. The water department shall own and maintain all water meters. The water department shall not pay rent or any other charges for a meter or other water facilities, including housing and connections, located on a customer’s premises.

B. Installation. Installation of water meters shall be performed only by authorized employees of the water department. All meters shall be sealed by the water department at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by one of its authorized employees.

C. Size and Type of Meter. An applicant may request and receive any size meter regularly stocked or furnished by the water department; provided, that the request is reasonable; and further provided, that the meter is not greatly oversized or undersized, as determined by the superintendent. The water department reserves the right to determine the type of meter to be installed.

D. Location of Meters. Meter shall normally be placed at the property line closest to the water main; the meter may be installed wherever the applicant desires, within reason, but the location must be approved by the water department. A meter shall not be located in a driveway or other locations where damage to the meter or its related parts may occur.

E. Joint Use of Meters. The joining of several customers to take advantage of the single minimum charges or large quantity rates is prohibited, except under special contract. Where multiple users are receiving water from a single meter, the applicant for service shall be considered the customer and shall be responsible for all charges.

F. Changes in Size or Location. If, for any reason, a change in size of a meter and service is required, the installation shall be accomplished on the basis of a new connection, and the customer’s application shall be amended. Meters or services moved for the convenience of the customer shall be relocated only at the customer’s expense. (Ord. 7-1988 § 7)


13.05.080 Water rates.

The water rates to be charged, including base rate charges, charges for water used over the specified minimum, fire hydrant rates, and service connection charges, shall be published in a separate water rate schedule adopted by council resolution following public hearing. All water used, with the exception of that used for fighting fires, shall be metered and a charge made according to the schedule of water rates. (Ord. 7-1988 § 8)


13.05.081 Fee imposed – Use of proceeds.

There is hereby imposed a fire suppression fee on all water service accounts served by the city’s water department within the corporate limits of the city. All monies generated by the fee shall be used solely for the payment of costs associated with fire suppression including those associated with the implementation of any intergovernmental agreement(s) for the delivery of fire suppression services and the administration of said contract by the city. (Ord. 18-2000 § 1)


13.05.082 Classes of users.

The fee imposed under the terms of FMC 13.05.081 may differentiate only as between the following three user classes and not otherwise: residential water users, commercial water users and industrial water users. (Ord. 18-2000 § 1)


13.05.083 Fee adjustments.

In the event the city believes the fee amount imposed by the terms of FMC 13.05.081 should be adjusted, the council may do so by resolution. Any change in the fee shall become effective not sooner than the thirtieth day following the passage of the resolution by the council. (Ord. 18-2000 § 1)


13.05.090 Notices.

A. Notices to Customers. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, notices from the water department to the customer shall be given in writing and either mailed or delivered to the customer’s last known address. In emergencies, the water department may notify by telephone or messenger.

B. Notices from Customers. Notices from customers to the water department may be given by the customer or authorized representative orally or in writing at the office of the water department, or to an agent of the water department duly authorized to receive notices or complaints. (Ord. 8-2011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 7-1988 § 9)


13.05.100 Billing and payment.

A. Meter Readings. Meters shall be read and customers billed on the basis of the meter reading, according to the rate structure established by council resolution. The water department shall keep an accurate account on its books of all readings of meters, and the account so kept shall be offered at all times, places, and courts as prima facie evidence of the use or water service by the customer.

B. Rendering of Bills.

1. Billing Period. Meters shall be read and bills rendered monthly.

2. Bills for Other Than Normal Billing Period. Opening or closing bills or bills that for any other reason cover a period containing 10 percent more days or 10 percent less days than in the normal billing period shall be prorated.

3. Bills for More Than One Meter. All meters supplying a customer’s premises shall be billed separately; except:

a. Where the water department has, for operating purposes, installed two or more meters in place of one, the readings may be combined for billing.

b. The customer has elected to receive statement billings summarizing activity in lieu of individual bills. Statement billing may be requested by contacting the utility billing clerk.

C. Disputed Bills. A customer who disputes the correctness of a bill shall deposit with the city of Fairview the amount of the disputed bill at the time the complaint is lodged to preclude discontinuance of service pending final settlement of the bill or bills. Subsequent bills shall be paid or placed on deposit in similar manner. Failure of the customer to make the deposit shall warrant discontinuance of service as provided under this section.

1. Adjustment of Disputed Bills Due to Leakage. Water furnished by the city of Fairview shall not be permitted to run to waste. Leaks in private pipes shall be repaired as soon as detected. Repairs need to be made within 10 days after the leak is discovered along with proof of repairs having been made. The customer is responsible for all water costs through leakage, frozen pipes, and/or other causes beyond the 10-day period. Adjustment of the water bill will be handled administratively.

D. Failure to Read Meters. In the event that it is impossible or impractical to read a meter on the regular reading date, the water consumption shall be prorated on the basis of 30 days per month, and the total water consumption for billing purposes for the period shall be estimated.

E. Payment of Bills. Each bill rendered shall contain the due date of the 15th of the month. If the bill is not paid by that date, the account shall be considered past due unless other arrangements have been made with the city recorder or designee, in writing, that specify another due date.

F. Past Due and Delinquent Accounts.

1. If a bill is not paid by 5:00 p.m. 10 days after the due date designated on the bill, penalties shall be assessed on all past due charges. Assessed penalties combine with the delinquent balance and are immediately considered past due.

2. If a bill is not paid within 30 days after the due date designated on the bill, the account shall be considered two months delinquent. If a bill is not paid within 10 days of becoming two months delinquent, another penalty shall be assessed on all past due charges, including previously assessed penalties, and a turnoff notice will be mailed specifying that payment must be made by 10:00 a.m. seven days after the turnoff notice was mailed.

3. Customers shall be notified of and have the opportunity to be heard by a city official or employee empowered to resolve any valid objections to the billing prior to the disconnection.

4. Service Turnoff. If payment is not made in full, including assessed penalties, on the date provided in the turnoff notice, then on the turnoff date the city shall deliver a written notice to the customer’s property stating that service is being turned off until all past due and delinquent amounts have been paid. The city may immediately thereafter turn off the service. Service shall be restored after the city receives payment in full of amounts owed, including assessed penalties and any disconnection and connection fees established by the city.

5. Penalty Fees – Late Payments. The penalty on past due accounts and delinquent accounts shall be five percent of all unpaid charges, including previously assessed penalties. Penalty fees will only be assessed on accounts with total balances of $10.01 or more on the date of penalty assessment. Once a penalty has been assessed, any payment to the city shall be applied by the billing system on a weighted average across the utility funds for all unpaid charges.

6. Installment Payments of Delinquent Accounts. In cases of extreme hardship, the city recorder or designee shall have the discretion of renewing service to a delinquent account upon receipt of a satisfactory written installment plan for the payment of the overdue amount.

7. Assessment Lien Against Real Property. If payment is not received or a payment agreement has not been arranged within two business days of the turnoff as described in subsection (F)(4) of this section, the city recorder or designee shall provide notice to the real property where the water was used or charges incurred and, if different, to the last known address of the property owner stating the amount owed, the description of the real property involved, and a statement that if the amount owed is not paid within 15 days from the date the notice is mailed, the real property involved will be subject to an assessment lien in the amount of the delinquent water bill, charge or penalty. If payment is not made within the 15-day period, the city recorder or designee shall enter in the lien docket of the city a lien against the real property. The city may proceed to foreclose the lien in the manner provided by law for the collection of liens on real property.

8. Change in Property Ownership. Customers shall provide notice to the city of a change in ownership of property receiving water service. Upon notice from a customer that the property will be changing ownership, the city may place a lien upon the property for the final bill and payment for services. The lien shall be released once the final bill has been paid and satisfied in full. (Ord. 2-2016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 8-2014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 8-2011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 4-1996 § 1; Ord. 7-1988 § 10)


13.05.110 Meter error.

A. Meter Accuracy. All meters will be tested prior to installation. No meter will be placed in service or allowed to remain in service that is known to have an error in registration in excess of three percent under conditions of normal operation.

B. Meter Test.

1. Standard Test. Meter tests will be conducted in accordance with standards of practice established by the American Water Works Association.

2. On Customer Request. A customer may, giving not less than seven days’ notice, request the water department to test the meter serving his premises. The water department will require the customer to deposit the testing fee as established by the council resolution. The deposit will be returned to the customer if the test reveals the meter to over-register more than three percent under conditions of normal operation. If the meter is operating satisfactorily, or if the meter under-registers more than three percent under the standard test conditions, the deposit shall be forfeited to the water department. Customers may, at their option, witness any meter tests that they request.

3. On Water Department Request. If, upon comparison with past water usage, it appears that a meter is not registering properly, the water department may, at its option, test the meter and adjust the charges accordingly if the meter either over-registers or under-registers. No charge for the meter testing will be made to the customer for the meter test under these conditions.

C. Adjustment of Bills for Meter Error.

1. Fast Meters. When, upon test, a meter is found to be over-registering more than three percent under normal operating conditions, the water department will credit to the customer’s account the full amount of the overcharge, based on the corrected meter readings, not exceeding two regular billing periods that the meter was in use.

2. Slow Meters. When, upon test, a meter is found to be under-registering more than three percent, the water department may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge, based upon the corrected readings, not exceeding two regular billing periods that the meter was in use.

3. Nonregistering Meters. The water department will bill the customer for water consumed while the meter was not registering. The bill will be computed upon an estimate of consumption based on the customer’s prior use during the same season of the previous year, or on a reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same season and under similar circumstances and conditions, or both. (Ord. 7-1988 § 11)


13.05.120 Discontinuance of service.

A. On Customer Request. Each customer about to vacate any premises supplied with water service by the water department shall give the water department a request to discontinue service prior to the specific date service is to be discontinued. The customer is responsible for all water supplied to the premises until water service is actually discontinued by the city or two days after the city receives notice, whichever occurs first.

B. Nonpayment of Bills. A customer’s water service may be discontinued if the water bill is not paid in accordance with the procedures listed in these rules and regulations.

C. Improper Customer Facilities.

1. Unsafe Facilities. The water department may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to any premises without prior notice where plumbing facilities, appliances or equipment using water are dangerous, unsafe, or not in conformity with the state plumbing code.

2. Cross-Connections or Physical Connections with Other Water Supplies or Systems.

a. Neither cross-connections nor physical connections of any kind shall be made to any other water supply, whether private or public, without the written approval of the water department. Included in this category are all pipelines, appurtenances, and facilities of the water department’s system; and all pipes, appurtenances, pumps, tanks, storage reservoirs, facilities, equipment, and appliances of other systems, whether located within or on public or private property, or the premises of a water user.

b. The superintendent or other authorized representative shall have the right, without being considered guilty of trespass or unlawful act, to check the premises of users for physical connections with other water supplies. Any such connection shall be removed immediately by the customer; otherwise the water department shall discontinue any connection that it may have for the serving of water to the premises.

c. All plumbing within the building served by the water department shall be so installed and all plumbing fixtures so constructed as to prevent pollution of water supply by back siphonage or cross-connections. Water service to any premises known or found to have such defects and hazards shall be disconnected and not restored until the defects and hazards have been eliminated.

4. Water Waste. Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a customer’s premises, seriously affecting the general service, the water department may discontinue service if the conditions are not corrected after due notice by the water department.

5. Service Detrimental to Others. The water department may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to any premises where excessive demand by one customer will result in inadequate service to others.

6. Fraud or Abuse. The water department will refuse or discontinue service to any premises where it is considered necessary to protect the water department from fraud or abuse. Discontinuance of service for one or both of these causes will be made immediately upon receipt of knowledge by the water department that the condition or conditions exist.

7. Unauthorized Turn-on. Where water service has been discontinued for any reason and the water is turned on by the customer or other unauthorized person, the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter removed. The charges for shutting the water at the main or removing the meter shall be computed at actual cost to the water department, plus 15 percent overhead, but not less than $10.00. These charges shall be billed to the offending customer, and the water shall not be furnished to the premises until the charges are paid and the water department has reasonable assurance that the violation will not recur.

8. Noncompliance with Rules and Regulations. The water department may, upon five days’ notice, discontinue service to a customer’s premises for failure to comply with any of the provisions of these rules and regulations. This subsection does not prevent immediate continuance when authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 7-1988 § 12)


13.05.130 Restoration of service.

A. Restoration of service after discontinuance for nonpayment of bills shall be made after payment of past-due charges, plus any restoration charge that may be provided by council resolution, and posting a deposit as provided by this chapter.

B. Restoration of service after discontinuance of service for the customer’s convenience, or for unsafe facilities, water waste, fraud, abuse, or for noncompliance with any of the rules and regulations, shall be made. If discontinuance of service has occurred because of irregularities, restoration of service will only occur after adjustments have been made to ensure that the irregularity will not recur. The restoration charge shall be as provided by council resolution, plus any other charges, due or past due, that the water department may have incurred to correct the irregularity. (Ord. 7-1988 § 13)


13.05.140 Unusual demands.

A. When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool, log pond, or for other purposes, arrangements must be made with the water department prior to taking the water.

B. Permission to take water in unusual quantities will be given only if the water department facilities and other consumers are not inconvenienced. (Ord. 7-1988 § 14)


13.05.150 Access to property.

The duly appointed employees of the water department, under the direction of the superintendent, shall have free access at all reasonable hours of the day to any and all parts of structures and premises in which water is or may be delivered for the purpose of inspecting connections, the conditions of conduits and fixtures, and the manner and extent in which the water is being used. The water department does not, however, assume the duty of inspecting the customer’s line, plumbing, and equipment, and shall not be responsible therefor. (Ord. 7-1988 § 15)


13.05.160 Responsibility for equipment.

A. Responsibility for Customer Equipment. The water department shall not be liable for any loss or damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defect in the customer’s line, plumbing, or equipment, nor shall the water department be liable for loss or damage due to interruption of service or temporary changes in pressure. The customer shall be responsible for valves on the premises being turned off when the water service is turned on.

B. Responsibility for Water Department Equipment. Water department equipment on the customer’s premises remains the property of the water department and may be repaired, replaced, or removed by the water department employees at any time without consent of the customer. No payment will be made to the property owner for the right to install, maintain, replace, or remove water department equipment on the premises. The property owner and tenant shall exercise reasonable care to prevent damage to equipment and shall not interfere with its operation.

The property owner and tenant must keep vicious dogs or other animals secure or confined to avoid interference with the utility operation and maintenance.

C. The water department may, at its option, install pressure reducing valves at the expense of the water department, and for the purpose of reducing pressures from the distribution mains only in order to protect the water department’s meter. The installation of a pressure-reducing valve is not designed nor intended to protect any property beyond the meter to the customer’s lines. If any property of the customer, after water passes through the meter, is subject to damage by reason of water pressure changes therein, the loss or damage that may result to the customer’s property will be at the sole and exclusive expense of the customer and shall not be a responsibility of the water department. Failure of water department control valves or devices will not in any way indicate negligence by the water department or responsibility for damage caused thereby.

D. Damage to Water Department Equipment. The customer shall be liable for any damage to equipment owned by the water department that is caused by an act of the customer, the customer’s tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees. Damage to equipment shall include but not be limited to breaking of seals and locks; tampering with meters; injury to meters, including but not limited to damage by hot water or steam; and damaged meter boxes, curb stops, meter stops, and other service appurtenances.

E. Damage to Mains, Valves, and Appurtenances by Others. When underground mains, valves, and other city water department equipment is damaged by a contractor or private individual, the entire cost of repairs shall be borne by that contractor or individual.

F. The water department shall be notified before excavation by others on city rights-of-way and easements, so location of water pipes and other buried utilities can be established by the city at no cost to the requesting party. (Ord. 7-1988 § 16)


13.05.170 Fire hydrants.

A. Operation. No person or persons other than those designated and authorized by the water department shall open any fire hydrant or standpipe belonging to the water department, attempt to draw water from it, or in any manner damage or tamper with it. No tool other than special hydrant wrenches shall be used to operate a hydrant valve. In cases where a temporary service has been granted and water is received through a fire hydrant, an auxiliary external valve will be provided to control the flow of water.

B. Moving a Fire Hydrant. When a fire hydrant has been installed in the location specified by the proper authority, the water department has fulfilled its obligation. A property owner or other party who desires to change the size, type, or location of the hydrant shall bear all costs of the changes. Any change in the location of the fire hydrant must be approved by the water department. (Ord. 7-1988 § 17)


13.05.180 Underground utilities.

No person or persons other than those designated and authorized by the water department shall operate, adjust, or in any manner tamper with any part of the water system of the city. (Ord. 7-1988 § 18)


13.05.190 Penalties.

A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. 7-1988 § 19)


13.05.200 Amendments.

A. City Council. The city council shall have the power to establish water rates and charges and amend these rules and regulations as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the water department following public hearing thereupon.

B. Suspension of Rules. No employee of the water department is authorized to suspend or alter any of the rules and regulations cited herein without specific approval or direction of the council, except in cases of emergency involving loss of life or property or which would place the water system operation in jeopardy. (Ord. 7-1988 § 20)


13.05.210 Prohibiting any free service.

Except for service to the city, the water department shall not furnish any water or perform any service to any individual, firm, corporation, association, or institution free of charge or at a reduced rate or for any other consideration than the regular established rate or charges levied through a contractual agreement approved by the council or otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 7-1988 § 21)


Chapter 13.10 SEWER DEPARTMENT

Sections:

13.10.010    Unlawful disposal or discharge.

13.10.020    On-site disposal restricted.

13.10.030    Use of public sanitary sewers required.

13.10.040    Notice to connect.

13.10.050    Objections to notice.

13.10.060    Hearing on objections.

13.10.070    Sanitary sewer connection charges.

13.10.080    Connection permit required.

13.10.090    Connection permits – Fees.

13.10.100    Separate connections.

13.10.110    Sewer connection excavations.

13.10.120    Use of existing building sewers.

13.10.130    Construction standards.

13.10.140    Elevation of building sewer.

13.10.150    Connection to the public sewer.

13.10.160    Inspection.

13.10.170    Barricades required.

13.10.180    System development charges.

13.10.190    Public sanitary sewer charges – Fee in lieu of assessment.

13.10.200    Private wastewater disposal.

13.10.210    Discharge of storm water.

13.10.220    Prohibited discharge.

13.10.230    Protection from damage.

13.10.240    Sewer renovation.

13.10.250    Metered water consumption.

13.10.260    Inspection and testing.

13.10.270    Service charges.

13.10.280    Billing and payments.

13.10.290    User’s agreement.

13.10.300    Disposition of payments.

13.10.310    Liability.

13.10.320    Penalty.


13.10.010 Unlawful disposal or discharge.

No person except as herein provided shall place, deposit, or permit the placement or deposit of any of the following on public or private property within the city or in an area under the jurisdiction of the city:

A. Untreated human excrement.

B. Animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable material in an unsanitary manner.

C. Sewage or other polluted water which has not received suitable treatment according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3-1989 § 1)


13.10.020 On-site disposal restricted.

Except as authorized by this chapter, no person shall construct or retain a privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, or human or animal excrement. (Ord. 3-1989 § 2)


13.10.030 Use of public sanitary sewers required.

The owner of a house, building, or other property used for human occupancy, education, employment, recreation or other purpose, which is now or hereafter situated within 150 feet of a public sanitary sewer, shall install and maintain suitable toilet facilities therein and connect the facilities to the public sanitary sewer according to the provisions of this chapter within 60 days following official notice to do so or during construction and before use of the premises, as the case may be, in the event of construction requiring a building permit. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of the connection, including the installation and maintenance of any necessary pumps, pipelines, or equipment. (Ord. 3-1989 § 3)


13.10.040 Notice to connect.

Official notice to connect to the public sewer shall be given by the city by mailing notice to each owner of property not connected to the sewer that abuts a street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is a public sanitary sewer, or to which public sewer service is otherwise available within 150 feet of the concerned property. (Ord. 3-1989 § 4)


13.10.050 Objections to notice.

In the event that the property owner believes making a sewer connection is not possible or feasible the owner of the property may, during the 60-day period set forth in FMC 13.10.030, file written objections with the city council stating the reason the owner believes connection should not be required. The city shall not enforce the provisions of this chapter after the filing of objections until the council has heard the objections and rendered a decision. (Ord. 3-1989 § 5)


13.10.060 Hearing on objections.

An objection shall be heard by the council not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from and after the date of filing the objection with the city. Not less than seven days prior to the date set by the council for hearing the objection, the city recorder shall give notice to the person objecting to the date set for the hearing. The council shall make a final decision, and no exception shall be granted based on mere inconvenience or expense. For good cause shown, the council may permit a reasonable delay in making connection to the public sanitary sewer without penalty to the owner requesting the delay; provided, however, that no public health hazard shall be permitted to exist or be maintained at anytime. (Ord. 3-1989 § 6)


13.10.070 Sanitary sewer connection charges.

A. Applicants for a sanitary sewer connection permit must pay to the city the required sanitary sewer connection and inspection fee, system development charges and public sanitary sewer charges.

B. If connection to the sanitary sewage system is not made prior to the expiration of the sanitary sewer connection permit, the permit shall become invalid; thereafter, to connect to the sanitary sewerage system the owner must apply for a new sanitary sewer connection permit and pay all sanitary sewer connection charges.

C. When a sanitary sewer connection permit becomes invalid, the city may refund all of the sanitary sewer connection charges. The city administrator shall calculate and retain the cost for any city work performed plus an administrative service fee as set by council resolution. (Ord. 3-1989 § 7)


13.10.080 Connection permit required.

No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit. Improper or unauthorized connections may be summarily abated by the city and the costs assessed against the property upon which the connection was made. (Ord. 3-1989 § 8)


13.10.090 Connection permits – Fees.

A. Permit applications shall be made on a form furnished by the city and shall be made in writing by the owner of the property for which connection to the sanitary sewerage system is requested. The permit application shall be supplemented by plans, specifications, agreements or other information as the city may require. By such application, the owner and user(s) of the sanitary sewer system at that permitted connection agree to be bound by the terms of this chapter and any additional rules for the use of the sanitary sewer system as they be developed by the city, including joint and several liability for the payment of any and all fee(s), charge(s), expenses, losses, damages and/or fines incurred. The council may establish by resolution a process for collecting outstanding sanitary sewer charges, expenses, losses, damages and/or fines from the responsible parties.

B. A sanitary sewer connection permit is specific to the property for which it is issued and is not transferable to other property.

C. Prior to obtaining a permit, the owner shall first obtain any permits that may be required for street or highway opening and use.

D. A sanitary sewer connection permit is valid for 180 calendar days from the date the permit is issued. Upon written application of the owner of the property benefited by the permit, the city may extend the permit for a period not exceeding an additional 180 calendar days.

E. All fees, including an inspection and connection fee, as set by the city, shall be paid at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 10-2006 § 2; Ord. 3-1989 § 9)


13.10.100 Separate connections.

A separate sewer connection shall be provided for every building or premises unless special written permission is obtained from the city. If more than one building is permitted to be connected on one connection, the property owner shall pay a connection and inspection fee as described in FMC 13.10.090 for each building or premises served. (Ord. 3-1989 § 10)


13.10.110 Sewer connection excavations.

All excavations for sewer connections shall be open trench unless approved by the city public works superintendent, and no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. (Ord. 3-1989 § 11)


13.10.120 Use of existing building sewers.

Old service laterals or building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon approved examination and test, to meet all requirements of this chapter. The applicant/customer shall be responsible for the costs of such test(s). (Ord. 3-1989 § 12)


13.10.130 Construction standards.

The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a service lateral, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the state plumbing code and the city’s standards. (Ord. 3-1989 § 13)


13.10.140 Elevation of building sewer.

Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In a building in which a building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. (Ord. 3-1989 § 14)


13.10.150 Connection to the public sewer.

The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the state plumbing code. Each connection shall be made gastight and watertight. In no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. (Ord. 3-1989 § 15)


13.10.160 Inspection.

The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city 24 hours in advance of when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. No installation shall be covered until approved by the inspectors. (Ord. 3-1989 § 16)


13.10.170 Barricades required.

All excavations within the public right-of-way for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 3-1989 § 17)


13.10.180 System development charges.

A. The addition of new sanitary sewer service connections to the present Fairview sanitary sewer system creates additional demand upon the system and causes a more rapid deterioration making necessary the financing and construction of new and/or improved sanitary sewer lines and facilities, both trunk and lateral, and accelerating the repair and replacement schedules of existing lines and facilities.

B. The costs of these increased new and/or additional or improved facilities, repairs and replacements shall be borne, at least in part, by the applicants for new service connections as follows:

1. A system development charge for each new connection to the city sanitary sewerage system shall be payable prior to issuance of the sanitary sewer connection permit. The amount of such charge shall be established by council resolution.

2. If an alteration, expansion, improvement, conversion, or operation of a building causes an increase in the flow of wastewater, alters the character of the wastewater, or places the building in a new user class, the owner shall pay additional system development charges.

3. When a system development charge has been paid, the amount paid shall be credited against the amount owed for the current system development charge. If the current charge is greater than the credit, the owner shall pay the difference. If the credit is greater than the current charges, no refund shall be made.

4. System development charges shall apply to property and shall not be personal to the person paying the charges. (Ord. 3-1989 § 18)


13.10.190 Public sanitary sewer charges – Fee in lieu of assessment.

A. Except as provided below, if a property benefits from a public sanitary sewer, that property shall be charged a public sanitary sewer charge for its appropriate share of the cost of constructing that public sanitary sewer. In the following situations, the property shall not be charged a public sanitary sewer charge for an existing public sanitary sewer:

1. If a property has been assessed for the existing public sanitary sewer through a local improvement district, that property shall not be charged a public sanitary sewer charge for that public sanitary sewer.

2. If there is evidence of an approved connection to an existing public sanitary sewer, that property shall not be charged a public sanitary sewer charge for that public sanitary sewer.

B. All public sanitary sewer charges must be paid before the city will issue a sanitary sewer connection permit. The council shall establish the amount of the public sanitary sewer charges (fee in lieu of assessment) by resolution. (Ord. 3-1989 § 19)


13.10.200 Private wastewater disposal.

A. No person may construct, maintain, or use a private wastewater disposal system except as provided by this section.



B. Before construction or replacement of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall obtain land use approval required by the Department of Environmental Quality.

C. The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with the requirements of the Department of Environmental Quality.

D. If a private wastewater disposal system is abandoned, it shall be abandoned in accordance with the requirements of Department of Environmental Quality.

E. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal system in accordance with the regulations of the Department of Environmental Quality. (Ord. 3-1989 § 20)


13.10.210 Discharge of storm water.

A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.

B. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater, to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 3-1989 § 21)


13.10.220 Prohibited discharge.

No person may discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following substances into the sanitary sewerage system:

A. Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, any liquids, any solids, or any gases which by reason of their nature of quantity are sufficient either alone or by interaction:

1. To cause a fire or explosion; or

2. To injure in any other way the sanitary sewerage system.

B. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in a sanitary sewer line or other interference with the operation of the sanitary sewerage system. Such substances include grease, fat, waste, oil, (whether or not emulsified), either soluble or n-hexane soluble matter, any substance which may solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures above 32 degrees Fahrenheit, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, pauch manure, bones, hair, hides, or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil; mud grinding, glass grinding, or polishing wastes; paper dishes, cups, paper packaging, plastic packaging, glass packaging, and metal packaging where whole or ground.

C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the city.

D. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction:

1. To injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment plant process;

2. To constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or

3. To exceed the limitations set forth in the categorical pretreatment standards.

E. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the public sanitary sewer lines for their maintenance and repair.

F. Any substance which may cause the sanitary sewerage system’s effluent or treatment residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse. No substance may be discharged to the sanitary sewerage system that causes the wastewater treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state of Oregon standards applicable to the sludge management method being used.

G. Any substance which will cause the wastewater treatment plant to violate its NPDES or other disposal system permits.

H. Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.

I. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 65 degrees centigrade (150 degrees Fahrenheit) or having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity resulting in interference at the wastewater treatment plant. In no case may there be quantities of liquid or vapor in the wastewater, such that temperature of the wastewater entering the wastewater treatment plant exceeds 40 degrees centigrade (104 degrees Fahrenheit).

J. Any slug which shall mean any pollutant including oxygen demanding pollutant (BOD) released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the sanitary sewerage system.

K. Any unpolluted water including noncontact cooling water.

L. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration which exceeds limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal     regulations.

M. Any material from a private wastewater disposal system, except such material received at the wastewater treatment plant.

N. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.

O. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the handling of such wastes; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and be located so as to be easily cleaned and inspected.

P. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at the owner’s expense, in continuously efficient operation. (Ord. 3-1989 § 22)


13.10.230 Protection from damage.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, cover or uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is a part of the municipal sewage system. (Ord. 3-1989 § 23)


13.10.240 Sewer renovation.

A. Any building sanitary sewer connected to the sewer system, whether within the city’s right-of-way or within the bounds of the sewer user’s property, which is determined by the city to be causing infiltration of surface, storm or groundwater into the sewer system, shall be repaired within 60 days after the date of official notice to the concerned legal property owner to do so. All costs for the repair shall be borne by the said owner.

B. When repairs are made within the city right-of-way, such repairs shall be under city specifications.

C. Before being covered, each repair must be inspected and approved in writing by the city’s building official. (Ord. 3-1989 § 24)


13.10.250 Metered water consumption.

A. The volume of flow used for computing commercial and industrial wastewater charges shall be the metered water consumption at the premises served as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the city. Adjustments to the charges based upon metered water consumption may be made by the city recorder upon evidence by the user that a portion of the water is not discharged into the sanitary sewerage system.

B. If the discharge of waste into the sanitary sewerage system obtains any part, or all, of the water from sources other than the city, all or part of which is discharged into the sanitary sewerage system, the discharger shall install, maintain and pay for water meters of a type approved by the city for purposes of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.

C. The owner, after approval by the city, may install a device for measuring the volume of wastewater discharged instead of using a water meter. The owner shall own, install and operate the device.

D. All storm sewers, including building storm sewers, which are on private property and connect directly to the building sanitary sewer shall be disconnected and properly capped or connected to the appropriate system within 30 days after the date of official notice to the legal property owner to do so.

E. If the repair corrections required by this section are not made, the city may enter the property and make them, and cause the expenses to become a lien upon the property, which shall become due and payable upon entry in the lien docket. The city shall attempt to serve, by certified or registered mail, a written notice upon the owner of the property at the time the lien is entered on the city lien docket, which notice shall state the amount of the lien and give the property owner notice that the lien will be deemed delinquent if not paid within 60 days after the date the lien was entered on the city lien docket. If the owner fails to pay the lien within 60 days after entry of the lien on the lien docket, the city may enforce or foreclose the lien or lien account in the manner provided by law.

F. It is the owner’s responsibility to maintain, replace or repair service connection lines from the point of connection to the main collection line. (Ord. 3-1989 § 25)


13.10.260 Inspection and testing.

The city public works superintendent and other duly authorized city employees or representatives bearing proper credentials and identification shall have the right and be permitted to enter upon all properties and premises receiving sanitary sewer service at reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3-1989 § 26)


13.10.270 Service charges.

A. Service charges for use of the city sewage system shall be established by council resolution following public hearing thereupon.

B. The customer and the owner of the property served shall each be responsible for payment of the service charges provided for by this section. A penalty fee equal to the percentage set by council shall be added each month on all charges that are delinquent to help defray the city’s cost for administering the delinquency. Penalty fees will only be assessed on accounts with total balances of $10.01 or more on the date of penalty assessment. (Ord. 8-2014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1989 § 27)


13.10.280 Billing and payments.

A. Payment of Bills. Sewer service charges shall be billed monthly or every two months as determined by the city, and are due on the fifteenth of the month. If the bill is not paid by its due date, the account shall be considered past due unless other arrangements have been made with the city recorder, in writing, that specify another due date. Any charge not paid by the due date designated on the bill is delinquent. Delinquent accounts may be collected, water and sewer service discontinued, property liens filed as appropriate and late penalties imposed in the manner set forth in the city’s sewer and/or water regulation ordinances.

B. Recovery of Delinquent Charges for Sewer Accounts Only. The city may certify to the Multnomah County tax assessor the amount of any delinquent user and billing service charges. When the certification is complete, such amount, including interest, will be assessed against the premises served with sewer service in the same manner as other taxes are certified, assessed, collected and paid. The city may also at any time enter in the lien docket of the city a lien against the real property.

C. Notice to Customers of Placement of Lien. Except in an emergency, the city shall provide written notice to the customer, either mailed or delivered to the customer’s last known address, of the city’s intention to lien the property. In emergencies, the city may notify by telephone or messenger. The customer shall be notified of and have the opportunity to be heard by a city official or employee empowered to resolve any valid objections prior to city placement of property lien. (Ord. 8-2011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 8-1992 § 1; Ord. 3-1989 § 28)


13.10.290 User’s agreement.

All applicants and users of the Fairview sanitary sewer system shall by such application and use agree to be bound by the rules and regulations governing connection to and use of the sanitary sewer system without any reservation or qualification. (Ord. 3-1989 § 29)


13.10.300 Disposition of payments.

Payments made on sewer service charges shall be credited and paid to the city of Fairview sewer fund. (Ord. 3-1989 § 30)


13.10.310 Liability.

A person violating a provision of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 3-1989 § 31)


13.10.320 Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 3-1989 § 32)


Chapter 13.13 PUBLIC WORKS FACILITY FEE

Sections:

13.13.010    Purpose.

13.13.020    Definitions.

13.13.030    Establishment of fee.

13.13.040    Amount of fee.

13.13.050    Billing.

13.13.060    Payment due date.

13.13.070    Adjustment and administration of accounts.

13.13.080    Delinquency.


13.13.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the public works facility fee is to provide a funding mechanism to pay for the benefits conferred on residents, customers, and businesses in the provision of city public works and utility services through a new public works facility and maintenance of the public works facility. The new public works facility will meet state and local building standards and will allow the city to better serve its customers. (Ord. 9-2018 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.13.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:

A. “City utility service” means water, sanitary sewer, and/or storm water services provided by the city.

B. “Nonresidential unit” means a premises or a portion of a premises which is not used primarily for personal domestic accommodation and includes but is not limited to governmental, nonprofit, business, food cart, commercial, and industrial enterprises. Each separate business entity located on a premises shall be considered a separate nonresidential unit for these purposes. Portions of premises primarily used for transient lodging and subject to Chapter 3.05 FMC (Hotel and Motel Tax) shall be considered a nonresidential unit when occupancy is 30 days or less.

C. “Premises” means a parcel or portion of real property which is receiving city utility service.

D. “Residential unit” means a premises or a portion of a premises used for personal, domestic accommodation which provides complete living facilities for one or more persons. An accessory or ancillary residential dwelling unit on a premises may be considered as a separate residential unit. In premises with two or more apartments, condominiums, mobile homes, or other residential units, each residential unit shall be considered as a separate residential unit. Portions of premises primarily used for transient lodging and subject to Chapter 3.05 FMC (Hotel and Motel Tax) shall be considered a residential unit when occupancy is more than 30 days.

E. “Vacancy rate” means 3.81 percent, which is the average Troutdale/Fairview/Wood Village/Gresham area vacancy rate as reported by the Metro Multifamily Housing Association Apartment Report, Spring 2018, Volume 28. (Ord. 9-2018 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.13.030 Establishment of fee.

Effective November 16, 2018, there is hereby created a public works facility fee for the purposes set forth in this chapter. The full monthly fee will be charged on the December 2018 billing or January 2019 billing, depending on the billing cycle associated with each account. Accounts will be prorated for the initial billing only if the occupant has changed during the billing cycle. All public works facility fee revenues imposed by and collected under this chapter shall be deposited in the public works facility fee fund. An amount sufficient to pay the debt service on outstanding debt payable from the public works facility fee shall be paid from a debt service account within the fund. (Ord. 9-2018 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.13.040 Amount of fee.

A. The public works facility fee shall be assessed to each residential and nonresidential unit receiving city utility services at $4.82 per unit, per month.

1. The public works facility fee for a premises or portion of a premises with four or more attached residential units shall be reduced by the vacancy rate.

2. Determination of the number of residential units in a premises subject to hotel/motel tax under Chapter 3.05 FMC will be based on the average percentage of revenue reported to the city in each category over the four most recent quarters for which returns have been received by November 16, 2018. The percentage of revenue attributable to residential units will then be multiplied by the total units available, adjusted for the vacancy rate. Should a new entity form that is subject to Chapter 3.05 FMC (Hotel and Motel Tax), quarterly returns will be averaged cumulatively until four have been received.

B. The public works facility fee shall be prorated based on utility billing cycles and, for utility accounts that are opened or closed during the periods the public works facility fee is in effect, based on the date the utility account is opened or closed.

C. Premises owned or operated by the city of Fairview are exempt from the public works facility fee. (Ord. 9-2018 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.13.050 Billing.

A. The party responsible for paying city utility service bills has the obligation to pay the public works facility fee.

B. The city shall collect the public works facility fee by adding a line item to the utility bill of each customer of the city. The city will bill the public works facility fee every month or every other month, consistent with normal utility billing cycles.

C. If a premises has more than one utility account, the public works facility fee for the premises shall be calculated based on the total number of residential units or nonresidential units on the premises. The residential and nonresidential units may be combined into one account or allocated to each account based on the method used to bill other utility fees.

D. Charges for water, sanitary sewer, and storm water, fire suppression fee, and the public works facility fee may be billed on the same utility bill. Payment shall first be applied to the public works facility fee.

E. Creation of a utility account is the basis for imposing the public works facility fee. The public works facility fee does not in any way create an obligation of the real property. Rather, the obligation to pay the public works facility fee is a personal obligation of the customer responsible for payment of the utility account. No lien will attach to the premises at which the account is located because of the nonpayment of the fee. (Ord. 9-2018 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.13.060 Payment due date.

The public works facility fee shall be bound by the same due dates as water, sanitary sewer, and storm water charges and fire suppression fees. Penalties will also be assessed on the same schedule as these charges. (Ord. 9-2018 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.13.070 Adjustment and administration of accounts.

A. Customers who believe their public works facility fee, as applied to their premises, is not within the intent of this chapter may request, in writing, a review of their public works facility fee by the finance director. The finance director may initiate the review of a customer’s public works facility fee. Similarly, if the city feels that the public works facility fee, as it applies to a particular premises, is not within the intent of this chapter, it may be reviewed by the finance director.

1. If a customer’s charge is reduced as a result of this review, the corrected public works facility fee shall begin with the next billing and a credit or refund shall be made retroactively, not to exceed one year from the last billing.

2. If a customer’s charge is increased as a result of this review, the corrected public works facility fee shall begin with the next billing and the customer may be billed for the increase retroactively, not to exceed one year from the last billing.

B. If an existing customer has not been billed for the public works facility fee, the fee shall begin with the next billing and the customer may be billed retroactively, not to exceed one year.

C. Customers not satisfied with the results of the review by the finance director may protest the decision to the city administrator.

D. The finance director may write off closed accounts and retroactive bills if in the best interest of the city and may write off refunds, unless the customer requested otherwise, if the cost of making the refund would exceed the amount of the refund.

E. The finance director shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter and for the collection of fees hereunder. (Ord. 9-2018 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.13.080 Delinquency.

A. A public works facility fee is considered delinquent based on the same criteria as water, sanitary sewer, and storm water charges and fire suppression fees.

B. If a customer’s utility account for the public works facility fee is delinquent, the city may discontinue all water services billed on that account. The city may refuse to restore water service to the premises until the delinquent charges and other costs incurred are paid.

C. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the city may institute any legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to injunctive relief and collection of charges owing. The city’s enforcement rights shall be cumulative. If the city commences any legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the city prevails, the city is entitled to all fees and costs it incurred, as well as any sum that a court, including any appellate court, may deem reasonable as attorneys’ fees.

D. The council may set by resolution fees for extra services required in collecting delinquent customer accounts for the public works facility fee. (Ord. 9-2018 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 13.15 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL

Sections:

13.15.005    Designation.

13.15.010    Purpose.

13.15.015    Definitions.

13.15.020    Application and responsibilities.

13.15.025    Cross-connections regulated.

13.15.030    Backflow prevention assembly requirements.

13.15.035    New construction.

13.15.040    Retrofitting.

13.15.045    Irrigation systems.

13.15.050    Thermal expansion.

13.15.055    Mobile units.

13.15.060    Installation requirements.

13.15.065    Pressure loss.

13.15.070    Fire systems.

13.15.075    Temporary meters and hydrant valves.

13.15.080    Plumbing code.

13.15.085    Access to premises.

13.15.090    Annual testing and repairs.

13.15.095    Maintenance of assemblies.

13.15.100    Responsibilities of backflow prevention assembly testers.

13.15.105    Costs of compliance.

13.15.110    Recovery of costs.

13.15.115    Termination of service.

13.15.120    Falsifying information.


13.15.005 Designation.

This chapter shall be referred to and may be cited as the “Fairview Cross-Connection Control Chapter.” (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the water supply and distribution system of the city of Fairview from contamination or pollution due to any existing or potential cross-connections and to comply with Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 333-061-0070, 333-061-0071, 333-061-0072, 333-061-0073 and 333-061-0074 and the city’s most recent written program plan. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.015 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this chapter is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in OAR Chapter 333, or the most recent edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California (“USC”).

A. “Backflow prevention assembly” or “backflow assembly” or “assembly” shall mean an assembly to counteract backpressure and/or prevent back-siphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by the Oregon Department of Human Services.

B. “Auxiliary water supply” shall mean any water source or system other than the city of Fairview water system.

C. “Backflow” shall mean the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the city of Fairview.

D. “Certified backflow assembly tester” shall mean a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Department of Human Services – Health Services to be a tester in the state of Oregon.

E. “Certified cross-connection control specialist” shall mean a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Department of Human Services – Health Services to be a specialist in the state of Oregon.

F. “City” shall mean the city of Fairview.

G. “City of Fairview water system” shall mean the system for the provision of piped water for human consumption provided by the city of Fairview, which shall include wells, treatment mechanisms or processes, pumping stations, reservoirs, supply trunk or feeder lines, service lines, meters and all other appurtenances, device lines and items necessary to the operation of the system and to supply water service to individual property or premises and shall include the city of Fairview’s potable water with which the system is supplied.

H. “Contamination” shall mean the entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.

I. “Cross-connection” shall mean any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other nondrinkable water system or auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers or any other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices or other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow may occur are considered to be cross-connections.

J. “Degree of hazard” shall mean either the non-health hazard or health hazard classification that shall be assigned to all actual or potential cross-connections.

K. “DHS” shall mean Department of Human Services.

L. “Director” shall mean the public works director for the city of Fairview or their designee.

M. “Double check detector assembly” shall mean a specially designed assembly composed of a line size approved double check valve assembly assembled with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for only very low rates of flow up to three gallons per minute and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health hazard.

N. “Double check valve assembly” shall mean an assembly of two independently acting approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health hazard.

O. “Health hazard” shall mean an actual or potential threat of impairment of the quality of water that would be a danger to health.

P. “Mobile units” shall mean units that are temporary in nature, connecting to the water system through a legally permitted hydrant, hose bib, or other appurtenance of a permanent nature that is part of the city of Fairview’s water system or a permanent water service to a premise. Examples can include but are not limited to the following: water trucks, pesticide applicator vehicles, chemical mixing units or tanks, waste hauler’s trucks or units, sewer cleaning equipment, carpet or steam cleaning equipment other than homeowner use, rock quarry or asphalt/concrete batch plants or any other mobile equipment or vessel that poses a threat of backflow in the city of Fairview water system. Uses that are excluded from this definition are recreational vehicles at assigned sites or parked in accordance with other city of Fairview policies pertaining to recreational vehicles and homeowner devices that are used by the property owner in accordance with other provisions of this, or other, city of Fairview policies pertaining to provision of water service to a premise.

Q. “Non-health hazard” shall mean an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree that does not create a hazard to the public health, but does adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of such water for potable use.

R. “OAR” shall mean OAR Chapter 333, Division 61.

S. “Person(s)” shall mean a natural person (individual), corporation, company, city, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture company or city, and other such entity.

T. “Plumbing code” shall mean the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, Division 750.

U. “Premises” or “premise” shall mean any piece of property serviced by the city of Fairview water system, including, but not limited to, all improvements, mobile structures and other structures located upon it.

V. “Premises isolation assembly” shall mean the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the premises. This location will be at or near the property line and downstream from the service connection meter.

W. “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” or “RP assembly” shall mean an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same time, below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and two tightly closing shut-off valves.

X. “Reduced pressure principle detector assembly” shall mean an approved assembly consisting of two approved reduced pressure backflow prevention assemblies, set in parallel, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or use. The assembly should include properly located test cocks and two tightly closing shut-off valves.

Y. “Retrofitting” shall mean to furnish a service connection with parts or equipment made available after the time of construction or assembly installation.

Z. “Specialist” shall mean a DHS-certified cross-connection specialist, either employed by the city of Fairview or under contract with the city of Fairview.

AA. “Thermal expansion” shall mean the pressure created by the expansion of heated water.

BB. “Used water” shall mean city of Fairview water that has moved beyond the point of the city’s control. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.020 Application and responsibilities.

This chapter applies throughout the city of Fairview water system and to every premises served by the city of Fairview water system. It applies to all premises, regardless of date of connection to the city of Fairview water system. Every owner, occupant or person in control of any concerned premises is responsible for the terms and provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.025 Cross-connections regulated.

No cross-connections shall be created, installed, used or maintained within the area(s) served by the city of Fairview water system, except in accordance with this chapter.

The specialist, under the supervision of the director, shall carry out surveys or cause surveys to be carried out to determine if any actual or potential cross-connection exists. If found necessary, the specialist may direct the owner, occupant or person in control of the premises to install at the service connection an assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard determined by the specialist.

The owner, occupant or person in control of any given premises is responsible for all cross-connection control within the premises.

The owner, occupant or person in control of any premises found on the table “Premises Requiring Isolation” in the currently filed OAR shall install a reduced pressure principle backflow assembly at the service connection in accordance with this chapter.

It is the responsibility of the owner, occupant or person in control of any premises to purchase, install, test, repair and maintain all backflow assemblies.

If there is a change in ownership of any premises within the city’s service area, it shall be the responsibility of the new owner to determine that all assemblies are in compliance with this chapter.

All parts of the city’s code will apply to this chapter. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.030 Backflow prevention assembly requirements.

A specialist shall determine the type of backflow assemblies to be installed within the city of Fairview’s water system. All assemblies shall be installed at the service connection immediately behind the meter in the city right-of-way unless it is determined by the specialist that it should be installed at the point of use. An approved assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard shall be required in each of the following circumstances, but the specialist is in no way limited to the following circumstances:

A. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to permit entry into the potable water system, the potable water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

B. When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity at a premises, or materials stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.

C. When a premises has one or more cross-connections, as that term is defined in FMC 13.15.015.

D. When internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable.

E. When intricate plumbing arrangements are present making it impractical to ascertain whether cross-connections exist.

F. When the premises has a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established.

G. When entry to the premises is restricted so that surveys for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure cross-connections do not exist.

H. When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result.

I. When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the city.

J. On any and all used water return systems.

K. If a point-of-use isolation assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this chapter, the installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection.

L. When there is piping or equipment for conveying liquids other than potable city of Fairview water and that piping or other equipment is under pressure and installed and operated in a manner that could cause a cross-connection.

M. When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by a specialist to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.

N. When there is use of any type of chemical spray attachment connected to the premises plumbing, including garden hose fertilizers and pesticide applicators.

O. When there is use of any type of radiator flush kits attached to the premises plumbing.

P. Wherever reclaimed water or ditch water is used on premises.

Q. When there is a premises with an auxiliary water supply which is interconnected to the city of Fairview water system.

R. In any multi-story building or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank.

S. All water services two inches or larger. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.035 New construction.

A. On all new commercial/industrial connections, an approved backflow assembly shall be installed at the service connection. The type of the assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by a specialist.

B. When a building is constructed on commercial/industrial premises, and the end use of the building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the most hazardous use of the building. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.040 Retrofitting.

Retrofitting shall be required at all service connections where an actual or potential cross-connection exists, and wherever else the city deems retrofitting necessary to comply with the OAR and this chapter. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.045 Irrigation systems.

All irrigation systems shall be protected according to the plumbing code. In the event any system is equipped with an injector system, a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.050 Thermal expansion.

If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly, or other appurtenances, it is the responsibility of the owner, occupant, or person in control of the premises to eliminate the possibility of damage from thermal expansion in accordance with the plumbing code. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.055 Mobile units.

Any mobile unit or apparatus using city water or water from a premises attached to the city of Fairview water system shall first meet all cross-connection requirements imposed by the city including complying with the city’s hydrant meter process. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.060 Installation requirements.

All backflow prevention assembly installations shall follow the requirements of the city and the OAR.

If the premises isolation assembly is allowed to be installed at an alternate location, the city of Fairview must have access to the assembly. If access is denied, the city will require an RP assembly at the meter. No connections can be made between the meter and the backflow assembly.

The type of backflow prevention assembly required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists and must, at all times, meet the standards of the DHS. All backflow prevention assemblies required under this chapter shall be of a type and model approved by the DHS. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.065 Pressure loss.

Any decrease in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the city. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.070 Fire systems.

An approved double check detector assembly shall be the minimum protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use, and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through. A reduced pressure principle detector assembly must be installed if any substance other than potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the following circumstances:

A. Where improper maintenance has occurred;

B. On all systems that are a health hazard;

C. Wherever a specialist deems necessary; and

D. Wherever required by the OAR.

In the event an assembly is installed on a designated lateral, a detector assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.075 Temporary meters and hydrant valves.

Backflow protection will be required on all temporary meters and hydrant valves before any use. The type of assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard and will be determined on a case-by-case basis by a specialist. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.080 Plumbing code.

As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the plumbing code and the OAR.

Temporary plumbing systems including hose bibs not covered by the plumbing code will be governed by this chapter and the OAR. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.085 Access to premises.

Authorized personnel of the city, with proper identification and sufficient notice, shall have access during reasonable hours to all parts of a premises and within the structure to which water is supplied. However, if any owner, occupant or person in control of the premises refuses authorized personnel access to a premises, or to the interior of a structure, during these hours for inspection, a reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed at the service connection to that premises.

All parts of this chapter will apply to the installation of the assembly at the service connection required under this section. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.090 Annual testing and repairs.

All backflow prevention assemblies installed within the area(s) served by the city of Fairview water system shall be tested at the following times: immediately upon installation, and at least annually thereafter; within 24 hours of any repair or relocation; more frequently than annually, as determined by the city, for approved backflow prevention assemblies that repeatedly fail or are protecting health hazard cross-connections; after a backflow incident; or after an approved air gap is replumbed.

All tests shall be performed by a certified backflow assembly tester and in accordance with all applicable regulations. All such assemblies found not functioning properly shall be promptly repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner, occupant or person in control of the premises.

All repairs on backflow assemblies within the city of Fairview water system service area must be performed according to all state and county regulations. Assemblies protecting health hazard cross-connections must be repaired or replaced within 24 hours. Assemblies protecting non-health hazard cross-connections must be repaired or replaced within 10 business days. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.095 Maintenance of assemblies.

Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained, tested and repaired in accordance with the requirements set out in this chapter, the OAR and all applicable state agencies’ regulations. The assembly owner is responsible for protecting their assembly from freezing and vandalism. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.100 Responsibilities of backflow prevention assembly testers.

A. All backflow assembly testers operating within the city of Fairview water system service area shall be certified in accordance with all applicable regulations of the DHS.

B. Persons certified as backflow assembly testers shall agree to abide by all requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”) and Oregon Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OR-OSHA”).

C. It is the responsibility of backflow assembly testers to submit records of all backflow assembly test repairs to the city within 10 days of completing the test.

D. No person shall operate as a backflow prevention assembly tester within the city without first annually registering with the city. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.105 Costs of compliance.

All costs associated with purchase, installation, inspections, surveys, testing, replacement, maintenance, parts and repairs of the backflow prevention assembly, and all costs associated with enforcement of this chapter, are the financial responsibility of the owner, occupant, or other person in control of the premises. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.110 Recovery of costs.

Any owner, occupant, or other person in control of the premises violating any of the provisions of this chapter and who causes damage to or impairs the city of Fairview’s water system, including, but not limited to, allowing contamination, pollution, any other solution or used water to enter the city of Fairview’s water system, shall be liable to the city for any costs, expense, loss or damage caused by such violation, including but not limited to costs and expenses incurred by the city for any cleaning, purifying, repair or replacement work or any other expenses caused by the violation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may result in the termination of service and/or a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 per day. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation.

All costs associated with any disconnect or reconnect fees resulting from the enforcement of this chapter are the sole responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.115 Termination of service.

Failure on the part of any owner, occupant or person in control of the premises to eliminate all cross-connections and/or to install a required assembly, have it tested annually and repaired if necessary in accordance with this chapter is sufficient cause for the discontinuance of public water service to the premises pursuant to OAR 333-061-0070. In the case of an extreme emergency or where an immediate threat to life or public health is found to exist, discontinuance or termination of public water service to the premises shall be immediate.

In lieu of termination of service, the city of Fairview may, at the property owner’s expense, cause a reduced pressure assembly to be installed at the meter. Testing, maintenance and repair of the assembly will be the responsibility of the property owner.

In the event an assembly is not properly tested and repaired, the city of Fairview may cause the assembly to be tested and repaired and apply all costs associated with this to the assembly owner’s utility bill. These costs will include all administrative and legal costs accrued by the city. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.15.120 Falsifying information.

Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any backflow assembly, device or method required under this chapter shall be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties provided by state law. (Ord. 3-2011 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 13.20 FAIR SHARE CONTRIBUTION

Sections:

13.20.010    Established.

13.20.020    Determination of charge.

13.20.030    Billing – Collection.

13.20.040    Effective date.

13.20.050    Disclosure.

13.20.060    Sunset clause.


13.20.010 Established.

Now, therefore, there shall be established a fair share charge upon city water department and city sewer department billings made to the public and to its users for services provided by each department in an amount to be determined by the city council following review of all pertinent factors so as to provide general city backup, support services and operational environmental controls, which fair share payment shall not exceed three percent of all charges billed by the city water department and the city sewer department. (Ord. 6-1986 § 1)


13.20.020 Determination of charge.

Such determination shall be made by the city council annually, following public hearing thereupon, and shall remain in effect until modified or changed by a succeeding council or until this program is terminated by the sunset clause as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 6-1986 § 2)


13.20.030 Billing – Collection.

Such determination shall be by appropriate resolution of the council and once made, such fair share contribution, which may be referred to as a “PILOT” (payment in lieu of taxes) payment, shall constitute and become a part of the monthly or periodic charges made by the water department or the sewer department, as the case may be, for services rendered or water furnished, and shall be collected in the same manner and time as regular billings thereof. Such charge shall be applied to all services for which a charge is made by each of said departments, and may be shown separately upon such billings, or added to and be in addition to the present overhead charge made by that department. (Ord. 6-1986 § 3)


13.20.040 Effective date.

The effective date of such fair share contribution shall be 30 days following its determination by the city council, and shall be applicable to all bills and charges made by the water department or the sewer department thereafter, and with respect to regular periodic billings, shall apply to the next full billing cycle. (Ord. 6-1986 § 4)


13.20.050 Disclosure.

Each billing, except billings for miscellaneous and sundry services rendered by said departments, shall indicate thereon that the billing includes such fair share charge in the percentage amount determined, and state the purpose therefor, i.e., to provide, compensate and reimburse the city for plant, support and operational environment services necessary for the function and operation of said city department, as the case may be. (Ord. 6-1986 § 5)


13.20.060 Sunset clause.

Annually, and on or before the anniversary date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a committee of the council or the council as a whole shall review the fair share payment program established hereby, hold a public hearing and determine whether there is a demonstrated need for the continuation of said program, and such finding and determination shall be made a matter of record by appropriate council resolution. In the event such annual review and determination is not so made, or in the event such review and determination shall cause a negative resolution to be adopted, the fair share program established hereunder shall terminate and end at the close of the then current city’s fiscal year, midnight, June 30th following. (Ord. 6-1986 § 6)


Chapter 13.25 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT PROGRAM1

Sections:

13.25.010    Adoption of Gresham Revised Code for industrial pretreatment requirements and industrial pretreatment response plan.

13.25.015    Enforcement of city’s pretreatment program.


13.25.010 Adoption of Gresham Revised Code for industrial pretreatment requirements and industrial pretreatment response plan.

A. The terms of Gresham Revised Code (GRC) Article 4.05 “Definitions” (as those definitions are applicable to and used in GRC Article 4.45); GRC 4.15.060 “Application to City Service Area”; Article 4.45 “Pretreatment”; and GRC 4.40.040 “General Discharge Prohibitions into the Sanitary Sewerage System” (2012) are hereby adopted by reference and shall be fully effective in and for the city of Fairview. Three copies of said provisions shall be kept on file in the city recorder’s office.

B. Repealed by Ord. 4-2013.

C. The city of Gresham Industrial Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan as attached to Ordinance 9-2005 is adopted and enforceable in the city of Fairview. (Ord. 4-2013 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 12-2007 § 1; Ord. 9-2005 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 11-2001 § 1)


13.25.015 Enforcement of city’s pretreatment program.

Fairview’s public works director shall direct the city’s administration and enforcement of the industrial pretreatment program. The director may appoint such personnel as he deems appropriate to perform said administration and enforcement, including the use of employees of other public agencies. (Ord. 11-2001 § 1)1

Prior legislation: Ords. 1-1993 and 2-1996.

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 6-2003, adopted by council, incorporates Gresham’s amendments to their Gresham Revised Code Article 4 regarding definitions and limitations on wastewater strengths. 


Chapter 13.27 WASTEWATER TREATMENT CAPACITY ALLOCATION POLICY

Sections:

13.27.010    Objective.

13.27.020    Recommended wastewater treatment allocation policy.

Policy Implementation

13.27.030    Establish priority date.

13.27.040    Applicant to establish wastewater treatment capacity required.

13.27.050    Reserving and assigning capacity.

13.27.060    Transferability of assigned capacity.

13.27.070    Inventory and record keeping.


13.27.010 Objective.

Develop a policy and procedure for the city of Fairview to use in allocating temporary wastewater treatment capacity among development applicants.

A. Policy Requirements. The policy should be:

1. Equitable;

2. Conform to existing state and city of Fairview law;

3. Understandable to development applicants and general public; and

4. Result in maximum use of available treatment capacity.

B. Implementing Procedure Requirements. The implementing procedure should:

1. Not require qualitative judgments;

2. Coincide with the existing development approval process;

3. Impose relatively light administrative burden on staff and applicant;

4. Work as well with small development proposals as with large;

5. Permit reallocation of previously allocated but unused capacity; and

6. Apply as effectively no matter how much capacity is available to allocate. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1)


13.27.020 Recommended wastewater treatment allocation policy.

A. It is the policy of the city of Fairview to assign wastewater treatment capacity from its inventory of available capacity on a “first in – first served” basis to development projects receiving preliminary plan approval. The date to be used in determining the development application’s “first in” date shall be the date the city executes a letter of completion evidencing successful completion of the development permit application for review and processing.

B. Exempted from the wastewater treatment allocation process are developments having received preliminary plan approval prior to the effective date of this policy. Included within this exception are previously approved developments where wastewater treatment capacity was a key finding in multiple development phases or in the overall planned unit development approval for a property. This exemption is consistent with city code and reflects the fact that preliminary plan approval includes a finding and establishment of sufficient sewer capacity to serve the development.

C. Also exempted from the wastewater treatment capacity allocation process are development permit or building permit applications requiring three or fewer equivalent dwelling units of wastewater treatment capacity. The city will endeavor to maintain in reserve sufficient unallocated wastewater treatment capacity to serve such exempted developments. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1)

Policy Implementation


13.27.030 Establish priority date.

Priority for allocation of available wastewater treatment capacity will be based on the date the letter of completion for a development application is executed by the city planning department. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1)


13.27.040 Applicant to establish wastewater treatment capacity required.

A. It is the responsibility of the development applicant to file a statement with the planning department expressing, in equivalent dwelling units, the total wastewater treatment capacity required by the development. The statement must be accompanied by supporting engineering evidence of same which is acceptable to the city. At the express written discretion of the city, the requirement to submit acceptable supporting engineering evidence may be waived for residential developments or the residential portion of mixed use developments. The applicant’s statement of required capacity and accompanying engineering evidence (unless waived) must be received and accepted by the city before a letter of completion may be executed.

B. The public works director will establish in writing the definition of an “equivalent dwelling unit” and express the result in terms of the unit of wastewater treatment capacity measurement used in the city’s lease for additional capacity. The definition of an “equivalent dwelling unit” will be provided to each applicant along with notification that the application process is not complete until the city has received the applicant’s statement of required capacity and has accepted the supporting engineering evidence. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1)


13.27.050 Reserving and assigning capacity.

A. Assignment of capacity will be a two stage process. Not later than the date a letter of completion is to be prepared, the planning director will compare the then available wastewater treatment capacity with the amount of capacity required by the applicant development. If sufficient capacity is available, the required capacity will be tentatively reserved for the development, but not yet permanently assigned. Assignment occurs only after preliminary development approval by the planning commission or planning department (for expedited land divisions, etc.).

B. If less than the required capacity is available, the applicant will be notified and given the option of reserving up to the available amount and, subject to this wastewater treatment capacity limitation, proceeding to planning commission review. However, this will require a new application submittal with the development proposal “scaled down” or phased accordingly.

C. If there is no available treatment capacity or the applicant refuses the option to proceed with an application scaled to meet available capacity, the development permit review process stops due to the lack of capacity to serve the development.

D. If additional capacity becomes available for allocation, it will be offered for reservation or assignment to developments previously receiving a reservation or assignment of less than the full amount required. Offers of such additional available capacity will be made to developments in chronological order based on the date of their letter of completion.

E. Capacity reserved for a development is held only for the period in which the development application is under active review by the planning commission or while a planning commission decision is under legal appeal. If the development application is approved, the reserved quantity is assigned to the development.

F. If the development application does not receive final approval, the reserved capacity reverts to the inventory of available wastewater treatment capacity for reallocation.

G. Should the planning commission require changes in the development plan that reduces the amount of wastewater treatment capacity required, the “reserved” amount will be reduced. If the planning commission requires changes that increase the amount of capacity required, the additional amount will be reserved subject to the availability of the added amount required at the time of the planning commission action and assigned upon preliminary approval.

H. Capacity assigned to a development continues only as long as the development permits and/or building permits are valid. If the permits lapse and are not administratively renewed, the assigned but unused capacity reverts to the inventory of available capacity. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1)


13.27.060 Transferability of assigned capacity.

Consistent with existing city policy, practice and legal framework, the wastewater treatment capacity assigned to a development is transferable and runs with the land. Any owner(s) wishing to transfer capacity to a different owner(s) must provide notice of such a transfer to the city. The purpose of the notice requirement is to permit the city to maintain accurate ownership records to use for future communication with owners regarding the assigned capacity. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1)


13.27.070 Inventory and record keeping.

A. The planning director will establish and maintain an ongoing inventory of available wastewater treatment capacity. In establishing the amount of capacity available, the director will calculate and set aside from the total treatment capacity an amount sufficient to accommodate anticipated requests for capacity for subsequent development phases of previously approved developments as defined in the wastewater treatment allocation policy.

B. The director will also calculate and set aside an amount for anticipated requests for development approval or sewer hookup from developments of three or fewer equivalent dwelling units. The amount set aside for this type of use must be projected to last for the entire term of the city’s lease of treatment capacity. To determine a reasonable amount of capacity to set aside for this type of use, we recommend that the planning director annually calculate a three-year moving average of actual sewer hookup requests to serve developments of three or fewer equivalent dwelling units. This average annual projected requirement times the number of years (or fraction thereof) remaining in the lease is the amount to set-aside each year for projected demand from this type of exempt use.

C. The total treatment capacity remaining after combining set-asides for previously approved/reviewed development, plus the amount for three or fewer equivalent dwelling unit hookups, is the total available capacity for reservation and assignment to new development.

D. The planning department will promptly record in writing and provide to the planning director a record of:

1. Each amount reserved;

2. Amount moved from reserved to assigned;

3. Amounts allocated under the exempt set-aside provisions; and

4. Any reserved or assigned amounts reverting to the treatment capacity inventory.

E. Not less than monthly, the current amounts of wastewater treatment capacity reserved, assigned, set-aside for exempt uses and the resulting total treatment capacity available for future allocation will be reported in writing and made available for public inspection. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1)


Chapter 13.30 STORM DRAINAGE

Sections:

13.30.010    Definitions.

13.30.020    Policy.

13.30.030    City responsibility.

13.30.040    Private responsibility.

13.30.050    Charges for storm drainage services.

13.30.060    Storm drainage utility fund.

13.30.070    Enforcement.

13.30.080    Initiation of billing.

13.30.090    Administrative regulations.


13.30.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, except where the context otherwise requires:

A. “City public works director” means the person designated by the city administrator.

B. “Commercial or industrial unit” means any building or facility used other than as a single-family dwelling unit or as a duplex.

C. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

D. “Duplex” means a single building which contains two single-family units.

E. “Equivalent residential unit” or “ERU” means an area which is estimated to place approximately equal demand on the city’s storm drainage system as a single-family unit. One ERU shall be equal to 2,500 square feet of impervious surface.

F. “Impervious surface” means any surface area which either prevents or retards saturation of water into the land surface, or a surface which causes water to run off the land surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions pre-existent to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, graveled, oiled or macadam surfaces or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural saturation or runoff patterns which existed prior to development.

G. “Improved premises” means any area which the city public works director determines has been altered such that the runoff from the site is greater than that which could historically have been expected. “Improved premises” does not include public ways under the jurisdiction of the city, county, state or federal government.

H. “Mobile home park” means the same as defined in FMC 19.10.140.

I. “Multiple-family unit” or “MFU” means a building or facility under unified ownership and control and consisting of more than two dwelling units with each such unit consisting of one or more rooms with bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one family and having a common water meter.

J. “Open drainageway” means a natural or manmade path, ditch or channel which has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or storm runoff water from a point of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.

K. “Person responsible” means the person with the right to occupy property, and may include the occupant, tenant, owner, contract purchaser, or the agent of any of the foregoing.

L. “Single-family unit” or “SFU” means that part of a building or structure which contains one or more rooms with a bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one family and where the units are sold and deeded as individual units. A SFU is presumed to have 2,500 square feet of impervious surface area for purposes of this chapter. The term “SFU” shall be inclusive of those units identified as detached single-family residences, unit ownership, and condominiums.

M. “Storm drainage facilities” means any structure or configuration of the ground that is used or by its location becomes a place where storm water flows or is accumulated including but not limited to pipes, sewers, curbs, gutters, manholes, catch basins, ponds, open drainageways and their appurtenances.

N. “Storm drainage service” means the collecting of storm water discharged from property on which development exists and its deposit directly or indirectly into public storm drainage facilities.

O. “Storm water” means water from precipitation, surface or subterranean water from any source, drainage and nonseptic waste water. (Ord. 5-1994 § 2)


13.30.020 Policy.

A. Pursuant to the general laws of the state of Oregon and the powers granted in the Charter of the city, the council does hereby declare its intention to acquire, own, construct, reconstruct, equip, operate and maintain within the city limits of the city, and outside the city limits when consistent with the council’s adopted policies or intergovernmental agreements, storm drainage facilities, and also to require persons responsible to construct, reconstruct, maintain and extend storm drainage facilities.

B. The improvement of both public and private storm drainage facilities through or adjacent to a new development shall be the responsibility of the developer. Said improvements shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, policies and standards.

C. It is the policy of the city to participate within budgetary limits in improvements to storm drainage facilities when authorized by the council. To be considered for city financial participation, a facility must either:

1. Be public and be of major benefit to the community such that the facility has capacity over that required to serve the property on which it is located and provided it is placed and sized in conformance with the storm drainage master plan;

2. Be a rehabilitation or replacement of an existing public facility.

D. No portion of this chapter or statement herein or subsequent interpretations or policies shall relieve any property owner of assessments levied against real property for a local improvement project or for abating conditions on the property that violate any provision of this code. (Ord. 5-1994 § 3)


13.30.030 City responsibility.

The city shall manage public storm drainage facilities located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, and city easements. Other public storm drainage facilities that may be managed by the city include but are not limited to:

A. A piped drainage system and its related appurtenances which have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city;

B. Roadside drainage ditches along unimproved city streets but not access drive culverts;

C. Flood control facilities (levees, dikes, overflow channels, detention basins, retention basins, dams, pump stations, groundwater recharging basins, etc.) that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city;

D. Retention systems constructed with city financial participation. (Ord. 5-1994 § 4)


13.30.040 Private responsibility.

A. A storm drainage facility to be managed by the person responsible includes but is not limited to:

1. A storm drainage facility not located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, or city easement;

2. A drainage facility located on city property, public right-of-way, or city easement required as a condition of development approval or otherwise needed to comply with city storm drainage requirements;

3. A private parking lot storm drain;

4. Any roof, footing, or area drain;

5. A storm drainage facility not designed and constructed for use by the general public;

6. Access drive culverts in the public right-of-way or on private property;

7. A retention system in the construction of which the city did not financially participate.

B. Any person responsible for a facility defined in subsection A of this section shall maintain it so as to prevent flooding or damage to other property not owned or controlled by the person responsible and to prevent injury to any person on property not owned or controlled by the person responsible, and shall maintain the facility’s stormwater management function.

C. The failure of any person responsible to comply with the obligation stated in subsection A or B of this section is a violation.

D. The conditions on private property which may result in situations proscribed by subsection B of this section are declared to be a danger to public health and safety and therefore are a nuisance, to be abated as provided in FMC 8.10.070. (Ord. 2-2007 § 1(Exh. 1 § 2); Ord. 5-1994 § 5)


13.30.050 Charges for storm drainage services.

A. Except as the fees may be reduced or eliminated under subsection D of this section, the obligation to pay storm drainage fees arises when a person responsible uses storm drainage services. It is presumed that storm drainage services are used whenever there is an improved premises.

Unless another person responsible has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of that writing is filed with the city, the person(s) paying the city’s water or sewer utility charges shall pay the storm drainage fees set by council resolution. If there is no water or sewer service to the property or if water service is discontinued, the storm drainage fees shall be paid by the person(s) having the right to possess the property.

B. When establishing the fees for storm drainage service the council shall:

1. Establish a monthly rate for a single-family unit;

2. Establish a monthly rate for all property not included in subsection (B)(1) of this section based on the amount of the property’s impervious surface: For each 1,000 square feet of impervious surface, the said property shall be charged the rate established by council resolution.

C. When required, area measurements may be determined from records of the county assessor when available or be determined by the city public works director.

D. Upon application a person responsible may seek a reduction of the monthly charge for storm drainage service. Upon payment of an application fee set by council resolution and submission of appropriate evidence, the city public works director shall consider the application. The applicant must show to the city public works director’s satisfaction the amount of permanent reduction to the amount of impervious surface for the property.

Any reduction given shall continue until the property is further developed. Upon further development of the property another application may be made by a person responsible. Any applicant aggrieved by the city public works director’s decision may appeal to the city administrator by filing with the manager a written request for review no later than 10 days after receiving the city public works director’s decision. The city administrator’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 5-1994 § 6)


13.30.060 Storm drainage utility fund.

A. There is hereby created a drainage utility fund and all charges imposed under this chapter and the revenue collected therefrom shall be deposited therein.

B. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, money in the drainage utility fund shall be used for planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance and administration of storm drainage facilities, including repayment of indebtedness, and for all expenses for the operation and management of the storm drainage utility. Expenditures from this fund need not be identified to any particular revenue source.



C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, money in the drainage utility fund attributable to the systems development charge imposed in Chapter 15.30 FMC as amended shall be limited to the purposes stated in that section. (Ord. 5-1994 § 7)


13.30.070 Enforcement.

A penalty fee equal to the percentage set by council shall be added each month on all charges that are delinquent. Penalty fees will only be assessed on accounts with total balances of $10.01 or more on the date of penalty assessment. In addition to other lawful remedies, the city administrator may enforce the collection of charges required by this chapter by withholding delivery of water to any premises where the storm drain utility charges are delinquent or unpaid. (Ord. 8-2014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-1994 § 8)


13.30.080 Initiation of billing.

Request for water or sewer service will automatically initiate appropriate billing for storm drainage services as established in this chapter. If development of a parcel does not require initiating water or sewer service, the creation of an impervious surface from which storm water may be discharged into public drainage facilities shall initiate the obligation to pay the fees and charges established in this chapter. (Ord. 5-1994 § 9)


13.30.090 Administrative regulations.

The city administrator may adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for the administration of the duties required by this chapter and for the public health, safety and welfare.

The city recorder is hereby authorized, upon first receiving the concurrence of the city attorney, to administratively correct any references contained in this chapter or elsewhere in the Fairview Municipal Code to sections that have been added, amended, or renumbered in this chapter. (Ord. 5-1994 § 10)


Chapter 13.40 CONTROL OF NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE

Sections:

13.40.010    Definitions.

13.40.020    Application.

13.40.030    Responsibility for administration.

13.40.040    Discharge prohibitions.

13.40.050    Prohibition of illicit connections.

13.40.060    Suspension of stormwater access.

13.40.070    Industrial or construction activity discharges.

13.40.080    Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants through use of best management practices.

13.40.090    Watercourse protection.

13.40.100    Notice of spills.

13.40.110    Enforcement.


13.40.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:

A. “Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibited practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

B. “Clean Water Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.

C. “Construction activity” means activities subject to NPDES construction permits.

D. “Hazardous materials” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. Any material defined in the Wellhead Protection Manual, adopted pursuant to FMC 16.10.010(C) and Resolution No. 2-2003.

E. “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit, and discharges resulting from precipitation or fire fighting activities.

F. “Illicit connections” means an illicit connection that is:

1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether the drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; 

2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or similarly descriptive materials and approved by the city.

G. “Industrial activity” means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. Section 122.26(b)(14) or within the Wellhead Protection Area as defined in FMC 16.10.010.

H. “Municipal separate storm sewer” or “MS4” as used in this chapter means a conveyance or system of conveyances located within the city limits of the city of Fairview; owned by the city of Fairview, city of Gresham, or Multnomah County, or any other public body operating within the city limits; and which is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater which is not a combined sewer and which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined in 40 C.F.R. Section 122.2.

I. “National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit” means a permit issued by Oregon Department of Environmental Quality under the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.

J. “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

K. “Person” means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity in law and acting as either the owner or owner’s agent.

L. “Pollutant” means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include but are not limited to paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations that may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

M. “Stormwater” means stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 

N. “Wastewater” means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all water entering the city of Fairview storm drain system and generated on any developed and undeveloped property unless specifically exempted. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.030 Responsibility for administration.

The city of Fairview, through its public works department, shall be responsible for administering, implementing, and directing enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be delegated by the public works director to appropriate personnel. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.040 Discharge prohibitions.

A. Prohibition of Illicit Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater.

B. Exemptions. 

1. Conducting or continuing any illicit discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited unless the discharge meets any of the exemptions described in this section: 

a. Water line flushing or other potable water sources;

b. Landscape irrigation or lawn watering;

c. Diverted stream flows;

d. Rising groundwater or groundwater infiltration to storm drains;

e. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

f. Foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems);

g. Crawl space pumps;

h. Air-conditioning condensation;

i. Springs;

j. Noncommercial washing of vehicles;

k. Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;

l. Swimming pools (if dechlorinated less than one PPM chlorine);

m. Fire fighting activities; and

n. Any other water source not containing pollutants.

2. The public works director may prohibit a specific discharger from engaging in a specific activity listed in subsection (B)(1) of this section if at any time the public works director has reasonable grounds, based on standards in the industry in the Portland metropolitan area, to believe that a specific discharge is, was, or may be a significant source of pollution. 

3. A nonexempt discharge may be allowed if it is approved in writing by the public works director on the basis that the discharge is necessary to protect public health and safety.

4. Discharge comprised of dye testing may be allowed; provided, that prior to any dye test, oral or written notification of the discharge, including time and place, is submitted to the public works director. The city will retain a record of such notifications.

C. Limit on Prohibition. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality or U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.050 Prohibition of illicit connections.

A. Constructing, using, maintaining, or continuing an illicit connection to the storm drain system is prohibited.

B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections existing prior to the date of this regulation, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under any law or practice applicable at the time of connection.

C. Connection of a line conveying sewage to the separate municipal storm sewer, or allowing such a connection to continue, is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.060 Suspension of stormwater access.

A. Suspension Due to Illicit Discharge in Emergency. The public works department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when the suspension is necessary to stop or prevent an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. 

B. Emergency Suspension Order. In the event the city issues a suspension order to a person, and such person fails to comply with the order, the public works director or his or her designee may take such steps deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage or harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.

C. Suspension Due to Detection of Illicit Discharge. The city of Fairview may terminate any person’s access to the municipal separate storm sewer if the person is discharging in violation of this chapter and the public works director determines that termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will provide notice of violation and termination as provided in FMC 13.40.110. 

D. It shall be a violation of this chapter if a person reinstates access to the municipal separate storm sewer that has been terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.070 Industrial or construction activity discharges.

A. Compliance Required. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with a permit under this section shall be required in a form acceptable to the public works department prior to the city allowing any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer. The public works director may allow a person to submit a copy of a new, existing, or renewed NPDES permit to meet the purposes of this subsection. 

B. Monitoring of Discharges.

1. Application. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.

2. Access to Facilities.

a. Inspection. The city of Fairview public works department is permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force that require personal identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to city personnel.

b. Facility operators shall allow the public works department access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.

c. On any permitted facility, the public works department shall have the authority to set up devices that in the opinion of the public works department are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge.

d. The public works department has the authority to require an operator to install monitoring equipment. At all times and at its own expense, the operator shall maintain the facility’s sampling and monitoring in a safe and proper operating condition. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure accuracy.

e. At the written or oral request of the public works department, the operator shall promptly and permanently remove any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled. The discharger shall be responsible for the cost of removal of any such obstruction.

f. An unreasonable delay in allowing access to a facility by the public works department for the purpose of inspection or monitoring is a violation of an NPDES stormwater discharge permit and this chapter. The operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits a violation if the operator denies reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.

g. If the operator of a facility has refused the public works department access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the person acting on behalf of the public works department has a reasonable belief that a violation of the chapter has occurred or may imminently occur, or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued by the city under this chapter, or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, then the public works department may request the city of Fairview law enforcement agency seek issuance of a search warrant of the premises from any court of competent jurisdiction.

h. The city shall establish a reporting form and schedule of monitoring discharges on property with industrial use or construction less than one acre in size, where a construction permit or NPDES permit is not required. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.080 Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants through use of best management practices.

A. BMPs Adopted. The city of Fairview has adopted a stormwater management plan that identifies best management practices (BMPs) for activities, operations, or facilities which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. 

B. Protection from Discharge Using BMPs. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial facility shall provide (and pay for) reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. 

C. Responsibility to Prevent Further Illicit Discharge. Any person responsible for a property or premises that is or may be the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement and pay for additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. The city’s adopted BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.090 Watercourse protection.

Every owner or lessee of property through which a watercourse passes shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.100 Notice of spills.

A. In General. Notwithstanding any other law or regulation, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. 

B. Hazardous Materials. In the event of a release of hazardous materials as defined (in this chapter or FMC 16.10.010), the responsible person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies including the Gresham fire department and city of Fairview of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. 

C. Nonhazardous Materials. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the Fairview PWD in person, by telephone, or by facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed in writing addressed and mailed to the city of Fairview public works director within three business days of the oral notice.

D. Record Requirement. If the discharge of prohibited materials originates from a commercial or industrial facility, the owner or operator of such facility shall retain a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained at the facility for at least three years. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


13.40.110 Enforcement.

A. Violation. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

1. Penalty. Penalty for conviction of a first violation of this chapter shall be $250.00. A penalty of $1,000 may be imposed for each subsequent failure or continuing failure to comply with any provision of this chapter following written notice pursuant to this section. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.

2. Notice of Violation. Upon information that a violation of any provision of this chapter has occurred, the city of Fairview may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:

a. The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;

b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;

c. That discharges, practices or operations in violation of this chapter shall cease and desist; 

d. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 

e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;

f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.

3. Content of Notice.

a. For the first failure to comply with any provision of this chapter, the public works director shall cause to be issued to the affected person a written notice which includes the following information:

i. A statement specifying the violation committed;

ii. A specified time period within which the affected person must correct the failure;

iii. The time period of five calendar days to file a written request disputing the notice of failure to comply;

iv. A statement setting forth the right to request a hearing on appeal; and

v. A statement of the penalty for continued noncompliance.

b. Any statement informing a violator of a citation shall include a notice setting forth the hearing rights provided by Fairview Municipal Code or applicable city ordinance.

c. If abatement, violation, or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such action must be completed. The notice shall include the information that should the violator fail to remediate or restore within an established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. The city may place a lien on property for the cost of work performed at the city’s direction, as provided by law.

B. Appeal of Notice of Violation and Penalty.

1. Right to Appeal. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the notice by requesting a hearing on a form provided by the city within the time and manner set forth in this section. No hearing request shall be deemed timely filed and no hearing shall be held unless within the time period to request a hearing, the person deposits with the Fairview municipal court payment for the amount of any unpaid penalty due under this section. If as a result of the hearing it is determined that the penalty was wrongly assessed, the Fairview municipal court shall direct the city to refund to the person any money deposited as payment of a fine or a penalty. 

2. Appeal Procedure. The notice of appeal must be received by the city within five days of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal shall be conducted in Fairview municipal court within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal under hearing procedures provided by city ordinance or code.

C. Abatement. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 14 days of the judgment of the Fairview municipal court upholding the decision of the city’s public works director, then the public works director shall enter upon the premises where the violation occurred and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. 

D. Injunctive Relief. The city may take any action at law or equity to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including seeking injunctive relief to restrain a person from performing activities that violate this chapter or to compel a person to perform and complete abatement and remediation of a violation.

E. Authority of Public Works Director. The public works director may exercise authority to enforce a construction permit or NPDES permit through a stop work order if necessary to prevent the occurrence or continuing occurrence of illicit discharge or illicit connection.

F. Penalties, Costs, Alternative Penalties. The city may impose all penalties for violations as provided by law, including recovering the costs of enforcement. The public works director may recommend the imposition of penalties as alternatives to the imposition of fines where, in the public works director’s opinion, such penalties are appropriate in the circumstances. Alternative penalties may include compensatory actions such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, roadway, watercourse, or creek clean up, or similar activities to prevent or remedy illicit discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer.

G. Violations Deemed Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement process and penalties provided in this section, any condition permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is determined to be a nuisance. The city may take any action provided by Fairview Municipal Code, city ordinance, or state law to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

H. Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available at law or equity, and it is within the discretion of the city of Fairview to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 8-2004 §§ 1, 2)


Title 14 (Reserved)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Building Code Amendments

15.10    Moving Buildings

15.15    Building Numbering

15.20    New Construction

15.21    Dangerous Buildings

15.25    Repealed

15.30    Systems Development Charges

15.35    Fire Code Amendments

15.36    Fire Alarm Systems


Chapter 15.05 BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS

Sections:

15.05.010    Conformity to state building code standards.

15.05.020    Local administration of building code.

15.05.030    Adoption of state codes.

15.05.040    Violations and penalties.


15.05.010 Conformity to state building code standards.

Building and related activities shall comply with the State Structural Specialty Codes, including the Building, Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical Codes, adopted by the Director of the Oregon Department of Commerce and the Fire and Life Safety Code Standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal, as these codes apply at the time of the building or related activity. No person may undertake building or related activities without compliance with these codes. (Ord. 11-2010 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 5-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 4-1989 § 1)


15.05.020 Local administration of building code.

The city shall provide for specialty code administration, including plan checking with fire and life safety plan review, permit issuing and inspection for structural, electrical and plumbing work. (Ord. 11-2010 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 5-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 4-1989 § 2)


15.05.030 Adoption of state codes.

A. Adoption of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

1. The Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, is adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

2. Grading. Appendix J of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified in this code, is adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

3. The provisions of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, in addition to its individual scoping provisions, shall also apply to demolition of structures, equipment and systems regulated by the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

B. Adoption of the Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code. The Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified in this code, is adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

C. Adoption of the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code. The Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified in this code, is adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

D. Adoption of the Oregon Electrical Specialty Code. The Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified in this code, is adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

E. Adoption of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

1. The Oregon Residential Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified in this code, is adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

2. The provisions of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code, in addition to its individual scoping provisions, shall also apply to demolition of structures, equipment and systems regulated by the Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

F. Adoption of the Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code. The Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified by this code, is adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

G. Adoption of the Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code.

1. Parks. The manufactured dwelling park and mobile home park rules adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified in this code, are adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

2. Manufactured Home Installations. The manufactured dwelling rules adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified in this code, are adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

3. Recreational Park and Organization Camp Regulations. The recreational park and organizational camp rules adopted by OAR Chapter 918, as amended or revised by the state of Oregon, and except as modified in this code, are adopted and enforced as part of this chapter.

H. The city adopts and enforces the Oregon Fire Code as part of this chapter as adopted and amended by Gresham Fire and Emergency Services.

I. Appendix J (Grading) of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code as amended or revised by the state of Oregon is adopted and enforced as part of this chapter. (Ord. 5-2019 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-2010 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 5-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 4-1989 § 3)


15.05.040 Violations and penalties.

No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. The violation of this chapter shall be a civil infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding $200.00 per infraction. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each separate day that an act prohibited by this chapter is continued or permitted to continue. (Ord. 11-2010 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 5-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 4-1989 § 5. Formerly 15.05.050)


Chapter 15.10 MOVING BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.10.010    Permit required.

15.10.020    Application.

15.10.030    Statements of noninterference with appliances along route.

15.10.040    Statement of liability.

15.10.050    Notice of movement – Public hearing requirements.

15.10.060    Public hearing – Notice – Decision.

15.10.070    Fee.

15.10.080    Bond – Insurance.

15.10.090    Approval – General.

15.10.100    Approval – Chief of police.

15.10.110    Approval – Building inspector.

15.10.120    Determination by city engineer.

15.10.130    Moving must be continuous.

15.10.140    Safeguards required.

15.10.150    Permit contents.

15.10.160    Removal of building within time specified required.

15.10.170    Violation – Penalty.


15.10.010 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to move any building or structure upon, over or along any public street, alley or public way within the city of Fairview without first obtaining a permit from the city recorder. (Ord. 10-1959 § 1)


15.10.020 Application.

Application for permit to move any building or structure upon, over or along any public street, alley or public way within the city of Fairview shall be made in writing to the office of the city recorder upon form provided by said office. The application shall be signed by the owner of the building or structure to be moved and by the person, firm or corporation engaged to move the same and shall contain the following information:

A. Name and address of owner of building or structure;

B. Location of building before moving;

C. Proposed location where building is proposed to be moved including a plot and so far as is necessary a structural plan showing where upon the proposed plot the structure or building will be located and that it will conform to the building code, plumbing requirements, fire code and other restrictions or regulations governing structures in said proposed location;

D. The type, age, width, length and height of the building;

E. The use or purpose for which building will be put and that for which building was in the past used for;

F. Name and address of person, firm or corporation engaged to move the building;

G. The means or manner the building is to be moved and type of equipment to be used therefor;

H. Route over and along which the building is proposed to be moved;

I. The time required to move the building, including the day and hour when any part will enter any street and the approximate date and hour every part of the building will be off every street, alley or public way;

J. Such other information as the city recorder, city building inspector or city engineer may deem necessary.

Where the building or structure is to be moved outside the corporate limits of the city the information required by subsections C and E of this section may be omitted. (Ord. 10-1959 § 2)


15.10.030 Statements of noninterference with appliances along route.

There shall be attached to every completed application as above provided written statements from each person, firm or corporation operating any public utility maintaining any wires, conduits, cables, poles or other appliances or appurtenances thereto, along, over or across any street, alley or public way along the route over which the building or structure is to be moved by or for the applicant, stating that the moving of such building will not molest, damage or interfere with or interrupt the service thereof or that the applicant has made appropriate arrangements for clearing the same at the time the building is to be moved; in such instance as said building or structure is to be moved over, across or along any railway tracks laid in any street a similar statement from the operator of said railroad or his duly authorized agent shall be furnished. (Ord. 10-1959 § 3)


15.10.040 Statement of liability.

Any such application as above indicated shall also contain a statement or agreement to the effect that the applicant shall not damage any real or personal property upon, along or adjacent to any street, alley or public way while moving any building and that in case any damage is so caused, that the applicant will pay therefor. (Ord. 10-1959 § 4)


15.10.050 Notice of movement – Public hearing requirements.

Upon receipt of application for moving a building or structure into a residential zone of the city, the city recorder shall advise, in writing, property owners within 200 feet of the property upon which said structure or building is to be moved of said application, which notice shall be given the affected property owners within seven days of receipt of such application. If within 10 days of notification to the affected property owners of such application by the city recorder, the owners of at least 25 percent of the affected property, which shall be deemed that lying within 200 feet of the applicant property, shall in writing, filed with the city recorder, object to such moving or request the right to be heard concerning said application, public hearing shall be had thereon before the city council at the next regularly scheduled council meeting unless said meeting shall be scheduled within 10 days of the expiration of said 10-day protest or hearing request, in which case public hearing shall be held at the next following, regularly scheduled council meeting; provided further, that the council may, whenever it believes public interest warrants, call a public hearing upon said application whether the 25 percent requirement be met or not. (Ord. 3-1969 § 1; Ord. 10-1959 § 4A)


15.10.060 Public hearing – Notice – Decision.

When public hearing shall be required or called as provided in FMC 15.10.050, the city recorder shall, within five days of the expiration of said 10-day protest or hearing demand period, notify in writing the affected property owners and post notice thereof in two public places in the property area affected and also post notice thereof at the City Hall, which notice shall state the purpose, time and place of said hearing. In all instances, the applicant requesting the moving permit shall be notified and his presence requested at said public hearing. The purpose of said public hearing shall be to permit the city council to obtain all pertinent information, facts and material relating to said application and the effect thereof upon the public interest of the affected area and the city as a whole. Following said public hearing the city council may, if in its discretion the granting of such application would be adverse to the best interests of the public and the city, deny such application. The city council may also request various public officials, the applicant or others to furnish such additional information as it may feel necessary to reach an appropriate decision. In the event that said application is denied, the city recorder shall, within seven days of such denial, notify the applicant of such denial and the reasons therefor. (Ord. 3-1969 § 1; Ord. 10-1959 § 4B)


15.10.070 Fee.

Each application for moving a building or structure within the city as above indicated shall be accompanied by a permit fee as follows:

A. For buildings or structures having less than 1,000 square feet in floor area: $50.00;

B. For buildings in floor area of 1,000 square feet or more: $50.00 plus $.05 for each additional square foot in excess of 1,000.

The area of the several floors shall be counted; in case of story and a half buildings, only one-half of the second floor area shall be used in calculation of the permit fee. All fees collected shall be credited to the street repair fund. (Ord. 3-1969 § 1; Ord. 10-1959 § 5)


15.10.080 Bond – Insurance.

No permit shall be issued to move a building or structure as above indicated unless the mover shall furnish a bond or insurance policy, approved by the city, as follows:

The mover shall furnish a public liability insurance policy or certificate of insurance in the sum of not less than $20,000 covering such truck with respect to injuries to or death of any person or persons and in a sum of not less than $5,000 covering such truck with respect to damage to the property of any person, including damages to any street, bridge or other public property of the city of Fairview or any other public corporation and the above limits shall be the minimum required for each truck or motor vehicle towing any building while moving over or upon any public street, alley or way; provided further, that such mover shall also furnish an insurance policy or bond in a sum not less than $20,000 conditioned that the mover will pay any injuries to or for the death of any person or persons, or any damages to any property of any person, and damages to streets, bridges and other public property owned or maintained by the city of Fairview or other public corporation on account or by reason of any of the operations of the mover while engaged in moving any building or structure, including injuries or damages occasioned by the falling or collapsing of, or the weight of, or collisions with any such building or structure while any part thereof is upon any part of a public street; provided, that the city council may require a greater or additional bond or insurance policy if in their just determination conditions so require. Evidence of the above requirement being met must be furnished the city recorder upon his request and before issuance of permit. (Ord. 10-1959 § 6)


15.10.090 Approval – General.

No permit shall be issued until the application shall be approved by the chief of police, the building inspector and, in case of a structure other than wood frame or in excess of 2,500 square feet, the city council. (Ord. 10-1959 § 7)


15.10.100 Approval – Chief of police.

The chief of police shall consider the probable effect of the proposed moving on the public safety, and he shall approve the application for moving only where such moving will not jeopardize the public safety and the route proposed or finally adopted is the one least dangerous to the citizens of the city and the general public. (Ord. 10-1959 § 8)


15.10.110 Approval – Building inspector.

The building inspector shall inspect the building to be moved and if he finds that the building be of substantial construction and in condition that it may be moved without collapsing or falling apart and without endangering any person upon, along or adjacent to any public street, and further finds that the building is designed and adaptable for the purpose, use or occupancy to which it is proposed to put the same at the new location and that it conforms to the requirements of the building code and fire zones of the new location he shall approve the application. (Ord. 10-1959 § 9)


15.10.120 Determination by city engineer.

Before permit be granted as herein provided the city engineer or other responsible official shall determine that the mover has safe and sufficient equipment and facilities for moving, adequate barricades, lights, flags and personnel for warning the public both day and night and for the safe direction of traffic; that the streets and bridges along the route to be traversed by the moving are of sufficient width and strength and in condition to bear the moving of the building or structure described in the application and that said moving will not endanger any trees, shrubs or improvements in, upon or adjacent to any street. (Ord. 10-1959 § 10)


15.10.130 Moving must be continuous.

The removal of a building or buildings under a permit herein granted when commenced shall be continuous during all hours of the day and night unless exception be granted by the city recorder and such exception shall apply only to that provision requiring said moving to continue during hours of darkness, until such building reaches its destination or is removed from any and all streets, alleys or public ways. Other exceptions must be granted only by the city council. (Ord. 10-1959 § 11)


15.10.140 Safeguards required.

In case any building is moved at night or left standing on a public street, alley or way during hours or darkness the mover shall at all times provide such barricades, lights, flares and watchmen as may be necessary to safeguard the traffic and persons using said public street, alley or way. (Ord. 10-1959 § 12)


15.10.150 Permit contents.

Each permit shall prescribe thereon the mode and route for such moving and the date upon which the permit will expire together with such restrictions as the public interests may require, which restrictions shall be sufficient to protect all sidewalks, street improvements and other public improvements and private property from injury or damage. (Ord. 10-1959 § 13)


15.10.160 Removal of building within time specified required.

Failure to remove said building or structure for which permit shall be herein granted from a public street, alley or way within the time specified in the permit shall be considered a separate violation of this chapter apart from any and all other violations which may occur hereunder. (Ord. 10-1959 § 14)


15.10.170 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm, association, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof before the municipal judge be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a term not to exceed 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each day or portion of a day such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable accordingly. (Ord. 10-1959 § 15)


Chapter 15.15 BUILDING NUMBERING

Sections:

15.15.010    Numbering – Blocks.

15.15.020    Number design.

15.15.030    Address assignment.

15.15.040    Building department to maintain supply of numbers.

15.15.050    Address assigned with building permit application – Fee.

15.15.060    Adjustments in numbering system.


15.15.010 Numbering – Blocks.

All residence dwellings, business structures and properties and other buildings wherein persons meet, live, work or congregate or may so do, located within the city of Fairview, shall be numbered for address and identification purposes in the following manner:

A. Residence dwellings, business structures and other properties required to be numbered as provided herein fronting on streets extending in a general northerly and southerly direction shall be given a number depending upon the number of blocks they are distant from Depot Street; those within the first block from Depot Street shall be assigned a number from zero through 99 which block shall be known as the “zero to 100 block”; those within the second block from Depot Street shall be assigned a number from 100 through 199, which block shall be known as the “100 block”; this system of numbering shall continue for as many blocks as there may be within the city limits of the city of Fairview which may extend in a general northerly or southerly direction with each succeeding block being allotted an additional 100 numbers for address and identification purposes; those addresses extending south of Depot Street shall bear the prefix “South” and those extending north of Depot Street the prefix “North” but need not be displayed as hereinafter provided unless required by resolution of the city council.

B. Residence dwellings, business structures and other properties required to be numbered as provided herein fronting on streets extending in a general easterly and westerly direction shall be given a number depending upon the number of blocks they are distant from Fairview Avenue; those within the first block from Fairview Avenue shall be assigned a number from zero through 99 which block shall be known as the “zero to 100 block”; those within the second block from Fairview Avenue shall be assigned a number from 100 through 199, which block shall be known as the “hundred block”; this system of numbering shall continue for as many blocks as there may be within the city limits of the city of Fairview which extend in a general easterly or westerly direction with each succeeding block being allotted an additional 100 numbers for address and identification purposes; those addresses extending west of Fairview Avenue shall bear the prefix “West” and those extending east of Fairview Avenue the prefix “East”, but need not be displayed as hereinafter provided unless required by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 6-1960 § 1)


15.15.020 Number design.

All numbers used to designate the individual addresses of those buildings, dwellings and other structures required to be numbered as herein provided shall be uniform in design; shall be not less than two and one-half inches nor more than three and one-half inches in height; shall be of a metal or plastic material; and shall be placed in such manner upon the building, dwelling or other structure so as to be plainly visible from the street at all times and identifiable with the proper building, dwelling or other structure concerned. (Ord. 6-1960 § 2)


15.15.030 Address assignment.

The city building department shall assign numbers for address and identification purposes to the dwellings, buildings or other structures required to be numbered in a manner consistent herewith and under the direction of the public affairs committee of the city council. Appeal from any number designation made by the city building department shall be made directly to the public affairs committee and thence to the city council. (Ord. 6-1960 § 3)


15.15.040 Building department to maintain supply of numbers.

The city building department shall maintain a supply of numbers as above indicated which shall be made available to the owners and inhabitants of the dwellings, buildings or other structures required to be numbered and shall furnish the same to said persons at the city’s cost. (Ord. 6-1960 § 4)


15.15.050 Address assigned with building permit application – Fee.

Upon the receipt by the city building department of an application for building permit for the construction of any dwelling, building or other structure which under this chapter must be numbered for address and identification purposes the city building department shall assign and issue a number thereto. The applicant for said building permit shall at the time of making payment thereof pay an additional sum which shall be equal to the cost of the numbers required for address and identification purposes as hereinabove assigned. (Ord. 6-1960 § 5)


15.15.060 Adjustments in numbering system.

The city building department shall as provided herein and upon express direction of the public affairs committee of the city council make such adjustments in the present numbering system of the city of Fairview as may be necessary to carry out the intent and system of numbering herein set forth; but upon such an adjustment must give those dwellings, buildings or other structures affected 30 days’ written notice of said adjustment before said dwelling, building or other structure shall be considered to be in violation hereof. This provision shall apply solely to adjustments initiated by the city building department as above provided. (Ord. 6-1960 § 6)


Chapter 15.20 NEW CONSTRUCTION

Sections:

Article I. Construction Statement

15.20.010    Required.

15.20.020    Form provided by building department or inspector – Filing.

15.20.030    Form adopted by reference – Modification.

15.20.040    Violation – Penalty.

Article II. Clean-up of Construction Debris

15.20.050    Subdivision.

15.20.060    Building sites.

15.20.070    Other development and construction sites.

15.20.080    Release of stop work orders.

Article I. Construction Statement


15.20.010 Required.

As a prerequisite to final inspection and approval of any residential structure hereinafter erected in the city of Fairview, a construction statement shall be required of each contractor, builder or other person so erecting or having the responsibility for erecting the same. (Ord. 4-1976 § 1)


15.20.020 Form provided by building department or inspector – Filing.

A. The construction statement shall be in the form provided by the city building department and may be secured therefrom or from the city building inspector.

B. The construction statement shall be completed in duplicate by the party concerned, who will sign, date and file the same with the city building department prior to request for final inspection. At the time of final inspection, the city building inspector will verify the information set forth on the construction statement by the builder and indicate thereon the date of his final inspection. The original of such statement shall be filed with the building department and attached to the concerned building permit; the duplicate shall be posted within the inspected structure by the building inspector at the time his final inspection be made. The construction statement so posted shall be removed only by the occupant of the concerned premises. (Ord. 4-1976 § 2)


15.20.030 Form adopted by reference – Modification.

The form and substance of said construction statement shall be as attached to the ordinance codified in this article, marked “Exhibit A”,* and by this reference made a part hereof as if set forth in full at this point. The form and substance of said construction statement may be modified or amended from time to time by resolution of this council. The city building department shall, from time to time, propose to the council such amendments or modifications as it shall feel appropriate. (Ord. 4-1976 § 3)

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibit A is on file in the city clerk’s office.


15.20.040 Violation – Penalty.

Failure to complete the construction statement as herein required shall cause the city to withhold final inspection and approval of the concerned structure. False or misleading statements, intentional misstatements, failure to complete or failure to post such construction statement shall subject the responsible party to suspension of any existing city building or construction license and may be grounds for denial of any subsequent construction or building license or permits. Violation of this article in any of its particulars shall subject the offending party to punishment by a fine of not more than $200.00. (Ord. 4-1976 § 4)

Article II. Clean-up of Construction Debris


15.20.050 Subdivision.

Upon a finding by the superintendent of public works that mud or other debris have accumulated in the streets of a subdivision, which threaten or cause damage to the streets or utilities, the superintendent may direct the building official to issue a stop work order on all construction and building activities within the subdivision. (Ord. 6-1989 § 1)


15.20.060 Building sites.

The building official, upon finding that mud or other debris has accumulated in the streets as a result of a construction project on a single lot, may issue a stop work order on said project. (Ord. 6-1989 § 2)


15.20.070 Other development and construction sites.

The building official or superintendent of public works, upon finding that mud or other debris has accumulated on the streets as a result of any other residential, commercial or industrial site development or construction, may issue a stop work order on said project. The release of said stop work order shall be in accordance with FMC 15.20.080. (Ord. 13-1991 § 1; Ord. 6-1989 § 2A)


15.20.080 Release of stop work orders.

Upon finding by the building official that the builder or owner of a construction project on a single lot has cleaned up the mud and/or debris, the building official shall release the stop work order. Upon a finding by the superintendent of public works that the mud and/or debris of a subdivision project has been cleaned up or removed to a satisfactory degree, the superintendent shall direct the building official to release all stop work orders issued pursuant to FMC 15.20.050, 15.20.060 or 15.20.070. (Ord. 6-1989 § 3)


Chapter 15.21 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.21.010    Purpose.

15.21.015    Scope.

15.21.020    Alterations, additions and repairs.

15.21.025    Administration.

15.21.030    Inspections.

15.21.035    Right of entry.

15.21.040    Dangerous buildings declared to be public nuisances – Abatement.

15.21.045    Violations.

15.21.050    Inspections of work.

15.21.060    Definitions.

15.21.070    Commencement of proceedings.

15.21.080    Notice and order.

15.21.090    Service of notice and order.

15.21.100    Method of service.

15.21.110    Proof of service.

15.21.120    Repair, vacation and demolition.

15.21.130    Notice to vacate – Posting.

15.21.140    Compliance with notice to vacate.

15.21.150    Form of appeal.

15.21.160    Scheduling appeal for hearing.

15.21.170    Effect of failure to appeal.

15.21.180    Scope of appeal hearing – Stay of order.

15.21.190    Form of notice of hearing to appellant.

15.21.200    Record.

15.21.210    Conduct of hearings.

15.21.220    Rights of parties.

15.21.230    Official notice.

15.21.240    Inspection of the premises.

15.21.250    Form of decision – Judicial review.

15.21.260    Enforcement of orders.

15.21.270    Failure to commence work.

15.21.280    Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited.


15.21.010 Purpose.

A. This chapter is to provide a method (cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy(ies) available to the city by law) whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or the building’s occupants such that they should be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished.

B. This chapter does not create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms hereof. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.015 Scope.

This chapter shall apply to all “dangerous buildings” as herein defined be they now in existence or which may hereafter become dangerous buildings in the city. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.020 Alterations, additions and repairs.

All buildings or structures required to be repaired under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Section 3403 of the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.025 Administration.

A. The community development director (or his/her designate) (hereinafter “director”) is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director shall have the power to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter.

B. Any person may appeal an interpretation of this chapter, or any rule or supplemental regulation made by the director to the building code board of appeals which shall have the authority to affirm, modify, reverse or annul the director’s action. An appeal shall be made, if at all, in writing setting out the general nature of the person’s objection to the director’s action. The appeal shall be made within 14 days of the person receiving notice from the director that the interpretation, rule or supplemental regulation is applicable to that person. An appeal made to the board shall be addressed by the board in an expeditious manner and the board shall issue a written opinion thereon not later than 30 days after the board hears or otherwise considers the appeal. The board’s opinion on the matter shall be the final decision on the matter. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.030 Inspections.

The director with other officials such as the building official, the fire marshal and Multnomah County health department officials are authorized to make such inspections and take such other actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including (but not limited to) the issuance of stop work or similar abatement orders. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.035 Right of entry.

A. When necessary to make an inspection to enforce the requirements imposed by the terms of this chapter (or when the director or the director’s authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter making the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous) the director may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If entry is refused, the director shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including (but not limited to) the ability to apply for and obtain an administrative search warrant.

B. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the director shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including (but not limited to) the ability to apply for and obtain an administrative search warrant. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.040 Dangerous buildings declared to be public nuisances – Abatement.

All buildings or portions thereof determined after inspection by the director or his/her agent or designate to be dangerous as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. It is understood that the director, his/her agent or designate shall not, in designating a building to be dangerous as defined in this chapter, act unilaterally but rather shall involve other relevant officials, such as the building official, county health officer or fire marshal as necessary in the designation. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.045 Violations.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, unincorporated association, corporation or other entity to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.050 Inspections of work.

All buildings or structures within the scope of this chapter and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the director consistent with and in the manner provided by this chapter and Sections 108 and 1701 of the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code and other relevant provisions of municipal, county or state law. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.060 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the building code or the housing code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language (unabridged, copyrighted 1986) shall be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.

A. “Director” is the community development director or such other person as may be designated as such by the city administrator.

B. “City” means the city of Fairview.

C. “Dangerous building” is any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described; provided, that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or the building or structure’s occupants are endangered:

1. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

2. Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

3. Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

4. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

5. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.

6. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings.

7. Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.

8. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.

9. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.

10. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.

11. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.

12. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children or a harbor for vagrants and criminals.

13. Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.

14. Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the (a) strength, (b) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (c) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.

15. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.

16. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard.

17. Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.

18. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

D. “Owner” or “record owner” is the person whose name and address is listed as the owner of the property by the county tax assessor on the county assessment and taxation records. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.070 Commencement of proceedings.

When the director has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, the director shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition thereof. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.080 Notice and order.

A. The director shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain the following items:

1. The street address and a description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located.

2. A statement that the director has found the building dangerous with a brief factual description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the terms of this chapter.

3. A statement of the action(s) required to be taken by the director:

a. If the building must be repaired, the notice and order shall require all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and completed with in such time as the director shall determine reasonable under all of the circumstances.

b. If the building must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the director to be reasonable.

c. If the building or structure is to be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the director determines reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be secured therefor within 30 days of the date of the order; and that the demolition be completed within 30 days thereafter.

4. Statement advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified, the director:

a. Will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed; and

b. May proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner.

5. Copy of the regulations and procedures set out in this chapter.

6. Statements advising:

a. That any person having any record title or legal interest (other than a leasehold interest) in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the director to the municipal court provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this chapter and filed with the director within 14 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and

b. That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to a hearing and determination of the matter.

B. In the event the director believes conditions exist at a structure such that it presents an imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of the general public and/or the structure’s occupants, service of the notice and order consistent with the terms of FMC 15.21.090 shall not be required prior to any action(s) being taken by the director to address the imminent threat. The director is authorized to take all such actions as he/she deems reasonably necessary to address the imminent threat including demolition of the building, securing it against entry and vacation. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.090 Service of notice and order.

A. The notice and order (and any amended or supplemental notice and order) shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property with a copy thereof being served on each of the following (if known to the director or disclosed from official public records):

1. The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record;

2. The owner or holder of any lease of record; and

3. The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located.

B. In the event the director has exercised his/her authority under the terms of FMC 15.21.080(B), in addition to the notice and order referred to herein, the director shall cause a notice of summary action to be sent to person(s) identified in subsection (A) of this section, which notice shall include the following:

1. The date the summary action was taken; and

2. A statement of the violations of this chapter that existed at the property that were the cause of the director’s determination that the conditions gave rise to a imminent threat.

C. The failure of the director to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.100 Method of service.

Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, to each such person at his/her address as it appears in the Multnomah County tax records or as otherwise known to the director. If no address of such person appears or is known to the director, then a copy of the notice and order shall be mailed (addressed to such person) at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.110 Proof of service.

Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the director. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.120 Repair, vacation and demolition.

A. Any building declared a dangerous building under this chapter shall be made to comply with one of the following:

1. The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair; or

2. The building shall be demolished consistent with subsection (D) of this section.

B. If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against entry with the right to entry allowed to effect required repairs.

C. If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or the building’s occupants, it shall be ordered vacated, secured and maintained against entry.

D. If a building or structure is found to be or becomes dangerous such that the life, property or safety of the public is thereby jeopardized and if in the opinion of the director, the building or structure is not, under current circumstances, likely to be repaired such that it will be habitable within 120 days, it may be ordered demolished, with the cost thereof to be borne by the owners. In the event the director determines that a building is to be demolished, the director shall make a written order which includes the circumstances supporting demolition. The order shall be served on all persons entitled to notice provide under FMC 15.21.080 and is subject to a 21-day appeal consistent with the provisions of FMC 15.21.150. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.130 Notice to vacate – Posting.

Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:

DO NOT ENTER

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

_____________________________

Community Development Director

City of Fairview, Oregon

(Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.140 Compliance with notice to vacate.

A. Whenever such notice is posted, the director shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued under FMC 15.21.080 reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting.

B. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit.

C. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and all lawful requirements been met. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.150 Form of appeal.

A. Any person entitled to service under FMC 15.21.080 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the director under this chapter by filing with the municipal court a written appeal containing:

1. A heading in the words: “Before the Municipal Court of the City of Fairview, Oregon.”

2. A listing of the names of all appellants participating in the appeal along with a brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each appellant in the building or the land involved in the notice and order.

3. A brief statement concerning the basis for the appeal together with any material fact(s) claimed to support those contentions and why the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.

4. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses.

5. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

B. The appeal shall be filed within 21 days of the date of service of the director’s order or action; provided, that if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with FMC 15.21.120 and 15.21.130, such appeal shall be filed within 10 days from the date of the service of the notice and order of the director. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.160 Scheduling appeal for hearing.

As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the municipal court shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall not be less than 10 nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed with the director. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the court either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. A copy shall also be posted at the property and sent to all persons who received notice under the terms of sent to all persons who received notice under the terms of FMC 15.21.080. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.170 Effect of failure to appeal.

Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of FMC 15.21.150 shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.180 Scope of appeal hearing – Stay of order.

A. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

B. Except for vacation orders made pursuant to FMC 15.21.130, enforcement of any notice and order of the director issued under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.190 Form of notice of hearing to appellant.

The notice to the appellant(s) shall be substantially in the following form:

You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the Fairview Municipal Court at _____ on the ___ day of __________, 20___ at the hour, ___________ upon the notice and order served upon you for alleged violation(s) of Chapter 15.21 (Dangerous Buildings) of the Fairview Municipal Code. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to examine all witnesses.

(Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.200 Record.

A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the court. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.210 Conduct of hearings.

Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Oral evidence shall be taken on oath or affirmation. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in Oregon. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in Oregon. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.220 Rights of parties.

The city and the appellant(s) shall be able:

A. To call and examine witnesses on matters relevant to the issues of the hearing;

B. To introduce documentary and physical evidence;

C. To cross-examine opposing witnesses;

D. To rebut evidence; and

E. To be represented by anyone lawfully permitted to do so. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.230 Official notice.

In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken (either before or after submission of the case for decision) of any fact which judicially noticeable by Oregon courts. Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed which is to be noted in the record. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity to refute the noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.240 Inspection of the premises.

The court may inspect any building involved in an appeal during the course of the hearing; provided, that: notice of such inspection shall be given the parties before the inspection is made; the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; and, the judge shall state for the record after said inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.250 Form of decision – Judicial review.

A. With appeals heard by the municipal court, the court shall within a reasonable time (not to exceed 90 days from the date the hearing is closed) prepare a written decision which shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented and the requirements, if any, to be complied with. The effective date of the decision shall be as stated therein. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the city and appellant by certified mail and regular mail, postage prepaid.

B. Judicial review of the court’s decision shall be by way of writ of review as provided for in ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.260 Enforcement of orders.

A. After any order of the director or municipal court made pursuant to this chapter has become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order.

B. If the person to whom an order of the director has been directed fails, neglects or refuses to comply with said order, the director shall, before taking any action to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building, bring an action consistent with the terms of Chapter 2.27 FMC and the municipal court shall, if the evidence adduced shows cause, issue a final order requiring compliance with the director’s order. (Ord. 8-2007 § 7; Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.270 Failure to commence work.

Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this chapter becomes effective:

A. The director shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:

DANGEROUS BUILDING

DO NOT OCCUPY

It is unlawful to occupy this building, remove or deface this notice.

_____________________________

Community Development Director

City of Fairview, Oregon

B. No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the director have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code.

C. The director may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner provided for the collection of assessment liens. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


15.21.280 Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited.

No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this chapter, or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1)


Chapter 15.25 STRUCTURES OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

(Repealed by 8-2009)


Chapter 15.30 SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

Article I. Water and Sewer Systems

15.30.010    Definitions.

15.30.020    Purpose.

15.30.030    Scope.

15.30.040    Systems development charge established.

15.30.050    Compliance with state law.

15.30.060    Collection of charge.

15.30.070    Exemptions.

15.30.080    Credits.

15.30.090    Appeal procedures.

15.30.100    Prohibited connection.

Article II. Storm Drainage

15.30.110    Fund created.

15.30.120    System development charge.

15.30.130    Charges placed in fund.

Article I. Water and Sewer Systems


15.30.010 Definitions.

As used in this article, except where the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases have the following meaning:

A. “Capital improvement(s)” means facilities or assets used for any of the following services:

1. Water supply, storage, treatment and distribution; or

2. Sanitary sewers, including collection and transmission, treatment and disposal; or

3. Parks and open spaces land and facilities; or

4. Road and transportation facilities.

B. “Development” means the act of conducting a building or mining operation, or making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, which increases the usage of any capital improvements or which creates the need for additional capital improvements.

C. “Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the ordinance codified in this article becomes effective.

D. “Land area” means the area of a parcel of land where applicable shall be as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.

E. “Owner” means the legal owner of record as shown on the assessment and taxation records of Multnomah County, or where there is a recorded land sales contract in force, the purchaser thereunder.

F. “Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or another use, which may include the yard and/or other open spaces required under applicable zoning regulations or other pertinent redevelopment ordinances.

G. “PM peak hour” means the hour with the highest traffic generation in the PM peak period from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.

H. “Qualified public improvements” means a capital improvement that is:

1. Required as a condition of development approval;

2. Identified in the Capital Improvement Plan adopted pursuant to subsection 7.715(2); and

3. Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval. As used in this definition, “contiguous” means in a public way which abuts.

I. “Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article.

J. “Systems development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at any of the times specified in FMC 15.30.060. It shall also include that portion of a water or sanitary sewer connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average costs of inspecting and installing connections with the water system or the sanitary sewer system. “Systems development charge” does not include:

1. Any fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district;

2. A charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment; or

3. The cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed upon a land use decision.

K. “Transportation facilities and assets” means public transportation system facilities, roads and other assets of the transportation system which are capacity related. (Ord. 7-1994 § 1; Ord. 4-1994 § 1; Ord. 8-1991 § 2)


15.30.020 Purpose.

The purpose of the systems development charge is to impose a portion of the public cost of capital improvements upon those developments that create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements; provided, that system development charges for transportation shall be limited to improvement fees only. (Ord. 7-1994 § 1; Ord. 4-1994 § 1; Ord. 8-1991 § 3)


15.30.030 Scope.

The systems development charge imposed by this article is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, fee in lieu of assessment, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. A systems development charge is to be considered in the nature of a charge for service to be rendered or a service hookup charge. (Ord. 8-1991 § 4)


15.30.040 Systems development charge established.

A. Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this article or other local or state law, a systems development charge is hereby imposed effective June 15, 1991, upon all development within the city, and all development outside the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the water or sanitary sewer systems of the city.

B. When the council determines to establish a systems development charge for any capital improvement or include the same in the city’s system development charge program it shall do so by council resolution. (Ord. 8-1991 § 5)


15.30.050 Compliance with state law.

A. Revenues received from the systems development charges shall be deposited to the appropriate water or sewer capital improvement fund and be budgeted and expended as provided by state law. The accounting of such revenues and expenditures required by state law shall be included in the city’s annual financial audit required by ORS Chapter 294.

B. The capital improvement plan required by state law as the basis for expending revenues from the improvement fee of the systems development charge shall be the Fairview Capital Improvement Plan or as adopted by resolution(s) provided in FMC 15.30.040(B). (Ord. 4-1994 § 1; Ord. 8-1991 § 6)


15.30.060 Collection of charge.

A. The systems development charge is payable upon issuance of a permit to connect to the water or sanitary sewer systems.

B. If development is commenced or connection is made to the water system or sanitary sewer system without an appropriate permit, the systems development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.

C. The city shall collect the systems development charges from the person responsible for or receiving the benefit of the development. The city shall not issue any permit or allow connection described in appropriate ordinances until the charge has been paid in full or until provision for installment payments has been made within the limits prescribed.

D. The obligation to pay the unpaid systems development charge and interest thereon shall be secured. Acceptable security to insure payment includes: property, bond, deposits, letter of credit or the obliger may request a lien be placed against the property to be developed. (Ord. 8-1991 § 7)


15.30.070 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from the systems development charge imposed in FMC 15.30.040:

A. All applications to connect to the water or sanitary sewer system received by June 15, 1991. (Ord. 8-1991 § 8)


15.30.080 Credits.

A. When a development occurs that must pay a system development charge under FMC 15.30.040, the system development charge for the existing use shall be calculated and if it is less than the system development charge for the proposed use, the difference between the system development charge for the existing use and the system development charge for the proposed use shall be the system development charge required under FMC 15.30.040. If the change in use results in the system development charge for the proposed use being less than the system development charge for the existing use, no system development charge shall be required, however, no refund or credit shall be given.

B. The limitations on the use of credits contained in this subsection shall not apply when credits are given under subsection C of this section. A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement associated with a development. If a qualified public improvement is located partially on and partially off the parcel of land that is the subject of the approval, the credit shall be given only for the cost of the portion of the improvement not located on or wholly contiguous to the parcel of land. The credit provided for by this subsection shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed and shall not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee.

C. When establishing the methodology, the council shall provide for a credit against the improvement fee, the reimbursement fee, or both, for a capital improvement constructed as part of a development that reduces the development’s demand upon existing public capital improvements or the need for future public capital improvements or that would otherwise have to be constructed at city expense under the then-existing council policies.

D. Credit shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvements to another. (Ord. 8-1991 § 9)


15.30.090 Appeal procedures.

A. A person aggrieved by a decision made by the city under FMC 15.30.040 through 15.30.080 or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of systems development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure by filing a written request with the city recorder for consideration by the Fairview city council. Such appeal shall describe with particularity the decision or the expenditure from which the person appeals and shall comply with subsection C of this section.

B. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of alleged improper expenditure. Appeals of any other decision must be filed within 15 days of the date of the decision.

C. The appeal shall state:

1. The name and address of the appellant;

2. The nature of the determination being appealed;

3. The reasons the determination is incorrect; and

4. What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

An appeal which does not meet the above criteria or is not filed within the time set forth herein shall not be processed or heard.

D. Unless the appellant and the city agree to a longer period, an appeal filed hereunder shall be heard within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of intent to appeal. At least seven days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the appellant.

E. The Fairview city council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the council deems appropriate. At the hearing the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel.

F. The appellant shall carry the burden of proving that the determination being appealed is incorrect and what the correct determination should be.

G. The city council shall issue a written decision within 20 days after the hearing date and that decision shall be final. (Ord. 8-1991 § 10)


15.30.100 Prohibited connection.

No person may connect to the city’s water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer system unless the appropriate systems development charges, if any, have been paid. (Ord. 8-1991 § 11)

Article II. Storm Drainage


15.30.110 Fund created.

A fund for the accumulation of monies required for the development and construction of capacity-increasing storm drainage improvements within the urban planning area of the city of Fairview, is hereby created, to be called the “city of Fairview storm water improvement fund”. (Ord. 9-1993 § 1)


15.30.120 System development charge.

Hereafter, all applicants for a building permit for new construction within the city of Fairview will be required to pay a fee, which shall be in addition to all other fees related to a new development, to be assessed and paid at the time of application to the city for a building permit, which shall be known as a “system development charge.” The methodology and rate for determining the amount of the “system development charge” shall be established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 2-1999 § 1; Ord. 9-1993 § 2)


15.30.130 Charges placed in fund.

All system development charges collected under the provisions of this article shall be placed in the city of Fairview storm water improvement fund here created, to be used to finance and defray the costs of capacity-increasing improvements to the Fairview storm drainage system. Sums in said fund are to be expended only upon appropriate council resolution. (Ord. 9-1993 § 3)


Chapter 15.35 FIRE CODE AMENDMENTS

Sections:

15.35.010    Adoption of 2010 Oregon Fire Code and fire and life safety regulations.

15.35.020    Definitions.

15.35.030    Establishment and duties of life safety division.

15.35.040    Repealed.

15.35.050    Repealed.

15.35.060    Repealed.

15.35.070    Amendments to the 2010 Oregon Fire Code.

15.35.080    Appeals.

15.35.090    Enforcement – Offenses – Penalties.

15.35.095    Unlawful burning.


15.35.010 Adoption of 2010 Oregon Fire Code and fire and life safety regulations.

A. For the purpose of prescribing minimum regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, panic, or explosion, the city adopts the fire code known as the Oregon Fire Code (OFC) 2010 Edition, and the whole thereof, including Oregon adopted appendices, except as otherwise amended as codified in FMC 15.35.070 and incorporated herein.

B. This code section, including the codes hereby adopted, shall be filed and maintained in the record of Gresham fire and emergency services (FES) and in the Oregon State Fire Marshal’s Office. The whole of this chapter shall be known as the fire and life safety code of the city of Fairview (hereafter known as “fire code”).

C. Any violation of the OFC shall also constitute a violation of the Fairview Municipal Code under FMC 1.01.090, and shall constitute a public nuisance.

D. In addition to any fines, penalties, remedies or other enforcement powers authorized by the OFC, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter as provided by law, including the FMC. (Ord. 11-2010 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 2-2008 Exh. A; Ord. 7-2007 § 1; Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-1992 § 1)


15.35.020 Definitions.

A. “Business” means any activity, trade, occupation, profession, or pursuit conducted for the purpose of generating revenue, whether for-profit or nonprofit, regardless of occupancy type assigned by code language.

B. Fire Code Official. Wherever the Oregon Fire Code uses the term “fire code official,” it shall mean the city of Gresham fire chief or fire marshal.

C. City. Wherever the fire code uses the term “city,” “county,” “jurisdiction,” “municipality” or “state,” it shall mean the city of Fairview.

D. City Attorney. Wherever the fire code uses the term “city attorney” or “corporate counsel,” it shall mean the Fairview city attorney.

E. Fire Marshal. Wherever the fire code uses the term “fire marshal,” it shall mean the city of Gresham fire chief or fire marshal.

F. “Illegal occupancy” means any business occupying a building or on a premises without a city business license or the changing of an occupancy without proper building and planning department permits or certificate of occupancy.

G. “Occupancy” means the lawfully permitted purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used. (Ord. 11-2010 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 2-2008 Exh. A; Ord. 7-2007 § 1; Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-1992 § 2)


15.35.030 Establishment and duties of life safety division.

The 2010 Oregon Fire Code shall be enforced by the life safety division of the Gresham fire and emergency services, which shall be operated under the direction of the fire marshal. (Ord. 11-2010 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 2-2008 Exh. A; Ord. 7-2007 § 1; Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-1992 § 3)


15.35.040 Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases.

Repealed by Ord. 7-2007. (Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-1992 § 4)


15.35.050 Storage of flammable or combustible liquids in above ground tanks.

Repealed by Ord. 7-2007. (Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-1992 § 5)


15.35.060 Storage of explosives and blasting agents.

Repealed by Ord. 2-2004. (Ord. 9-1992 § 6)


15.35.070 Amendments to the 2010 Oregon Fire Code.

The 2010 Oregon Fire Code is amended as follows:

A. Section 104.2 is amended to add:

104.2.1 The jurisdiction shall set by resolution fees for special use permits.

B. Section 106.2.1 is amended to add:

The Council shall set by resolution fees for the following:

a. Initial business fire inspections.

b. Re-inspections.

c. Failure to abate hazards.

d. False alarms.

C. Section 308.1.4 is amended to read:

Open-flame cooking devices.

Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10 feet of combustible construction.

Exceptions:

1. One and two family dwellings.

2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system.

D. Section 308.3.1.1 is amended to read:

Liquefied-petroleum-gas-fueled cooking devices. LP-gas burners having an LP-gas container with a water capacity greater than 2.5 pounds (nominal 1 pound LP-gas capacity) shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10 feet of combustible construction.

Exception:

One and two family dwellings.

E. Section 505.1 is amended to read:

Address Numbers. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch and larger when required by Gresham Fire and Emergency Standard Operating Guideline 3.1.5.

F. Section 806.1.1 is amended to read:

Restricted occupancies.

Natural cut trees shall be prohibited in Group A, E, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and SR occupancies.

Exceptions:

1. Trees located in areas protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.1 or 903.1.2 shall not be prohibited.

2. Within dwelling units of R-2 occupancies.

G. Section 3401.4 is amended to read:

Permits

Permits for the installation of all flammable or combustible liquid tanks and/or storage of all flammable or combustible liquids within or outside of buildings are required within all areas of the city.

H. Section 3401.4.1 is amended to read:

Plans

Plans shall be submitted with each permit application for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) tanks and/or storage of the same.

I. Section 3801.2 is amended to read:

Permits

Permits for the installation of all liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) tanks and/or storage of all LPG are required within all areas of the city. Distributors shall not fill a gas container for which a permit is required unless a permit for installation has been issued for that location by the Fire Code Official,

J. Section 3801.3 is amended to read:

Plans

Plans shall be submitted with each permit application for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) tanks and/or storage of the same. 

(Ord. 11-2010 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 2-2008 Exh. A; Ord. 7-2007 § 1; Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-1992 § 7)


15.35.080 Appeals.

Decisions or determinations of the fire code official or fire marshal relative to the application and interpretation of this code or the OFC may be appealed to an appeals board, which shall consist of the building code board of appeals for the city, with the addition of a fire protection engineer, specialist or other qualified person as designated by the city council. (Ord. 11-2010 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 2-2008 Exh. A; Ord. 7-2007 § 1; Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-1992 § 8. Formerly 15.35.1010.)


15.35.090 Enforcement – Offenses – Penalties.

A. The purpose of this section is to set forth the requirements of a fire safety inspection program within the city of Fairview for violations of the OFC. The provisions of this section shall apply to each business location and every business within the city of Fairview.

B. Hazard Level Designations. A hazard level designation for each individual business will be determined by the fire marshal based on occupancy classification and existing hazards. The fire marshal will utilize the hazard ratings issued for occupancy designations by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 13, “Installation of Sprinkler Systems,” and as designated by OFC, Chapter 2. In cases of multiple occupancy classifications, hazard level placement will normally correspond to the occupancy classification with the highest rated hazard level.

C. Violation of any other provision of the OFC or any other provision of the city fire code is punishable as a nuisance. Penalty for such violation is a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation. Each day’s continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.

D. Costs. In addition to any fines or penalties provided by the Fairview Municipal Code or state law, the court may impose such costs deemed sufficient to enforce any section of this chapter, as provided by law.

E. Fire Safety Inspections. Each business location of every business located within the city of Fairview is subject to a fire safety inspection by Gresham FES each calendar year. An inspection fee will be assessed when the inspection is conducted. Inspection fees shall be established by council resolution and correspond to the hazard level designation for each business location as determined by the fire marshal.

F. Fire Safety Reinspections. When violations of the OFC are found in the course of an annual inspection, Gresham FES shall conduct a reinspection, after allowing the appropriate time for voluntary abatement of the violation. Fees for reinspection shall be established by council resolution.

G. Failure to Abate OFC Violations. Failure to abate OFC violations shall constitute a public nuisance and subject the violator to the nuisance abatement remedies established in Chapter 8.10 FMC, including the imposition of an administrative enforcement fee for each month the violation continues. The administrative enforcement fee for inspection violations shall be established by council resolution. In addition to the imposition of any administrative enforcement fee, the administrator may enforce abatement proceedings or civil action as otherwise provided by law, including any enforcement remedies, orders or powers under the OFC.

H. Business License Inspections. Any person or business entity that applies for a license to conduct business in a physical location within the city of Fairview must obtain a business license inspection by Gresham FES and pay a fee for that inspection, as established by council resolution. Any person or business entity that applies for a renewal of any license to conduct business in a physical location within the city of Fairview may be subject to a business license inspection by the Gresham FES, and pay a fee for that inspection, as established by council resolution, if a history of OFC code violations has been found within said business location and a general fire safety inspection has not been completed there within the previous 12 months. (Ord. 11-2010 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 2-2008 Exh. A; Ord. 7-2007 § 1; Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-1992 § 9. Formerly 15.35.1020.)


15.35.095 Unlawful burning.

No person may:

A. Burn yard debris or any other type of material on any single or multifamily property within the city of Fairview except when specifically authorized by a valid open burn permit issued by the city of Gresham fire marshal or during a designated residential backyard burn season, which consists of 10 specific days in the spring and 10 specific days in the fall of each year.

B. Burn at any time any manmade material; rubber; plastic; garbage; construction materials; petroleum-based materials; or any other product for which burning is prohibited by the Department of Environmental Quality.

C. Conduct any type of burning during a declared fire season.

D. Set on fire, or cause to be set on fire, any grass, grain, stubble, or other material being or growing on land within the city.

E. Intentionally or negligently allow fire to escape from the person’s own land, or land of which the person is in possession or control.

F. Accidentally set any fire on the person’s own land or the land of another and allow it to escape from control without extinguishing it, or using every reasonable effort to do so.

G. Know of a fire burning on the person’s own land, or land of which the person is in possession or control, and fail or neglect to make every reasonable effort to extinguish it, regardless of whether or nor the person is responsible for the starting or the existence of the fire. (Ord. 11-2010 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 2-2008 Exh. A)


Chapter 15.36 FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS

Sections:

15.36.010    Purpose and scope.

15.36.020    Definitions.

15.36.025    Violation.

15.36.030    Fines for excessive false alarms.

15.36.040    Hearing.

15.36.050    Enforcement.


15.36.010 Purpose and scope.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage fire alarm users and fire alarm businesses to assume increased responsibility for maintaining the mechanical reliability and the proper use of alarm systems to prevent unnecessary fire department emergency responses to false alarms and thereby protect the emergency response capability of the city from misuse.

B. This chapter governs fire alarm systems, provides for penalties and fines for excessive false alarms, and establishes a system of administration. Fire alarm system installation and maintenance are governed by applicable provisions of the fire code, Chapter 15.35 FMC. (Ord. 2-2004 § 1)


15.36.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms mean:

“Alarm business” means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any fire alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.

“Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind that owns, controls, or occupies any building, structure or facility in which a fire alarm system is maintained.

“Coordinator” means the individual designated by the fire chief to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

“False alarm” means an alarm signal, eliciting a response by the fire department when a situation requiring a response by the fire department does not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user.

“Fire alarm system” means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the presence of products of combustion or the flow of an extinguishing agent through an automatic fire extinguishing system or a device manually activated by a person to signal the presence of fire requiring urgent attention and to which the fire department is expected to respond.

“Fire chief” means the chief of the fire department of the city, or designee. (Ord. 2-2004 § 1)


15.36.025 Violation.

A. No alarm user may cause or permit activation of a fire alarm when a situation requiring a response by the fire department does not in fact exist.

B. Three or more false alarms occurring within one year prior to the date of the false alarm occurrence is a Class A violation pursuant to ORS 153.018. (Ord. 2-2004 § 1)


15.36.030 Fines for excessive false alarms.

A. After the second false alarm, fines will be assessed by the coordinator for excessive false alarms occurring within one year prior to the date of the false alarm occurrence. The amount of the fine for excessive false alarms shall be set by council resolution.

B. The coordinator shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business by regular mail of a false alarm and the fine and the consequences of the failure to pay the fine. The coordinator shall also inform the alarm user of the right to appeal the validity of the false alarm to the fire chief, as provided in FMC 15.36.040. If the fine has not been received in the coordinator’s office within 30 days from the day the notice of fine was mailed by the coordinator and there is no appeal pending on the validity of the false alarm, the coordinator shall send the notice of fine by certified mail along with a notice of late fee of $25.00. (Ord. 2-2004 § 1)


15.36.040 Hearing.

A. An alarm user may appeal the validity of a false alarm determination by the coordinator to the fire chief. The appeal shall be in writing and requested within 10 days of the alarm user having received notice of the false alarm and fine from the coordinator. Failure to contest the coordinator’s determination in the required time period results in a conclusive presumption for all purposes that the alarm was false.

B. If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the user by the fire chief by certified mail at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing, which shall not be more than 21 nor less than 10 days after the filing of the request for hearing.

C. The hearing shall be before a hearings officer appointed by the manager. The coordinator and the alarm user shall have the right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross-examination. The hearings officer shall determine if two or more false alarms have occurred in the year prior to the date of the false alarm in question. The hearings officer may issue written findings waiving, expunging or entering a false alarm designation on an alarm user’s record. If false alarm designations are entered on the alarm user’s record, the coordinator shall pursue fine collection as set by council resolution. (Ord. 2-2004 § 1)


15.36.050 Enforcement.

Enforcement of this chapter may be by civil action as provided by ORS 30.315 including fines set forth in FMC 15.36.030 or by administrative action wherein the coordinator may issue a citation for violation. (Ord. 2-2004 § 1)


Title 16 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS

Chapters:

16.05    Repealed

16.10    Wellhead Protection

16.15    Erosion Control Plan


Chapter 16.05


Chapter 16.10 WELLHEAD PROTECTION

Sections:

16.10.010    Definitions – Establishment of wellhead protection areas and wellhead protection program reference manual.

16.10.020    Storage, handling, use and transportation of hazardous materials – Reporting.

16.10.030    Storage, handling, use and transportation of hazardous materials – Standards.

16.10.040    Storage, handling, use and transportation of hazardous materials – Inspections.

16.10.050    Violations, penalties, and enforcement.

16.10.060    Compliance required.

16.10.070    Building and site permit review and approval.

16.10.080    Inspection fees.


16.10.010 Definitions – Establishment of wellhead protection areas and wellhead protection program reference manual. 

A. Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following words have the meaning described:

“Administrator” means the city administrator or the administrator’s designee.

“City” means the city of Fairview.

“Council” means the Fairview city council.

“Hazardous materials” means those hazardous materials identified in the city’s reference manual.

“Person” means any natural person, association, trust, partnership, company, firm or corporation, or other entity.

“Reference manual” means the wellhead protection program reference manual.

“Wellfield protection areas” means those areas whose boundaries are described in the reference manual.

B. The council shall establish by resolution wellhead protection areas where the storage, handling, use and transportation of hazardous materials that could contaminate groundwater may be regulated. The council shall establish the boundaries of wellhead protection areas based on the information about aquifer dynamics. The administrator shall cause a map of all designated wellhead protection areas to be published and make such maps available to the public. 

C. The council, by resolution, shall adopt a reference manual applicable to all wellhead protection areas in the city. (Ord. 12-2002 § 2)


16.10.020 Storage, handling, use and transportation of hazardous materials – Reporting. 

The city shall require any person or business storing, handling, using or transporting hazardous materials within the wellhead protection areas to report to the city based on the standards and requirements established in this chapter and the reference manual. The reports shall address the following requirements: 

A. The types and quantity of hazardous materials stored, handled, used or transported;

B. Storage and containment provisions for hazardous materials;

C. A site plan indicating the location of hazardous materials manufactured, generated, stored, handled, used or transported;

D. The location of drains;

E. Capacities of containment and treatment systems; 

F. Utility shut-off;

G. Topographical information; and

H. Such other information as the city may require. (Ord. 12-2002 § 2)


16.10.030 Storage, handling, use and transportation of hazardous materials – Standards.

The city shall set standards in the reference manual for the hazardous materials that may be stored, handled, used or transported within the wellhead protection areas. The standards shall include:

A. The designation of materials as hazardous to water quality;

B. The quantity of hazardous materials that may be stored, handled, used, or transported within the wellhead protection area without reporting such materials to the city;

C. Requirements for the storage, handling, use, transportation and containment of such materials both inside and outside structures;

D. Requirements for equipment and devices to prevent and control spills or releases of such materials beyond containment vessels;

E. The schedule for submitting reports; and

F. Such other matters as the city deems necessary for the purpose of implementing this chapter. (Ord. 12-2002 § 2)


16.10.040 Storage, handling, use and transportation of hazardous materials – Inspections.

A. Within designated wellhead protection areas and on property where hazardous materials are or may be stored, handled, used or transported, the city may conduct inspections to ascertain compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the reference manual, including but not limited to the types, quantities and locations of hazardous materials, primary and secondary containment facilities, and the existence of spill prevention and spill control equipment or devices. 

B. Inspections will be used to determine if a person is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the reference manual. Inspections may be initiated as the result of a complaint, referral, a routine schedule for inspection, application for a business license, commencement of operations or if the administrator has reason to believe a violation exists. In the event an inspection results in the discovery of a violation, reinspection may occur to ensure compliance. 

C. Inspections may involve a review of facilities, equipment, structures, practices, operations, records and plans; interviews with operators; and photo documentation. A person shall allow the administrator at reasonable times and upon presentation of credentials, to:

1. Enter the premises where hazardous materials are being stored, handled, used or transported, or where records may be kept. A person shall make necessary arrangements to allow access to such premises or records without delay; 

2. Inspect any facilities, equipment, structures, practices and operations regulated by or required by this chapter and the reference manual; and

3. Have access to and copy any records that must be available on the premises under the provisions of this chapter and the reference manual.

D. The council delegates authority to make inspections for the purpose of enforcing the standards and requirements of this chapter and the reference manual to the administrator and any such person or entity as the administrator or the council may direct. (Ord. 12-2002 § 2)


16.10.050 Violations, penalties, and enforcement. 

A. Violations – Penalties.

1. It shall be unlawful to store, handle, use or transport hazardous materials in a manner contrary to the requirements of this chapter and the reference manual.

2. The storage, handling, use or transport of hazardous materials in a manner contrary to this chapter or the reference manual is a public nuisance within the scope of FMC 8.10.020(K).

3. Failure to submit a required report or failure to submit a complete report as required by FMC 16.10.020 and the reference manual shall be a violation.

4. Failure to comply with the requirements of FMC 16.10.040 relating to inspections shall be a violation.

5. Failure to develop, obtain approval, or meet the requirements of an approved compliance plan required by this chapter and the reference manual shall be a violation. 

6. The penalty for any violation of this chapter shall constitute a fine not to exceed $1,000, with each day of violation constituting a separate offense. The penalties set forth in this section are in addition to and not in lieu of civil remedies.

B. Enforcement.

1. The administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and the reference manual under FMC 8.10.070. The administrator may also enforce the provisions of this chapter by taking any action authorized by law of this city, the state of Oregon, or the United States.

2. Should a hazardous material be released, whether or not as a result of a violation or of a failure to correct a violation, the person and business responsible for such release shall be liable for all costs associated with cleaning up such release and the costs of any other action conducted to ensure that the Columbia South Shore wellfield is protected from contamination. 

3. To the maximum extent practicable the city will work cooperatively with a person to achieve voluntary compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the reference manual. (Ord. 12-2002 § 2)


16.10.060 Compliance required.

Persons or businesses not already in compliance with the standards and provisions of this chapter and the reference manual when adopted or amended shall bring their operations into compliance within the timeframe established in the reference manual. (Ord. 12-2002 § 2) 


16.10.070 Building and site permit review and approval. 

Plans for site alterations, construction, alterations, repairs, or other work involving or affecting the storage, handling, use, transportation or containment of hazardous materials shall be reviewed and approved by the administrator prior to issuance of a permit for site work or a building permit. Review shall be for conformance with the requirements of this chapter and the reference manual. (Ord. 12-2002 § 2)


16.10.080 Inspection fees. 

The council, by resolution, shall establish fees for the conduct of inspection, reinspection, permit review, reports, and other functions that may be undertaken by the city to administer or enforce this chapter. (Ord. 12-2002 § 2)


Chapter 16.15 EROSION CONTROL PLAN

Sections:

16.15.010    Adopted – Intent.


16.15.010 Adopted – Intent.

The city of Fairview does here adopt the City of Gresham’s “Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Manual,” revised January 2011* and attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, to promote and encourage construction practices which minimize the amount of disturbed land area and avoid or minimize work on steep slopes, the intent of which plan is to provide the following positive results:

A. Less chance of soil washing off the site and clogging streets, drain systems, and neighbors’ yards;

B. The number and size of erosion control measures required will be minimized;

C. The costs of maintaining erosion control facilities are minimized;

D. As much topsoil as possible is retained on concerned sites, making revegetation and landscaping easier to establish. (Ord. 4-2014 § 1; Ord. 3-1993 § 1.3)

*Code reviser’s note: The Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Manual is on file in the city clerk’s office.


Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS1

(Repealed by Ord. 6-2001)1

See generally, FMC Title 19, and specifically, Chapter 19.430 FMC, for provisions on land divisions and lot line adjustments. 


Title 18 HISTORIC PRESERVATION

Chapters:

18.05    General Standards

18.10    Historic Review Board

18.15    Historic Landmark Designation

18.20    Property Alteration, Construction, Moving and Demolition – Criteria and Procedures


Chapter 18.05 GENERAL STANDARDS

Sections:

18.05.010    Title.

18.05.020    Purpose.

18.05.030    Definitions.


18.05.010 Title.

This title shall be known and may be cited as the “Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of Fairview”. (Ord. 3-1990 § 1)


18.05.020 Purpose.

To promote the historic, educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public, and to safeguard the city’s historic and cultural heritage, through the preservation, restoration and protection of buildings, structures and appurtenances, sites, places and objects of historic interest within the city. (Ord. 3-1990 § 2)


18.05.030 Definitions.

A. “Alter” means to remove, add to, or otherwise change the appearance of any part of an historic property. Maintenance is not considered alteration of a property.

B. “Board” means the historic review board of the city.

C. “Demolish” means raze, destroy, dismantle, or in any other manner cause significant partial or total destruction of an historic property.

D. “District” means a geographic area possessing a significant concentration, linkage, continuity or design relationship of historically significant sites, buildings, structures, landscape features, or objects unified by past events or physical development.

E. “Ensemble” means a small district.

F. “Exterior” means all outside portions of an historic structure or building.

G. “Historic landmark” means a building, and/or site, structure, object, ensemble, landscape feature, thematic group or district designated as an historic landmark.

H. “Historic property” means any building, site, structure, object, ensemble, landscape feature, thematic group or district that:

1. Is an historic landmark;

2. Is the subject of a formal application of initiation for historic landmark designation;

3. Is listed on the National Register of Historic Places or recommended for nomination to the National Register by the State Advisory Committee on Historic Preservation; or

4. Is on the same tax lot as a structure or building either designated as an historic landmark or listed on the National Register of Historic Places and contributes to its historic character.

I. “Interior” means all portions of an historic structure or building that are not part of the exterior and which normally are accessible to the public.

J. “Landscape feature” means a decorative or functional alteration to land or vegetation, including trees, gardens, hedges, arbors, canopies, walkways, fences, retaining walls, water features, gazebos, pavilions, and similar site features.

K. “Maintenance” means upkeep or repair of historic property that does not change the property’s composition or appearance that is important to maintaining its historic significance, consistent with FMC 18.15.070(B).

L. “Major new landscaping” means a new structural landscape feature or significant planting on the site of an historic property. Significant plantings cover more than 25 percent of the area, or grow to over 10 feet in height and are located within 25 feet of an historic building or structure.

M. “New construction” means a new building, structure, parking area, or other improvement, on the same tract as an historic landmark, or structure or property listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

N. “Noncompatible property” means property in an historic district or ensemble that contains uses or improvements that detract from or are not harmonious with historic properties in that district or ensemble.

O. “Planning director” means the city administrator, or the person designated to supervise development and implementation of the city’s historic preservation programs or his/her designee.

P. “Rehabilitation” means the return of property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use and preserves or restores the property’s historic value.

Q. “Restoration” means the process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as they appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or the replacement of missing earlier work.

R. “Site” means the location of an historically or archaeologically significant event, activity, occupation, structure, object, or landscape feature, including existing buildings or structures on the site.

S. “Thematic group” means a group of resources linked through a common theme, not necessarily geographical. Examples include buildings designed by a famous architect, common landscape features, resources related by a significant development theme, and rare buildings of the same architectural style or era. (Ord. 3-1990 § 3)


Chapter 18.10 HISTORIC REVIEW BOARD

Sections:

18.10.010    Composition.

18.10.020    Officers – Meetings – Rules – Procedures.

18.10.030    Powers and duties.


18.10.010 Composition.

The planning commission shall serve as the historic review board. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 4.A)


18.10.020 Officers – Meetings – Rules – Procedures.

A. The officers of the board shall be the president and vice president of the planning commission. The president shall preside at meetings of the board and shall have the right to vote. The vice president shall, in case of absence or disability of the president, perform the duties of the president.

B. The board shall hold meetings at such times as it deems necessary, and shall also meet upon the call of the president. The time and place for meetings shall be fixed by rules of the board.

C. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of a majority of the members present shall be required for approval or disapproval of any motion or other action of the board.

D. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. At public hearings, all interested parties shall be entitled to appear and address the board.

E. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and bylaws. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 4.B)


18.10.030 Powers and duties.

The board shall:

A. Designate an historic landmark pursuant to FMC 18.15.010 through 18.15.060.

B. Remove historic landmark status when the landmark has deteriorated, been altered or destroyed, and no longer meets any of the criteria in FMC 18.15.010 through 18.15.060.

C. Act upon applications concerning moving or demolition of historic properties.

D. Review and act upon appeals of planning director decisions for historic property alterations, including appeals initiated by the board.

E. Take all steps necessary to preserve historic properties pursuant to this title which are consistent with the public health, safety, general welfare, and policies of the city.

F. Institute and support such programs and projects as will help make the citizens of the city and its visitors aware of its origin, development and historic significance.

G. Disseminate information to educate the public on preservation matters.

H. Review and make recommendations to the planning commission and council on historic aspects of plans, goals, policies, and programs that are being considered for adoption or review.

I. Adopt rules and guidelines as needed to implement sections of this title.

J. Encourage the development and maintenance of, and make available to the public, a copy of the local inventory of historic properties compiled in compliance with OAR 660.

K. Serve without compensation.

L. Establish regulations whereby any member who has a financial interest in any matter being considered by the board shall disqualify himself/herself from voting on such matters.

M. Seek and accept appropriations, grants and/or gifts to implement sections of this title.

N. When appropriate, employ history, archaeology, architectural history, architecture, or historic architecture preservation professionals to assist in the implementation of this title.

O. Review National Register nominations and provide comments to the State Historic Preservation Officer.

P. Ensure that appropriate city departments are aware of requirements of, and will attempt to comply with, federal, state and city historic preservation laws. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 4.C)


Chapter 18.15 HISTORIC LANDMARK DESIGNATION

Sections:

18.15.010    Initiation of process.

18.15.020    Notice – Public hearing – Decision.

18.15.030    Appeals.

18.15.040    Action on appeals.

18.15.050    Modifications to certain regulations.

18.15.060    Reapplication.

18.15.070    Historic landmark standards – Contents and recordation.


18.15.010 Initiation of process.

The historic landmark designation process may be initiated by the board, the council, or an owner of a proposed historic landmark. Any other person may initiate an historic landmark designation process if the proposed historic landmark is not the subject of a pending application for a building, moving, demolition or other development permit and if a supporting petition signed by 20 residents of the city is submitted with the application. A person may initiate the designation process by submitting an application in a manner prescribed by the planning director and paying the fee set by the city. In the case of an historic district, ensemble, or thematic group designation, privately initiated requests must be submitted by the owners of at least one-third of the privately owned property in the area sought to be designated. For purposes of this section, “owner” means the legal owner of record, or where there is a recorded land sale contract which is in force, the purchaser thereunder. If there is multiple ownership in a parcel of land, each consenting owner shall be counted as a fraction to the same extent as the interest of the owner in land bears in relation to the interests of the other owners. (Ord. 3-1990 § 5.A)


18.15.020 Notice – Public hearing – Decision.

A. Within 45 days of initiation by the city or the receipt of a complete application, unless the owner of the property agrees to a longer time period, the board shall conduct a public hearing to consider the proposed historic landmark designation. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the planning department shall mail a written notice of the hearing and nature of the application to the owner and occupants of the proposed historic landmark, the applicant, and to property owners and occupants within 300 feet of the perimeter of the proposed landmark. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, an announcement of the hearing and nature of the application shall also be published at least once in the local newspaper.

B. Within 15 days of completion of the hearing, the board shall decide whether to designate the property, structure, landscape feature, object or site as an historic landmark. The board shall not designate a district, ensemble or thematic group if more than half of the owners of privately owned property in the area sought to be designated file written objections to the proposed designation. The decision of the board shall be in writing and contain findings and conclusions on the integrity, historic significance, and the conflicting use determinations set out below. Any decision to designate shall include development standards as provided in FMC 18.15.070. The board shall designate the property, structure, landscape feature, object or site as an historic landmark if it finds that:

1. The proposed historic landmark has integrity of location, design, setting, materials or workmanship;

2. The proposed historic landmark has historic significance; and

3. The value of preserving the property, structure, object or site as an historic landmark outweighs the value of using the property, structure, landscape feature, object or site for the identified conflicting use, taking into consideration the economic, social, environmental and energy consequences of each alternative. If the owner of the proposed historic landmark supports the designation there is a rebuttable presumption that the value of preservation outweighs the value of using the proposed historic landmark for the identified conflicting use.

C. In determining whether the proposed historic landmark has integrity of location, design setting, materials or workmanship, the board shall consider whether:

1. The property is in its original setting and remains essentially as originally constructed or fabricated;

2. Sufficient original workmanship and material remain to show the construction technique and stylistic character of a given period;

3. The immediate setting of the property retains the planting scheme, plant materials or land uses of the relevant historic period or the landscaping is consistent with that period;

4. The property contributes materially to the architectural continuity or scheme of the street or neighborhood.

D. In order to determine that the proposed historic landmark has historic significance, the board must find that the proposed historic landmark meets one or more of the following criteria:

1. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of history. This association must be direct and the event or activities must have significantly affected past social behavior, historic trends or community, state or national development;

2. Is associated with the life of a person significant in the past. The proposed landmark, through length of occupancy or coincidence of term of occupancy, must be the place most importantly associated with a person or persons significant in local, state, or national history;

3. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction that was used in the past. The property may be a prime example of a stylistic or structural type of construction or design, or representative of a rare type or a type which once was common and which, due to attrition, is among the few examples remaining locally or in the state;

4. Represents the work of a master, i.e., is a noteworthy example of the work of a craftsman, builder, architect, or engineer significant in local, state or national history;

5. Possesses high artistic values in its workmanship and materials;

6. Yields, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history,

7. Is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

A significant and distinguishable entity under any of the above criteria may be designated even if its components lack individual distinction.

E. Identified conflicting uses for a proposed historic landmark shall be the actual use planned for the property by its owner or owners. In the absence of a development proposal, the identified conflicting use is the highest and best generic use (i.e. commercial, industrial, high-density residential, etc.) of the property, as improved with the most intensive development and structures allowed by the currently applicable zoning and comprehensive plan designation. “Highest and best use” means reasonable and probable uses that are physically possible and financially feasible that support the highest present value of the land.

F. Interior features of a nonresidential historic landmark may also be designated if the board finds that the feature:

1. Is in a building or structure that is normally open to the public; and

2. Is physically attached to the building or structure so as to become a part of the building or structure; and

3. Meets the integrity and historic significance criteria set out in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

G. A copy of the board’s decision shall be mailed to the owner and occupants of the proposed historic landmark, the applicant, and parties who have requested a copy within one day of the decision. Unless appealed, the board’s decision is effective on the eleventh day after it is rendered. (Ord. 3-1990 § 5.B)


18.15.030 Appeals.

Within 10 days of the board’s decision, the decision may be appealed to the council by the owner, applicant, an adversely affected person, a person who submitted oral or written testimony to the board, or a party entitled to notice under FMC 18.15.020(A). The appeal shall be on a form prescribed by the planning director, shall be based on the record, and shall state specifically how the board erred in its decision or decision-making. (Ord. 3-1990 § 5.C)


18.15.040 Action on appeals.

A. Unless the applicant and appellant agree to a longer time period, the council shall hold a public hearing to allow oral argument on an appeal within 40 days of its receipt. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice thereof to the applicant, appellant, owner, persons who submitted oral or written testimony to the board, and persons who requested notice of the board’s decision.

B. Unless the applicant and appellant agree to a longer time period, the council shall make a decision within 15 days of the hearing. The council may, by order and findings and conclusions therein, affirm, reverse, or modify in whole or in part, any decision or determination of the board. The council shall reverse or modify the decision of the board if it finds that the board failed to follow the procedures applicable to the matter before it in a manner that prejudiced the substantial rights of the appellant, made a decision not supported by substantial evidence in the whole record or improperly construed the applicable law. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant, owner, appellant, and persons who requested a copy. (Ord. 3-1990 § 5.D)


18.15.050 Modifications to certain regulations.

The board or council may modify regulations pertaining to signs, fence and wall provisions, general provisions regarding height, yards, area, lot width, frontage, depth, coverage, number of off-street parking spaces required, and regulations prescribing setbacks, in the final order designating historic landmark status if the modifications:

A. Are necessary to preserve the historic character, appearance or integrity of the proposed historic landmark; and

B. Are in accordance with the purposes of zoning and sign regulations. (Ord. 3-1990 § 5.E)


18.15.060 Reapplication.

When an application for historic landmark status has been denied, no new application for the same purpose shall be filed within one year of the date of that denial unless the board or council, whichever was responsible for denial, grants permission upon a showing of good cause. (Ord. 3-1990 § 5.F)


18.15.070 Historic landmark standards – Contents and recordation.

The board or council shall prescribe standards intended to preserve or enhance the unique characteristics of the proposed historic landmark in its final order designating historic landmark status. Standards prescribed shall include all the following:

A. A development section setting forth specific standards to be applied to exterior and interior alterations and new construction not otherwise addressed in FMC 18.15.010 through 18.15.060, or Chapter 18.20, Articles I or II.

B. A maintenance section setting forth the extent and types of repair and maintenance that may be undertaken without first obtaining an alteration permit.

C. A code modifications section based on the requirements in FMC 18.15.010 through 18.15.060 pertaining to modification of certain regulations and specifically listing what modifications to zoning and sign development code regulations are to be applied to the proposed historic landmark.

The city shall file a memorandum of the standards with the Multnomah County recorder. (Ord. 3-1990 § 6)


Chapter 18.20 PROPERTY ALTERATION, CONSTRUCTION, MOVING AND DEMOLITION – CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES

Sections:

Article I. Alteration

18.20.010    Permit required.

18.20.020    Preapplication conference.

18.20.030    Application submittal.

18.20.040    Notice.

18.20.050    Decision.

18.20.060    Notice of decision.

18.20.070    Effective date of decision.

18.20.080    Appeals.

18.20.090    Action on appeals.

18.20.100    Alteration to noncompatible property within districts and ensembles.

18.20.110    Expiration of alteration approval.

18.20.120    Refiling of alteration applications.

18.20.130    Performance contract.

Article II. New Construction and Major New Landscaping

18.20.140    Approval required.

18.20.150    Preapplication conference.

18.20.160    Application submittal.

18.20.170    Notice.

18.20.180    Decision.

18.20.190    Notice of decision.

18.20.200    Effective date of the decision.

18.20.210    Appeals.

Article III. Moving and Demolition

18.20.220    Permit required.

18.20.230    Preapplication requirements – Demolition.

18.20.240    Application submittal.

18.20.250    Notice – Public hearing – Decision.

18.20.260    Record of demolished and moved historical properties.

18.20.270    Appeals.

18.20.280    New location designation.

18.20.290    Historic landmark – Removal of landmark designation.

18.20.300    Penalties.

Article I. Alteration 


18.20.010 Permit required.

Unless allowed by the standards imposed under FMC 18.15.070, no person may alter an historic property unless an alteration application has been approved under this section and a permit has been obtained from the building department. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7)


18.20.020 Preapplication conference.

Prior to submission of an alteration application, the applicant shall confer with the city staff on the requirements of this code. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.A)


18.20.030 Application submittal.

An alteration application shall be submitted by the applicant in a manner prescribed by the planning director. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.B)


18.20.040 Notice.

Within 10 days after receipt of a complete alteration application, the owner and occupants of the historic property and the owners and occupants of properties within 300 feet of the perimeter of the subject property shall be notified that an alteration application has been filed. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.C)


18.20.050 Decision.

Unless the applicant agrees to a longer time period, the board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny any alteration request within 30 days after receipt of a complete application. The decision shall be in writing, and contain findings on the criteria set out below. The board shall allow the alteration if it finds that:

A. The alteration is consistent with the standards applied to the property pursuant to FMC 18.15.070.

B. Only minimal future alterations of the historic property and its site will be necessary to continue the proposed use of the property.

C. The alteration will not impair or change the essential historic form and integrity of the historic property. The distinguishing historic qualities, features or character of the historic property and its site will not be impaired or altered unless:

1. There is an immediate hazard to public safety and no alternative approach exists which would retain the features or minimize the impact of the proposed alteration;

2. There are mandatory building or handicap codes or requirements, and it is not reasonably possible to retain the historic features or minimize the impact of the proposed alteration and also to comply with those codes or requirements; or

3. The only alternative to the alteration would be demolition of the historic property.

D. The alteration will not create an earlier historic appearance which is different than the remainder of the property or which has no historic basis.

E. Distinctive stylistic features and examples of skilled craftsmanship have been retained to the greatest extent possible.

F. The alteration is compatible in design, size, arrangement, proportion, detail, scale, color, texture, material and character with the rest of the historic property and the nearby area.

G. Reasonable conditions may be imposed in granting an alteration application. Particular conditions may be imposed based on the following considerations:

1. Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced whenever possible. Deteriorated architectural features that cannot be repaired should be replaced with material which matches the original material in design, color, texture and other visual qualities. Whenever possible, repair or replacement of architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features and composition of materials, substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of architectural elements from other buildings or structures.

2. When surface cleaning of buildings or structures takes place, it should be undertaken with the gentlest effective means possible. Sandblasting and other abrasive cleaning methods that may damage the historic property should not be employed.

3. Every reasonable effort should be made to protect known archaeological resources affected by and adjacent to any alteration project. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.D)


18.20.060 Notice of decision.

The city shall mail a copy of the planning director’s decision within one day of the decision to board, owner and occupants of the proposed historic property, the applicant, and parties who have requested a copy. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.E)


18.20.070 Effective date of decision.

Unless appealed, the planning director’s decision is effective on the eleventh day after it is rendered. Before proceeding with an alteration, the property owner shall obtain the appropriate building permits. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.F)


18.20.080 Appeals.

Within 10 days of the planning director’s decision, it may be appealed to the board by the applicant, an adversely affected person, an individual board member, the board on its own motion, or a party entitled to notice. The appeal shall be on a form prescribed by the planning director and, except when filed by the board or an individual board member, shall state specifically how the planning director failed to properly evaluate the alteration request application or make a decision consistent with applicable criteria. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.G)


18.20.090 Action on appeals.

A. Unless the applicant and appellant agree to a longer time period, the board shall hold a hearing to allow oral argument and additional testimony on an appeal within 30 days of its receipt. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the planning department shall mail notice thereof to the applicant, appellant, and persons who requested notice of the planning director’s decision.

B. Unless the applicant and appellant agree to a longer time period, the board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an alteration request within 15 days of the hearing. The decision shall be in writing and contain findings and conclusions on the alteration approval criteria set out in FMC 18.20.050. The board’s action is final and must be agreed to by a majority of the members present at the hearing. A tie board vote shall result in affirming the decision of the planning director. The planning department shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant, appellant, and persons who requested a copy. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.H)


18.20.100 Alteration to noncompatible property within districts and ensembles.

Alteration to historically noncompatible property within the boundaries of an historic district or ensemble shall be governed by the following criteria instead of the standards set forth in FMC 18.20.050:

A. Design guidelines adopted by the board at the time of designation of the district or ensemble.

B. The alterations do not detract from the historic character of the district or ensemble through their design, arrangement, proportion, size, scale, detail, color, texture, and material. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.I)


18.20.110 Expiration of alteration approval.

An alteration approval shall terminate if: construction has not begun within 18 months after the effective date of approval; or construction is not completed within 24 months of the date it began or within 60 months for phased projects. The planning director or board may extend the commencement or completion time period if an extension request is filed prior to the termination of the applicable time period. If an approval is terminated, a new application must be submitted and approved prior to obtaining a building permit for the alteration. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.J)


18.20.120 Refiling of alteration applications.

When an alteration application has been denied, no application for the same or a substantially similar alteration of the historic property shall be filed within one year of the denial unless the planning director or board, whichever denied the application, allows refiling upon a showing of good cause. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.K)


18.20.130 Performance contract.

A. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall execute a performance contract guaranteeing compliance with the approval conditions and adherence to the approved plans for the alteration. The performance contract shall be prepared by the city, be executed by the applicant and city, and shall bind the applicant and the applicant’s successors in interest. A memorandum of the contract shall be filed by the city in the office of the Multnomah County recorder.

B. After execution of the performance contract, the planning director or board may permit modifications to the approved alteration plans if the changes are consistent with the remainder of the approved plans and the approved conditions. Depending on the nature of the changes, they may also require a building permit. A new alteration approval is necessary for modifications that are inconsistent with the approved plans and conditions.

C. If an applicant breaches the performance contract the city may enforce the contract by any or all legal means.

D. The city shall terminate the contract and notify the Multnomah County recorder accordingly when the obligations of the performance contract have been completed, or when alteration approval is revoked because the applicant does not commence the alterations within the required time period. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 7.L)

Article II. New Construction and Major New Landscaping


18.20.140 Approval required.

No person shall construct new construction projects or major new landscaping without first obtaining approval according to the procedures specified under this section. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 8)


18.20.150 Preapplication conference.

Prior to submittal of a new construction or major new landscaping application, the applicant shall confer with the city staff on requirements of this code. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 8.A)


18.20.160 Application submittal.

Applications and related information shall be submitted by the applicant in a manner prescribed by the planning director. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 8.B)


18.20.170 Notice.

Within 10 days after receipt of a complete application, the owners and occupants of the historic property and of properties within 300 feet of the perimeter of the subject property shall be notified that an application has been filed. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 8.C)


18.20.180 Decision.

Unless the applicant agrees to a longer time period, the planning director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for new construction and/or major landscaping projects within 30 days after receipt of a complete application. The decision shall be in writing, shall be forwarded to the board, and shall be based on findings that address all the following criteria:

A. Is consistent with the reasons for the historic landmark designation as set forth in the designation decision.

B. The adverse and beneficial effects of the proposed new structure on the character of the historic property.

C. The general compatibility of the exterior design, type, arrangement, proportion, size, detail, scale, color, texture, and materials of the proposed new building, structure, object, or landscaping with the character of the historic property.

D. Development standards adopted by the board at the time of landmark designation. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 8.D)


18.20.190 Notice of decision.

The city shall mail a copy of the planning director’s decision within one day of the decision to the board, the owner, and occupants of the proposed historic property, the applicant, and parties who have requested a copy. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 8.E)


18.20.200 Effective date of the decision.

Unless appealed, the planning director’s decision is effective on the eleventh day after it is rendered. Before proceeding with the construction or landscaping, the property owner shall obtain the permits required by FMC 18.20.220 through 18.20.280. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 8.F)


18.20.210 Appeals.

Appeals shall be filed and decided in the same manner as provided by Article I of this chapter relating to alteration appeals. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 8.G)

Article III. Moving and Demolition


18.20.220 Permit required.

No person may move or demolish an historic property unless the board or council has approved an application to do so and a building permit has been obtained from the building official. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 9.A)


18.20.230 Preapplication requirements – Demolition.

Prior to submittal of an application to demolish an historic property, the owner shall endeavor to prepare an economically feasible plan for its preservation. At a minimum, the owner shall solicit purchase offers for the historic property by giving notice of sale of the property as follows:

A. Listing the property in the local newspaper at least two times;

B. Posting and maintaining a visible for sale sign on the property beginning at least 90 days before submitting an application;

C. Making a financial prospectus on the status of the property available to interested persons beginning at least 90 days before submitting an application; and

D. Listing the property in at least two preservation newspapers, websites, or magazines at least 30 days before submitting an application. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 9.B)


18.20.240 Application submittal.

An application shall be submitted in a manner prescribed by the planning director. A demolition application shall include sufficient proof that the pre-application requirements listed in FMC 18.20.230 have been completed. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 9.C)


18.20.250 Notice – Public hearing – Decision.

A. Unless the applicant agrees to a longer time period, the board shall conduct a public hearing within 45 days following receipt of a complete application. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the city shall post a notice summarizing the application and stating the time and place of the hearing in at least three places within 300 feet of the affected property and mail this notice to the owners and occupants of the historic property, the applicant, and to the owners and occupants of property within 300 feet of the perimeter of the affected property.

B. Within 15 days following completion of the hearing, the board shall decide whether to approve or postpone the moving or demolition application. The decision of the board shall be in writing and contain findings and conclusions. The board shall approve the application unless the board finds that a postponement will likely result in preservation of the historic property or retention of the historic property at its current site. A postponement shall be for a maximum of 120 days from the time a complete application is filed. The board may consider the following in assessing the likelihood of preservation or retention:

1. The state of repair of the historic property and the financial and physical feasibility of rehabilitation, moving or leaving the property in its current state or location.

2. The effects of the moving upon the use and development of the historic property.

3. The marketability of the property and the willingness of the property owner to sell the property.

C. The city shall mail a copy of the board’s decision within one day of the decision to the owner and occupants of the historic property, the applicant, and parties who have requested a copy.

D. Unless appealed, board decisions are effective on the eleventh day after they are rendered. Before moving or demolishing an historic property, the applicant shall obtain the appropriate permits. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 9.D)


18.20.260 Record of demolished and moved historical properties.

If an historical property is to be demolished or moved, the board shall mitigate the loss by requiring the owner to produce one or more of the following: archivally sound photographs of the historic property and its site; measured architectural drawings of the historic property and its designated historic features; and additional graphic history, data, and commemorative materials. The documentation materials shall be the property of the city or its assignee. The board may also require that certain specific artifacts, architectural features, materials, or equipment be preserved. The board shall determine where the documentation is to be deposited and where any artifacts, architectural features, materials, or equipment saved from the building or structure are to be stored. The board may assign documentation and storage costs for no more than two years to the historic property owner. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 9.E)


18.20.270 Appeals.

Appeals shall be filed and decided in the same manner as provided by FMC 18.15.010 through 18.15.060 relating to designation appeals. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 9.F)


18.20.280 New location designation.

When an historic property is moved to a new location, the historic property status is automatically retained for that property at the new site unless the board, using the process required for designation, determines that landmark designation is no longer appropriate. If the property retains historic property status at the new site, the board may review and modify the development standards and designation as appropriate, using the processes required for designation. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 9.G)


18.20.290 Historic landmark – Removal of landmark designation.

A. If a historic landmark is demolished or removed, the landmark site is automatically removed from landmark status unless:

1. The landmark was part of a district or ensemble designated as an historic landmark; or

2. The site itself was designated as a significant feature of an historic landmark; or

3. Other buildings, structures, or objects on the property are historic landmarks.

B. If an historic landmark is allowed to deteriorate or be altered to the extent that it no longer meets the criteria for landmark designation, the board shall notify the owner that it will consider removal of landmark status. The process, decision-making criteria, and appeal procedures and rights shall be the same as provided by FMC 18.15.010 through 18.15.060 relating to designations. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 10)


18.20.300 Penalties.

Violations of this chapter, except FMC 18.20.290, are punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each day the violation exists. In addition, the city attorney, upon request, shall institute any necessary civil proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, except FMC 18.20.290. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-1990 § 11)


Title 19 DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters:

Article I. Introduction to the Development Code

19.05    General

19.10    Introduction

19.12    General Administration

19.13    Definitions

19.14    Enforcement

Article II. Land Use Districts

19.20    Land Use District Administration

19.25    Agricultural Holding Zone (F-2)

19.30    Residential (R) District

19.60    Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District

19.65    Town Center Commercial (TCC) District

19.70    Corridor Commercial (CC) District

19.80    Light Industrial (LI) District

19.85    General Industrial (GI) District

19.95    Airport Overlay

19.100    Culturally Sensitive Lands

19.105    Floodplain Overlay

19.106    Natural Resource Regulations

19.107    South Fairview Lake Design Overlay

19.108    Community Service/Parks Overlay

19.110    Village General Provisions

19.115    Village Single-Family (VSF)

19.120    Village Townhouse Residential (VTH)

19.125    Village Apartment (VA)

19.130    Village Office (VO)

19.135    Village Commercial (VC) and Mixed Use (VMU)

19.140    Village General Standards

19.145    Special Development Standards – VSF, VTH and VA Zones

19.150    Special Development Standards – VO, VC and VMU Zones

19.155    Village Trail System Plan

Article III. Design Standards

19.160    Design Standards Administration

19.162    Access and Circulation

19.163    Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls

19.164    Vehicle and Bicycle Parking

19.165    Public Facilities Standards

19.170    Sign Regulations

19.200    Family Day Care Providers in a Residential Zone

19.205    Amendments

19.230    Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks

19.245    Telecommunications Facilities

19.250    Minimum Densities

Article IV. Applications and Review Procedures

19.400    Administration of Land Use and Development Review

19.412    Description of Permit Procedures

19.413    Procedures

19.414    Appeal Process

19.415    Amendments to Decisions

19.416    Repealed

19.417    Repealed

19.418    Neighborhood Meetings

19.420    Development Review and Site Design Review

19.422    Applicability

19.423    Development Review Approval Criteria

19.424    Site Design Review – Application Review Procedure

19.425    Site Design Review – Application Submission Requirements

19.426    Site Design Review – Approval Criteria

19.427    Bonding and Assurances

19.428    Development in Accordance with Permit Approval

19.430    Land Divisions and Lot Line Adjustments

19.440    Conditional Use Permits

19.450    Master Planned Developments

19.460    Repealed

19.470    Land Use District Map and Text Amendments

19.480    Code Interpretations

19.490    Miscellaneous Permits (Temporary Uses, Home Occupations, Others)

Article V. Exceptions to Code Standards

19.510    Introduction

19.520    Variances

19.530    Nonconforming Uses and Developments


Chapter 19.05 GENERAL

Sections:

19.05.010    Title.

19.05.020    Purpose.

19.05.030    Scope and compliance.

19.05.040    Zoning map.


19.05.010 Title.

This title shall be known as the “Fairview Zoning Ordinance and Code.” (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.05.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to establish city regulations governing and guiding the development and use of land in the city of Fairview and in accordance with the Fairview Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.05.030 Scope and compliance.

Any building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used, possessed, or occupied, and any building, structure, or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered only in accordance with the provisions of this title and other applicable city ordinances. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.05.040 Zoning map.

Zoning districts are as mapped on the official zoning map and is hereby incorporated as part of this title. Zone boundaries shall run along streets, alleys or lot lines unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.10 INTRODUCTION

Sections:

19.10.010    How to use the development code.


19.10.010 How to use the development code.

Welcome to the City of Fairview Development Code. This is a comprehensive land use and development code that governs all of the land within the incorporated limits of the city of Fairview. The five articles of the code are used together to review land use applications. They are organized as follows:

A. Article I. In addition to this brief introduction, Article I provides definitions for selected terms and information on the legal construction of the code. It also explains the city authority to enforce the development code.

B. Article II. Every parcel, lot, and tract of land within the city’s incorporated boundaries is also within a “land use district.” (Land use districts are shown on the city’s official zoning map.) Article II identifies the land uses that are permitted within each district, and the standards that apply to each type of land use (e.g., lot standards, setbacks, and use-specific design standards). As required by state law, the zones or “land use districts” conform to the city of Fairview’s Comprehensive Plan. The districts reserve land for planned land uses, provide compatibility between different uses, and implement planned housing densities. Overlay districts reflect special conditions that add special conditions, criteria or standards to uses within these areas.

C. Article III. The design standards contained in Article III apply throughout the city. They are used in preparing development plans, and reviewing applications, to ensure compliance with city standards for access and circulation, landscaping, parking, public facilities, surface water management, housing densities, and sensitive lands.

D. Article IV. This article provides all of the application requirements and procedures for obtaining permits required by this code. Four types of permit procedures are covered: Type I (nondiscretionary, “ministerial” decision); Type II (limited discretionary, “administrative” decision); Type III (discretionary, “quasi-judicial” decision with public hearing); and Type IV (“legislative” decision by city council).

E. Article V. This article provides standards and procedures for variances and nonconforming situations (i.e., existing uses or development that do not comply with the code). This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The city’s varied geography, and complexities of land development, requires flexibility. Article V provides that flexibility, while maintaining the purposes and intent of the code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.12 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

19.12.010    Severability.

19.12.020    Compliance and scope.

19.12.030    Consistency with plan and laws.

19.12.040    Use of a development.

19.12.050    Pre-existing approvals.

19.12.060    Building permit and certificate of occupancy.

19.12.070    Official action.


19.12.010 Severability.

The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this title. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.12.020 Compliance and scope.

A. Compliance with the Provisions in the Development Code. Land and structures may be used or developed by construction, reconstruction, alteration, occupancy, use or otherwise, only as this development code (“code”) or any amendment thereto permits. No plat shall be recorded or no building permit shall be issued without compliance with the provisions of this code.

B. Obligation by Successor. The requirements of this code apply to the owner(s) of record, persons undertaking the development or the use of land, and to those persons’ successors in interest.

C. Most Restrictive Regulations Apply. Where this code imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.

D. Variances. Variances shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 19.520 FMC.

E. Transfer of Development Standards Prohibited. No lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this code for one use shall be a required lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area for another use, except as otherwise specifically allowed by this code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.12.030 Consistency with plan and laws.

Each development and use application and other procedure initiated under this code shall be consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan of the city of Fairview as implemented by this code, and with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. All provisions of this code shall be construed in conformity with the adopted comprehensive plan. This provision does not create an independent requirement for additional findings of compliance with the Comprehensive Plan unless a particular Comprehensive Plan provision is directly applicable to the proposed request. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.12.040 Use of a development.

A development shall be used only for a lawful use. A lawful use of a development is one that is permitted by this code (including nonconforming uses), subject to Chapter 19.530 FMC, and is not prohibited by law. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.12.050 Pre-existing approvals.

This section describes the status of development proposals approved under earlier city or county codes. The “effective date” of the revised code will be on the cover page.

A. Legality of Pre-existing Approvals. Developments, including subdivisions, projects requiring development review or site design review approval, or other development applications for which approvals were granted prior to the effective date of this code, may occur pursuant to such approvals; except that modifications to development approvals shall comply with Chapter 19.415 FMC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval.

B. Subsequent Development Applications. All development proposals and applications received by the city administrator after the adoption of this code shall be subject to review for conformance with the standards under this code or as otherwise provided by state law. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.12.060 Building permit and certificate of occupancy.

A. Building Permit. A building permit shall not be issued until the city administrator has issued a development permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.400 FMC, Administration of Land Use and Development Review, or otherwise found that a development permit is not required.

B. Certificate of Occupancy Required. To ensure completion of a development or use in the manner approved, a development shall not be occupied and a use shall not begin until the city administrator or his or her designee has issued a certificate of occupancy (except for single-family residences which shall require a final inspection) following completion of the work in substantial conformance to the applicable land use and building permits.

C. Prior to Final Completion. Prior to the final completion of all work, a certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of the structure conditioned upon further work being completed by a date certain or other satisfactory assurance such as bonds, cash deposits, etc. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.12.070 Official action.

A. Official Action. All officials, departments, employees (including contractor-officials) of the city vested with authority to issue permits or grant approvals shall adhere to and require conformance with this code, and shall issue no permit or grant approval for any development or use which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed to carry out this code.

B. Severability. Any permit or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this code shall be void.

C. Notice. The failure of any person to receive mailed notice or failure to post a notice shall not invalidate any actions pursuant to this code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.13 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

19.13.010    “A” definitions.

19.13.020    “B” definitions.

19.13.030    “C” definitions.

19.13.040    “D” definitions.

19.13.050    “E” definitions.

19.13.060    “F” definitions.

19.13.070    “G” definitions.

19.13.080    “H” definitions.

19.13.090    “I” definitions.

19.13.100    “J” definitions.

19.13.110    “K” definitions.

19.13.120    “L” definitions.

19.13.130    “M” definitions.

19.13.140    “N” definitions.

19.13.150    “O” definitions.

19.13.160    “P” definitions.

19.13.170    “Q” definitions.

19.13.180    “R” definitions.

19.13.190    “S” definitions.

19.13.200    “T” definitions.

19.13.210    “U” definitions.

19.13.220    “V” definitions.

19.13.230    “W” definitions.

19.13.240    “X” definitions.

19.13.250    “Y” definitions.

19.13.260    “Z” definitions.


19.13.010 “A” definitions.

“Abutting” means contiguous or adjoining. It shall include the terms “adjacent,” “adjoining” and “contiguous.”

“Access easement” means an easement recorded for the purpose of providing vehicle, bicycle, and/or pedestrian access from a public street to a parcel across intervening property under separate ownership from the parcel being provided access.

“Access management” means the control of street (or highway) access for the purpose of improving the efficiency, safety and/or operation of the roadway for vehicles; may include prohibiting, closing, or limiting direct vehicle access to a roadway from abutting properties, either with physical barriers (curbs, medians, etc.) or by land dedication or easement.

“Accessible” means approachable and usable by people with disabilities; complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

“Accessory dwelling” means an interior, attached, or detached dwelling unit that is used in connection with, or that is accessory to, a single-family dwelling.

Accessory Use/Accessory Structure. “Accessory uses and structures” are of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot. Typical accessory structures in the residential district include detached garages, sheds, workshops, greenhouses and similar structures.

“Adjacent” means abutting or located directly across a street right-of-way.

“Administrative” means a discretionary action or permit decision made without a public hearing, but requiring public notification and an opportunity for appeal.

“Adverse impact” means negative effect of development that can be measured (e.g., noise, air pollution, vibration, dust, etc.).

“Affordable” means housing affordable to a certain percentage of the population earning a specified level of income and spending no more than 30 percent of their income on housing expenses. For more information, refer to the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Oregon Department of Housing and Community Services.

“Agriculture,” as used in this code, is the same as “farm use.”

“Alley” means a narrow street (10-foot to 20-foot right-of-way), usually a thoroughfare through the middle of the block giving access to the rear of lots or buildings, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public.

“Alteration” means any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy.

“Ambient” means something that surrounds, as in the level of light, dust or noise.

“Arcade” means an arched or covered passageway, often along building fronts or between streets.

“Arterial” means an arterial street. Arterials form the primary roadway network within a region, providing a continuous road system that distributes traffic between cities, neighborhoods, and districts. Generally, arterials are high capacity roadways.

“Articulate/articulation” means the jointing and interrelating of building spaces through offsets, projections, overhangs, extensions and similar features.

“Automobile-oriented use” means automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of the use such as drive-in restaurants, quick access or auto repair businesses. (Ord. 7-2018 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.020 “B” definitions.

“Basement” means any floor level below the first story in a building; a floor level in a building having only one floor shall be classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as defined in the building code.

“Bed and breakfast inn” provides accommodations (three or more rooms) plus breakfast on a daily or weekly basis in an operator- or owner-occupied home that is primarily used for this purpose. This use is operated as a commercial enterprise, encourages direct bookings from the public, and is intended to provide a major source of income to the proprietors. This level includes inns that operate restaurants offering meals to the general public as well as to overnight guests.

“Berm” means a small rise or hill in a landscape which is intended to buffer or visually screen certain developments, such as parking areas.

“Beveled building corner” means a rounded or flat edge on a building, usually at a street corner; may include an entrance, windows, pillars, or other architectural details and ornamentation.

“Block” means a parcel of land or group of lots bounded by intersecting streets.

“Boarding, lodging or rooming house” means any building or portion thereof, containing not more than five guest rooms where rent is paid.

“Bollard” means a post of metal, wood or masonry that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians and/or bicycles). Bollards are usually decorative, and may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting.

“Boulevard” means a street with broad open space areas, typically with planted medians.

“Building division” means a city governmental unit charged with the administration and enforcement of the city of Fairview and Oregon specialty codes, including building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical.

“Building footprint” means the outline of a building, as measured around its foundation.

Building Height. See zoning districts.

“Building mass” means the aggregate size of a building, or the total height, width, and depth of all its parts.

“Building pad” means a vacant building site on a lot with other building sites.

“Building scale” means the dimensional relationship of a building and its component parts to other buildings.

“Bulkhead” means the wall below ground-floor windows on a building (i.e., may be differentiated from other walls by using different materials or detailing).

“Business” means any profession, trade, occupation, commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind or nature including those carried on for profit or for nonprofit purposes, but excluding federally tax exempt organizations and nonprofit religious organizations. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.030 “C” definitions.

“Capacity” means maximum holding or service ability, as used for transportation, utilities, parks and other public facilities.

“Centerline radius” means the radius of a centerline of a street right-of-way.

“Childcare center, family childcare” means facilities that provide care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours. “Family child care providers” provide care for not more than 12 children in a home.

“City administrator” means the appointed chief administrative officer or a designee of the city who is generally responsible for the administration of all city ordinances.

“Clear and objective” relates to decision criteria and standards that do not involve substantial discretion or individual judgment in their application.

“Collector” means type of street which serves traffic within the commercial, industrial and residential neighborhood areas. Collectors connect local neighborhoods or districts to the arterial network. Collectors help form part of the grid system.

“Commercial” means land use involving buying/selling of goods or services as the primary activity.

“Common area” means land commonly owned to include open space, landscaping or recreation facilities (e.g., typically owned by homeowners associations).

“Conditional use” means a use which requires a conditional use permit.

“Consensus” means agreement or consent among participants.

“Conservation easement” means an easement that protects identified conservation values of the land, such as wetlands, woodlands, significant trees, floodplains, wildlife habitat, and similar resources.

“Constrained slope” means land on slope that is between 15 to 20 percent.

“Corner radius” means the radius of a street corner, as measured around the curb or edge of pavement.

“Cornice” means the projecting horizontal element that tops a wall or flat roof.

“Cottage” means a small house that may be used as an accessory dwelling.

“Court” means a space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building.

“Courtyard” means a court or enclosure adjacent to a building, which usually provides amenities such as gardens, planters, seating, or art.

“Curb cut” means a driveway opening where a curb is provided along a street. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.040 “D” definitions.

“Deciduous” means a tree or shrub that sheds its leaves seasonally.

“Dedication” means the designation of land by its owner for any public use as shown on a subdivision plat or deed. The term may also be used for dedications to a private homeowners association.

“Density(ies)” means a measurement of the number of dwelling units in relationship to a specified amount of land. As used in this code, density does not include land devoted to street right-of-way. Density is a measurement used generally for residential uses.

“Developable” means buildable land, as identified by the city’s Comprehensive Plan, includes both vacant land and land likely to be redeveloped.

“Development” means all improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, grading, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or landscapes.

“Discontinued/abandoned use” means a use that physically vacates the land it was on, cessation of an allowed activity, or use terminated at the end of any lease or contract.

“Discretionary” describes a permit action or decision that involves substantial judgment or discretion.

“Drip-line” means an imaginary line around a tree or shrub at a distance from the trunk equivalent to the canopy (leaf and branch) spread.

“Drive lane/travel lane” means an improved (e.g., paved) driving surface for one lane of vehicles.

“Driveway” means areas that provide vehicular access to a site, except for public and private streets. A driveway begins at the property line and extends into the site. Driveways do not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas in parking space areas.

“Driveway apron/approach” means the edge of a driveway where it abuts a public way; usually constructed of concrete.

Drought-Tolerant/Drought-Resistant Plants. Refer to Sunset Western Garden Book (latest edition).

“Duplex” means a building with two attached housing units on one lot or parcel.

Dwelling Unit. A “dwelling unit” is a living facility that includes provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by the Uniform Building Code, for not more than one family, or a congregate residence for 10 or less persons. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.050 “E” definitions.

“Easement” means a right of usage of real property granted by an owner to the public or to specific persons, firms, and corporations.

“Elevation” refers to a building face, or scaled drawing of the same, from grade to roof ridgeline.

Environmentally Sensitive Areas. See “sensitive lands.”

“Established residential area” means an area within the residential district that was platted prior to the effective date of a land ordinance.

“Evidence” means application materials, plans, data, testimony and other factual information used to demonstrate compliance or noncompliance with a code standard or criterion. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.060 “F” definitions.

“Facade” means the outside wall of a structure designated as either front, rear, or side facade. The front facade does not include front porches, bay windows or other similar architectural features.

“Facility, higher education” means a college or university supported by public or private funds, tuitions, contributions or endowments, giving advanced academic instruction as approved by a recognized accrediting agency, excluding elementary and high schools, and trade and commercial schools.

Family Day Care. See “Child care center, family childcare.”

“Farm use” means the current employment of land for the primary purpose of obtaining a profit in money by raising, harvesting and selling crops or the feeding, breeding, management and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals or honeybees or for dairying and the sale of dairy products or any other agricultural or horticultural use or animal husbandry or any combination thereof.

“Fence, sight-obscuring” means a barrier consisting of wood, metal, concrete or masonry arranged in such a way as to obstruct or obscure vision, or to enclose an area.

“Fire apparatus lane” means as defined by the Uniform Fire Code.

“Flag lot” means a lot or parcel which has access to a road, street or easement, by means of a narrow strip of lot or easement.

Floor Area Ratio. “Floor area ratio (FAR)” is measured by dividing the gross enclosed floor area of a building by the land area of the development.

“Frontage” means the dimension of a property line abutting a public or private street.

“Frontage street or road” means a minor street which parallels an arterial street in order to provide access to abutting properties and minimize direct access onto the arterial.

Front Yard Orientation. See zoning districts. The “front yard orientation” on corner lots is determined by the location of the main building entrance.

“Functional classification” means the classification given to streets (e.g., “local/collector/arterial”) by the city’s Transportation System Plan, by adopted county plans, and Oregon Department of Transportation. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.070 “G” definitions.

“Grade” means the degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.

“Grade (adjacent ground elevation)” means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, or, when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.

“Grade, finished” means the final or finish elevation of the ground surface after the development.

“Grade, natural” means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations.

“Grading” means any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling of earth, rock or land, including the land in its cut or filled condition.

“Ground cover” means a plant material or nonplant material (e.g., mulch, bark chips/dust) that is used to cover bare ground. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.080 “H” definitions.

“Hammerhead turnaround” means a “T” or “L” shaped dead-end street that allows for vehicles to turn around.

“Hardscape” means nonplant landscape materials, including pathways, decorative pavers, benches, drinking fountains, arbors, pergolas, playgrounds, plazas, and similar amenities.

“Historic building” means any building or structure on the city’s historic buildings inventory and so designated by action of the city.

“Home occupation,” “home occupation site” means small commercial ventures which could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters or which, by the nature of the venture, are appropriate in scale and impact to be operated within a residence.

“Hotel” means any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes of guests.

“Human-scale design/development” means site and building design elements that are dimensionally related to pedestrians, such as: small building spaces with individual entrances (e.g., as is typical of downtowns and main street developments); larger buildings which have articulation and detailing to break up large masses; narrower streets with tree canopies; smaller parking areas or parking areas broken up into small components with landscaping; and pedestrian amenities, such as sidewalks, plazas, outdoor seating, lighting, weather protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), and similar features. These features are all generally smaller in scale than those that are primarily intended to accommodate automobile traffic. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.090 “I” definitions.

“Impervious surface” means development which does not allow for water infiltration (e.g., pavement, roofs, etc.).

“Incidental and subordinate to” means a use or portion of a development that is secondary to, and less apparent, than the primary use or other portion of the development.

“Infill” means a dwelling that is proposed on land that is zoned for residential use where at least 75 percent of the abutting parcels have a dwelling, but not counting any parcel that is too small for a residence and any parcel that is large enough that it can be divided into four or more lots. These standards also apply where a home is removed to make way for a new house, manufactured home duplex and attached house. These standards do not apply to a dwelling that is proposed on land that is large enough that it can be divided into four or more lots. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.100 “J” definitions.

“Junk yard” means the use of more than 200 square feet of any lot for the dismantling or “wrecking” or for the storage or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.110 “K” definitions.

“Kennel or other animal boarding place” means any establishment or premises where five or more dogs over one year of age are kept for any purpose whatsoever, or any establishment or premises where dogs are bred, boarded or offered for sale as a commercial business. “Other animal boarding place” as used in this title means and includes any establishment or premises where five or more cats or other animals are bred, boarded or offered for sale as a commercial business. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.120 “L” definitions.

“Land division” means the process of dividing land to create parcels or lots.

“Land use” means the main activity that occurs on a piece of land, or the structure in which the activity occurs (e.g., residential, commercial, mixed use, industrial, open space, recreation, street rights-of-way, vacant, etc.).

Land Use District. As used in this title, a “land use district” is the same as a zone district.

“Landing” means a level part of a staircase, as at the end of a flight of stairs.

“Landscaping” means any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, plazas, works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like. Landscaping also includes irrigation systems, mulches, topsoil, and revegetation or the preservation, protection and replacement of existing trees.

“Lane,” “mid-block lane” means a narrow, limited use roadway facility usually used to access a limited number of dwelling units; similar to an alley in design.

“Legislative” means a legislative action or decision is the making of law, as opposed to the application of existing law to a particular use (e.g., adoption of, or amendment to, a comprehensive plan or development regulation).

“Legislative action” means any action which would result in a change in city policy including a change to the Comprehensive Plan text, a change to the Comprehensive Plan map which involves a number of parcels of land, a change to the test of an implementing ordinance, a change to the zoning map which involves a number of parcels of land, a change to any land use plan or map which represents a change in city land use policy.

“Level of service (LOS)” means, for transportation, a standard of a street’s carrying capacity, based upon prevailing roadway, traffic and traffic control conditions during a given time period. The level of service range, from LOS A (free flow) to LOS F (forced flow) describes operational conditions within a traffic stream and their perception by motorists/passengers. Level of service is normally measured for the peak traffic hour, at intersections (signalized or unsignalized) or street segments (between signalized intersections).

“Light manufacture” means light manufacturing operations (e.g., electronic equipment, printing, bindery, furniture, and similar goods). See zoning district.

“Live-work” means a type of residential mixed-use development that combines a nonresidential use with a residential use in the same unit, and where the work space is used by someone residing in the unit. The living space may be located in front or behind the work space on the same floor, or on a separate floor.

“Livestock” means domestic animal types customarily raised or kept on farms.

“Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot, or parcel, with a building or use, or contiguous to a group buildings or use, for temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading persons, merchandise, or materials, and which space or berth abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.

“Local improvement district (LID)” means a small public district formed for the purpose of carrying out local improvements (paving of streets, construction of storm sewers, development of a park, etc.). Property owners within the LID are assessed for the cost of the improvements in accordance with state statutes.

“Lot” means a lot is a unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land (See ORS Chapter 92). A lot or parcel under the same ownership.

“Lot area” means the total surface area (measured horizontally) within the lot lines of a lot.

“Lot coverage” means the area of a lot covered by a building or buildings expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.

“Lot depth, average” means the average distance from the narrowest frontage to the lot line opposite.

“Lot line adjustment” means the adjustment of a property line by the relocation of a common line where no additional lots are created.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.130 “M” definitions.

“Maneuvering area/aisle” refers to the driving area in a parking lot where motor vehicles are able to turn around and access parking spaces.

Main/Primary Entry/Entrance. A “main entrance” is the entrance, or entrances, to a building that most pedestrians are expected to use. Generally, smaller buildings have one main entrance. Main entrances may also be the widest entrance of those provided for use by pedestrians. In multitenant buildings, main entrances open directly into the building’s lobby or principal interior ground level circulation space. When a multitenant building does not have a lobby or common interior circulation space, each tenant’s outside entrance is a main entrance. Buildings may also have main entrances opening directly into a reception or sales area, a courtyard, or plaza.

“Major transit stop” means stops that are located where two or more existing or planned routes intersect or where there are existing or planned transfer locations between transit systems, park and ride lots, and shopping centers and other major destinations.

“Major transit street” means a primary corridor for transit, receiving half-hour or better service during peak traffic hours. Typically, these streets are also arterials or major collectors.

“Manufactured home” means a transportable single-family dwelling conforming to the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, but is not regulated by the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code and Fire Life Safety Regulations, and is intended for permanent occupancy.

Manufactured Home Park. See ORS Chapter 446.

“Mass movement” means the movement of earth (rock, soil, or fill) downslope as a function of gravity. The main types of mass movement include earthflow, slump, rockslide, rockfall and mudflow.

“Ministerial” means a routine governmental action or decision that involves little or no discretion. The issuance of a building permit is such an action.

“Mitigation” means to avoid, rectify, repair, or compensate for negative impacts which result from other actions (e.g., improvements to a street may be required to mitigate for transportation impacts resulting from development).

“Mixed use” means a development consisting of more than one broad category of use (e.g., commercial, industrial, residential, or institutional).

“Mixed-use development, residential” means development containing both residential and nonresidential uses on a single site. Uses may be mixed vertically in the same building, such as ground floor commercial with upper story residential units, or may be mixed horizontally in separate buildings on the same site.

“Multifamily housing” means housing that provides more than three dwellings on an individual lot (e.g., multiplexes, apartments, condominiums, etc.). See FMC 19.30.130.

“Multi-use pathway” means pathways for pedestrian and bicycle use. See FMC 19.162.030(A)(4). (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.140 “N” definitions.

“Natural resource areas/natural resources” means the same as sensitive lands.

“Natural hazard” means natural areas that can cause dangerous or difficult development situations. For example, natural hazard areas include steep slopes, unstable soils, landslides, flood areas.

“Neighborhood” means a geographic area lived in by neighbors and usually having distinguishing character.

“Neighborhood-scale design” means site and building design elements that are dimensionally related to housing and pedestrians, such as narrower streets with tree canopies, smaller parking areas, lower building heights (as compared to downtown areas) and similar neighborhood characteristics. These features are generally smaller in scale than those that are primarily intended to accommodate automobile traffic.

“Neighborhood commercial” means small-scale commercial uses allowed within the neighborhood commercial district.

“Nonconforming use/nonconforming development” means a land use/structure that exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by the code, but was lawful at the time it was established (see Chapter 19.530 FMC).

“Non-native invasive plants” means plants not historically found in the Fairview area prior to 1840. See the Metro Native Plant List. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.150 “O” definitions.

“Obstruction” means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel refuse, fill structures or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.

“Off-street parking” means all off-street areas designed, used, required or intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles. Off-street parking areas shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 19.164 FMC.

“On-street parking” means parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking lanes or bays. Parking may be “parallel” or “angled” in relation to the edge of the right-of-way or curb.

“Open space (common/private/active/passive)” means land within a development which has been dedicated in common to the ownership within the development or to the public specifically for the purpose of providing places for recreation, conservation or other open space uses.

“Orientation” means to cause to face toward a particular point of reference (e.g., “a building oriented to the street”).

Oriented to a Street. See “Orientation.”

“Outdoor commercial use” means a use supporting a commercial activity, which provides goods or services, either wholesale or retail, where the amount of site area used for outdoor storage of materials or display of merchandise exceeds the total floor area of all buildings on the site. Examples of outdoor commercial uses include automobile sales or services, nurseries, lumberyards and equipment rental businesses.

Overlay Zone/District. “Overlay zones” provide regulations that address specific subjects that may be applicable in more than one land use district. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.160 “P” definitions.

“Parcel” means a parcel is a unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land (see ORS Chapter 92). See the Procedure Section.

“Parking lot perimeter” means the boundary of a parking lot area which usually contains a landscaped buffer area.

Parking vs. Storage. “Parking” is the area used for leaving motor vehicles for a temporary time. “Storage” is to place or leave in a location for maintenance, repair, sale, rental, or future use.

“Partition” means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year (see also ORS Chapter 92).

“Pedestrian amenity(ies)” means pedestrian areas and objects that serve as places for socializing and enjoyment of the city’s downtown/main street. Examples include benches or public art or sculpture.

“Pier” means exterior vertical building elements that frame each side of a building or its ground-floor windows (usually decorative).

“Planter strip,” “tree cut-out” means a landscape area for street trees and other plantings within the public right-of-way, usually between the street and a sidewalk.

“Plat” means a map of a subdivision, prepared as specified in ORS Chapter 92, and recorded with Multnomah County. All plats shall also conform to the Land Divisions section.



“Plaza” means a public square or extra-wide sidewalk (e.g., as on a street corner) that allows for special events, outdoor seating, sidewalk sales, and similar pedestrian activity.

“Pocket park” means a small park, usually less than one-half acre.

Practicable Alternative. At least two alternative locations on-site must be considered in determining whether the proposed option is “practicable.” In determining whether a practicable alternative exists the analysis must first address relocating the proposed project on-site outside of the significant environmental concern or wetlands and riparian buffer overlay. If no design alternative is available on-site outside of the overlay, alternative sites on-site within the overlay shall be considered to avoid loss of resources protected by the applicable code provision. The lowest cost alternative is not automatically the only practicable alternative. Cost should be considered based on what might reasonably be expected as part of the development process, taking into account site conditions and constraints. The applicant’s inability to pay for a particular alternative does not automatically preclude that alternative from being considered practicable. Standard landscaping practices, methods, designs and technology should generally be considered practicable, though new innovations may be practicable if they are reasonable. The applicant may not define the scope of the development project so narrowly that other reasonable alternatives are precluded from consideration.

“Primary” means the largest or most substantial element on the property, as in “primary” use, residence, entrance, etc. All other similar elements are secondary in size or importance.

“Professional office” means an office used by a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, architect, engineer, accountant, artist, teacher or other member of a recognized, legal profession.

“Property line: front, rear, interior side, street side” means legal borders of a lot or parcel of land.

“Public facilities” means public and private transportation facilities and utilities. See Chapter 19.165 FMC.

“Public improvements” means development of public facilities. See Chapter 19.165 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.170 “Q” definitions.

“Quasi-judicial” refers to an action or decision that requires substantial discretion or judgement in applying the standards or criteria of this code, and usually involves a public hearing. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.180 “R” definitions.

“Residence” means the same as “dwelling unit.”

“Residential care facility” means a facility licensed by or under the authority of the Oregon Department of Human Resources, which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for six to 15 individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet Department of Human Resources licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential facility.

“Residential caretaker unit” means a dwelling unit for caretakers living on-site in the general industrial district. The unit must be served by water and sanitary sewage and conform with other applicable building standards.

“Residential care home” means residential treatment or training homes or adult foster homes licensed by the state of Oregon.

“Residential home” means a home licensed by or under the authority of the Department of Human Resources, which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for five or fewer individuals, who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet Department of Human Resources licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential home.

“Ridge line (building)” means the top of a roof at its highest elevation.

“Right-of-way” means land that is owned in fee simple by the public, usually for transportation facilities.

“Roof pitch” means the slope of a roof, usually described as ratio (e.g., one foot of rise per two feet of horizontal distance).

“Rooftop garden” means a garden on a building terrace, or on top of a building with a flat roof (usually on a portion of a roof).

Rooming House. See “Boarding, lodging or rooming house.” (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.190 “S” definitions.

“School, commercial” means a building or land where instruction is given to pupils in arts, crafts, or trade, and operated as a commercial enterprise as distinguished from school endowed and/or supported by taxation or public funds.

“School, primary and secondary” means any building used for educational purposes through the twelfth grade.

“Senior housing” means housing designated and/or managed for persons over the age of 55. (Specific age restrictions vary.)

“Sensitive lands” means wetlands, significant trees, steep slopes, floodplains and other natural resource areas designated for protection or conservation by the Comprehensive Plan.

“Setback” means the distance between a building (or other feature of development) and a property line. Minimum and maximum setbacks may be required for front, side and rear yards.

“Shared driveway” means when land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one driveway. An easement or tract (owned in common) may be created for this purpose.

“Shared parking” means required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (daytime versus nighttime primary uses).

“Shopping street” means a street or drive designed with the elements of a pedestrian-oriented street: buildings with close orientation to the street, on street parking, wide sidewalks, street trees, pedestrian scale lighting.

“Significant trees,” “significant vegetation” means trees and shrubs with a trunk diameter of six inches or greater, as measured four feet above the ground, and all plants within the drip line of such trees and shrubs. Other trees may be deemed significant, when designated by the city council as “heritage trees.” Any trees and shrubs in areas that have been designated as “sensitive lands,” in accordance with this code.

“Single-family attached housing (townhomes)” means two or more single-family dwellings with common end-walls.

“Single-family detached house” means a single-family dwelling that does not share a wall with any other building.

“Single-family detached zero-lot line house” means a single-family detached house with one side yard setback equal to “0.”

“Site” means a property (or group of adjacent parcels or lots under the same ownership) that is subject to a permit application under this code.

“Site design review” means a discretionary review that applies to all developments in the city, except those specifically listed under development review. Site design review ensures compliance with the basic development standards of the land use district, as well as more detailed design standards and public improvement requirements in Article III of this title.

“Slope” means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal usually expressed in percent or degrees. The vertical distance divided by the horizontal distance.

“Specific area plan” describes in more detail the type of development planned for a specific area than is typically found in a comprehensive plan, zone map, or public facilities plan.

Standards and Criteria. “Standards” are code requirements. “Criteria” are the elements required to comply with a particular standard.

“Steep slopes” means slopes of greater than 30 percent.

“Storefront character” means the character expressed by buildings placed close to the street with ground-floor display windows, weather protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), corner building entrances or recessed entries, and similar features.

“Stormwater facility” means a detention and/or retention pond, swale, or other surface water feature that provides storage during high-rainfall events and/or water quality treatment.

“Street” means any thoroughfare or public way not less than 16 feet in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and accepted by an appropriate public body.

“Street/road” means a public or private way for travel by vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians that meets the city standards.

“Street access” means safe and efficient passage for pedestrians and vehicles to circulate through a connected street system.

“Street connectivity” means the number of street connections within a specific geographic area. Higher levels of connectivity provide for more direct transportation routes and better dispersion of traffic, resulting in less traffic on individual streets and potentially slower speeds through neighborhoods.

“Street furniture/furnishings” means benches, lighting, bicycle racks, drinking fountains, mailboxes, kiosks, and similar pedestrian amenities located within a street right-of-way.

“Street stub” means a temporary street ending; i.e., where the street will be extended through adjacent property in the future, as those properties develop. Not a permanent street-end or dead-end street.

“Street tree” means a tree planted in a planter strip or tree cut-out.

“Subdivision” means to divide land into four or more lots within a single calendar year.

“Swale” means a type of stormwater facility; usually a broad, shallow depression with plants that filter and process contaminants. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.200 “T” definitions.

“Tangent” means meeting a curve or surface in a single point.

“Terrace” means a porch or promenade supported by columns, or a flat roof or other platform on a building.

“Topographical constraint” means where existing slopes prevent conformance with a code standard.

“Tract, private/public” means a piece of land set aside in a separate area for dedication to the public, a homeowner’s association, or other entity (e.g., open space, recreation facilities, sensitive lands, etc.).

“Transportation facilities” means the physical improvements used to move people and goods from one place to another (i.e., streets, sidewalks, pathways, bike lanes, airports, transit stations and bus stops, etc.).

“Transportation mode” means the method of transportation (e.g., automobile, bus, walking, bicycling, etc.).

“Triplex” means a building with three attached housing units on one lot or parcel. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.210 “U” definitions.

“Urban growth area” means as defined in state law.

“Urban growth boundary” means as defined in state law. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.220 “V” definitions.

“Vacate plat/street” means to abandon a subdivision or street right-of-way. For example, vacation of a public right-of-way that is not needed or cannot be used for a street or other public purpose. A plat may be vacated, returning the property to an undivided condition.

“Variance” means an administrative or quasi-judicial decision to lessen or otherwise modify the requirements of this code.

“Vision clearance area” means the shaded area as shown on the following figure is the vision clearance area.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.230 “W” definitions.

Wetland. “Wetlands” are land areas where water is the dominant factor determining the nature of soil development and the types of plant and animal communities. They are defined more specifically by the Federal Clean Water Act and Oregon Administrative Rules.

“Window hood” means an architectural detail placed above a window, used as an accent.

“Wireless communication equipment” includes cell towers, antennas, monopoles, and related facilities used for radio signal transmission and receiving (see Chapter 19.245 FMC). (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.240 “X” definitions.

Reserved. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.250 “Y” definitions.

“Yard” means the area defined by setbacks (i.e., between the setback line and respective property line). The term yard (front, rear and side) references the term “setback” used in the revised code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.13.260 “Z” definitions.

“Zero-lot line house” means a single-family courtyard home that is not subject to side yard setbacks on one side of a typical lot. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.14 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

19.14.010    Provisions of this code declared to be minimum requirements.

19.14.020    Violation of code prohibited.

19.14.030    Penalty.

19.14.040    Complaints regarding violations.

19.14.050    Inspection and right of entry.

19.14.060    Abatement of violations.

19.14.070    Stop order.


19.14.010 Provisions of this code declared to be minimum requirements.

A. Minimum Requirements Intended. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this code shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B. Most Restrictive Requirements Apply. When the requirements of this code vary from other provisions of this code or with other applicable standards, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standard shall govern. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.14.020 Violation of code prohibited.

No person shall erect, construct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure or shall use, divide or transfer any land in violation of this code or any amendment thereto. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.14.030 Penalty.

A. Class 1 Penalty. A violation of this code shall constitute a Class 1 civil infraction which shall be processed accordingly.

B. Each Violation a Separate Infraction. Each violation of a separate provision of this code shall constitute a separate infraction, and each day that a violation of this code is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate infraction.

C. Abatement of Violation Required. A finding of a violation of this code shall not relieve the responsible party of the duty to abate the violation. The penalties imposed by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any remedies available to the city.

D. Responsible Party. If a provision of this code is violated by a firm or corporation, the officer or officers, or person or persons responsible for the violation shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this section. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.14.040 Complaints regarding violations.

A. Filing Written Complaint. Whenever a violation of this code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a signed, written complaint.

B. File Complaint with City Administrator. Such complaints, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the city administrator or his or her designee. The city administrator shall properly record such complaints, investigate and take action thereon as provided by this code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.14.050 Inspection and right of entry.

A. Whenever any officer or employee of the city is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance or other regulation, the officer or employee is hereby authorized to enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided, that the officer or employee shall effect entry either with consent of the person having charge or control or in the manner provided in subsection B of this section.

B. If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the officer or employee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry to the building or premises from them. If consent to entry is not given, the officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.14.060 Abatement of violations.

Any development or use which occurs contrary to the provisions of this code or contrary to any permit or approval issued or granted under this code is unlawful, and may be abated by appropriate proceedings. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.14.070 Stop order.

A. Stop Order Issued. Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of the code or a condition of any permit or other approval granted pursuant hereto, the city administrator or his or her designee may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on persons engaged in doing such work or causing such work to be done. All work under the permit or approval shall cease until it is authorized to continue.

B. Stop Order Hearing. The city administrator shall schedule a hearing on the stop order for the earliest practicable date, if requested by the property owner, but not more than 30 days after the effectiveness of any required notice. At the discretion of the city administrator such hearing may be:

1. Part of a hearing on revocation of the underlying development approval; or

2. Solely to determine whether a violation has occurred. The city administrator shall hold this hearing and shall make written findings as to the violation within 30 days of issuing the stop-work order. Upon a finding of no violation, the planning commission shall require the issuance of a resume work order. Upon finding a violation, the stop-order shall continue to be effective until the violating party furnishes sufficient proof to the planning commission that the violation has been abated. The planning commission decision is subject to review as a Type III (public hearing) procedure. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.20 LAND USE DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

19.20.010    Classification of land use districts.

19.20.020    Land use district map.

19.20.030    Determination of land use district boundaries.


19.20.010 Classification of land use districts.

All areas within the city of Fairview are divided into land use districts. The use of each lot, parcel and tract of land is limited to the uses permitted by the applicable land use district. The applicable land use district shall be determined based on the land use district map, and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.20.020 Land use district map.

A. Consistency with Land Use District Map. The boundaries of each of the land use districts contained within this chapter shall coincide with the land use district boundaries identified on the city’s official zoning map, retained by the city recorder. Said map by this reference is made a part of this land development code. The city shall maintain a certified print of the adopted land use district map, and any map amendments.

B. Applicability of Zoning Requirements. Each lot, tract and parcel of land or portion thereof within the land use district boundaries, as designated and marked on the zoning map, is classified, zoned and limited to the uses as hereinafter specified and defined for the applicable district classification.

C. Land Use District Map Amendments. All amendments to the city land use district (zoning) map shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.470 FMC.

1. Copies of all map amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the ordinance adopting the map amendment, and shall be maintained without change, together with the adopting documents, on file at the city; and

2. The city shall make available for public inspection an up-to-date copy of the revised land use district map, so that it accurately portrays changes of zone boundaries or classification, as applicable. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.20.030 Determination of land use district boundaries.

Where due to the scale, lack of scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the city zoning district map, or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of district boundary lines, the boundary lines shall be determined by the city administrator in accordance with the following:

A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, railroad tracks or alleys shall be constructed to follow such centerlines;

B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the boundaries of a parcel, lot, or tract shall be construed as following such boundaries;

C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a city boundary, or the urban growth boundary, shall be constructed as following said boundary;

D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following river, stream and/or drainage channels or basins shall be constructed as following river, stream and/or drainage channels or basins, as applicable; and

E. Whenever any public right-of-way is lawfully vacated, the lands formerly within the vacated right-of-way shall automatically be subject to the same land use district designation that is applicable to lands abutting the vacated area. In cases where the right-of-way formerly served as a land use district boundary, the lands formerly within the vacated right-of-way shall be allocated proportionately between the subject land use districts. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.25 AGRICULTURAL HOLDING ZONE (F-2)

Sections:

19.25.010    Purpose.

19.25.020    Permitted uses.

19.25.030    Conditional uses.

19.25.040    Additional requirements.


19.25.010 Purpose.

This zone is intended primarily as a holding zone to be used for agricultural uses until the land is developed for industrial purposes. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.25.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the F-2 zone:

A. Grazing, agriculture, horticulture, or the growing of timber.

B. Dwelling or dwellings for owner, operator and/or help required to carry out grazing, agriculture, horticulture or the growing of timber.

C. Accessory building.

D. Family day care providers and residential homes activities in existing buildings.

E. Home occupations.

F. Telecommunications facilities: monopoles and antennas pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.25.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in an F-2 zone after approval of the planning commission:

A. Schools and associated structures and facilities.

B. Churches and associated structures and facilities.

C. Community centers and associated structures and facilities and day care centers.

D. Golf courses (excluding miniature golf courses and driving ranges).

E. Telecommunications facilities: guyed towers pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC.

F. Community service/parks.

G. Other community service uses and uses similar in nature to those listed above when approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.25.040 Additional requirements.

All land use shall be subject to the applicable requirements of appropriate overlays. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.30 RESIDENTIAL (R) DISTRICT

Sections:

19.30.010    Purpose.

19.30.020    Permitted land uses.

19.30.030    Building setbacks.

19.30.040    Lot area and dimensions.

19.30.050    Flag lots and lots accessed by mid-block lanes.

19.30.060    Residential density and building size.

19.30.070    Maximum lot coverage.

19.30.080    Building height.

19.30.090    Building orientation.

19.30.100    Architectural standards.

19.30.110    Special standards for certain uses.

19.30.120    Additional residential districts.

19.30.130    Multifamily district (MF).

19.30.140    Manufactured home park district (MH).


19.30.010 Purpose.

A. The residential district is intended to promote the livability, stability and improvement of the city’s neighborhoods. This chapter provides standards for the orderly expansion and improvement of neighborhoods based on the following principles:

1. Make efficient use of land and public services, implement the Comprehensive Plan, and provide minimum and maximum density standards for housing.

2. Accommodate a range of housing needs, including owner-occupied and rental housing.

3. Provide for compatible building and site design at an appropriate neighborhood scale.

4. Reduce reliance on the automobile for neighborhood travel and provide options for walking, bicycling, and transit use.

5. Provide direct and convenient access to schools, parks and neighborhood services.

6. Utilize subdistricts to add additional allowed uses to the uses in the R, single-family residential, base district.

7. Utilize overlay districts to limit uses in the underlying base district.

B. The Old Town and low density residential overlay zones are established to reflect the unique history and character of those two areas of the city.

Old Town was originally platted with lots 50 feet by 150 feet (7,500 square feet) in size. The maintenance of that open character and density is important to maintaining the identity of that area. 

The low density overlay zone area is a portion of Fairview that has had historically large lots of an acre or more. While it is anticipated that the area will eventually change to a higher density through incremental zone changes initiated by property owners, the city will wait until those changes are proposed to consider the appropriateness of increasing the density in that portion of Fairview. (Ord. 3-2003; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.020 Permitted land uses.

A. Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 19.30.020.A are permitted in the residential district, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses which are specifically listed in Table 19.30.020.A, and land uses which are approved as “similar” to those in Table 19.30.020.A, may be permitted. The land uses identified with a “CU” in Table 19.30.020.A require conditional use permit approval prior to development or a change in use, in accordance with Article IV of this title.

B. Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in Chapter 19.480 FMC.

.

Table 19.30.020.A 

Land Uses and Building Types Permitted in the Residential District  

	ZONES AND OVERLAYS	Residential	MF Subdistrict	MH Subdistrict	Townhouse Overlay Zone	Old Town Overlay Zone	Lower Density Residential Overlay Zone

	USES	 

	RESIDENTIAL	a. Single-family detached	X	 	 	X	X	X

	b. Single-family detached zero-lot line	X*	 	 	X*	X*	X*

	c. Accessory dwellings	X*	 	 	X*	X*	X*

	d. Accessory uses and structures (other than accessory dwellings)	X*	X*	X*	X*	X*	X*

	e. Manufactured homes on individual lots	X*	 	 	 	X*	X*

	f. Single-family attached townhomes	 	X*	 	X*	 	 

	g. Two-family – Duplex	CU*	 	 	 	CU*	CU*

	h. Three-family – Triplex	 	X*	 	 	 	 

	i. Multifamily (four or more units)	 	X*, **	 	 	 	 

	j. Manufactured home park 	 	 	X*	 	 	 

	RESIDENTIAL CARE	k. Residential care homes	X*	X*	X*	X*	X*	X*

	l. Residential care facilities	 	X*, **	 	 	 	 

	m. Family day care	X	X	X	X	X	X

	n. Child care center (more than 12 children)	 	X**	 	 	 	 

	RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL	o. Small scale retail goods and services	 	X**	 	 	 	 

	p. Medical and dental offices and clinics	 	X**	 	 	 	 

	q. Personal services (e.g., barber shops, salons, similar uses)	 	X**	 	 	 	 

	r. Repair services, conducted entirely within building; auto repair and similar uses excluded	 	X**	 	 	 	 

	s. Mixed use building – Residential with other permitted use	 	X**	 	 	 	 

	t. Bed and breakfast inns	 	CU*	 	 	 	 

	OTHER	u. Home occupations and temporary uses	X***	X***	X***	X***	X***	X***

	v. Community services/parks	X (CU)*	X (CU)*	X (CU)*	X (CU)*	X (CU)*	X (CU)*

	 	*    Subject to standards in FMC 19.30.110, Special standards for certain uses.

**    Subject to additional standards in FMC 19.30.130, Multifamily district (MF).

***    Subject to standards in Chapter 19.490 FMC, Miscellaneous Permits (Temporary Uses, Home Occupations, Others).

(Ord. 3-2003; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.030 Building setbacks.

Figure 19.30.030 – Building Setbacks
[IMAGE]


A. Front Setbacks.

1. Residential Uses (single-family detached and attached, duplex and triplex, manufactured homes on lots, multifamily housing types). Setbacks for manufactured home parks are located in FMC 19.30.130.

a. A minimum setback of 10 feet and a maximum setback of 30 feet is required, except that an unenclosed porch may be within eight feet of the right-of-way, as long as it does not encroach into a public utility easement. These setbacks shall also apply to accessory dwelling units. See also FMC 19.30.030(F), which provides standards for setbacks for established residential areas (for homes built on vacant lots surrounded by existing development).

b. Garages and carports shall be accessed from rear alleys or otherwise recessed behind the front building elevation (facade or porch) by a minimum of six feet. Alternatively, garage and carport entrances may be built flush with the front building elevation when the building is set back at least 20 feet.

c. Multifamily housing shall also comply with the building orientation standards in FMC 19.30.090, Building orientation.

2. Residential Commercial Buildings.

a. A minimum front setback is not required, except as necessary to comply with the vision clearance standards in FMC 19.162.020.

b. A maximum setback of 10 feet is required. This standard is met when a minimum of 50 percent of the front building elevation is placed 10 feet or closer to the front property line. On parcels with more than one building, this standard applies to the largest building. Exception: The setback may be increased when an expanded sidewalk, outdoor seating area, plaza, pocket park, or town square is provided between the building and front property line.

3. Public and Institutional Buildings. The standards in subsection (A)(2) of this section (residential commercial buildings) shall also apply to public and institutional buildings, except that the maximum setback standard in subsection (A)(2)(b) shall not be required for buildings that do not receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely for storage or housing mechanical equipment, and similar uses).

B. Rear Setbacks. The minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet for street-access lots, and two feet for alley-access lots (for accessory structures).

C. Side Setbacks. The minimum side setback shall be five feet on interior side yards, and 10 feet on street corner yards; or when zero-lot line development is permitted, the minimum side setbacks shall be 10 feet minimum on one side of the dwelling unit, and no setback required on the opposite side. (See the special standards for zero-lot line housing in FMC 19.30.110.)

D. Setback Exceptions. The following architectural features are allowed to encroach into the setback yards: Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, and similar architectural features may encroach into setbacks by no more than three feet. Decks and similar structures not exceeding 36 inches in height (attached railings not included) may encroach into setbacks by no more than five feet, subject to the front yard setback provisions in subsection A of this section. Walls and fences may be placed on property lines, subject to the standards in Chapter 19.163 FMC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. Walls and fences within front yards shall additionally comply with the vision clearance standards in FMC 19.162.020.

E. Special Yards – Distance between Buildings on the Same Lot. To provide usable yard area and allow air circulation and light, the minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be no less than 12 feet. This requirement shall also apply to portions of the same buildings separated from each other by a court, landscape yard, or other open space. This standard does not apply to detached garages, accessory dwelling units, and other accessory structures.

F. Setbacks for Infill Housing in Established Residential Areas. “Established residential area” means an area within the residential district that was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. In such areas, the following setback standards shall apply:

Figure 19.30.030.F – Infill/Established Residential Area Setbacks
[IMAGE]


1. When an existing single-family residence on the same street is located within 30 feet of the subject site, a front yard setback similar to that of the nearest single-family residence shall be used. “Similar” means the setback is within five feet of the setback provided by the nearest single-family residence on the same street. For example, if the existing single-family residence has a front yard setback of 20 feet, then the new building shall have a front yard setback between 15 feet and 25 feet. If the new building is to be located between two existing residences, then the setback for the new building shall be based on the average setback of both adjacent residences, plus or minus five feet.

2. In no case shall a front yard setback be less than 10 feet. Zero-lot line houses shall comply with the standards for zero-lot line housing in FMC 19.30.110.

3. The preceding standards in subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) of this section shall not be changed, except through a Type III variance (i.e., to avoid significant trees, topographic constraints or other sensitive lands). (Ord. 3-2010 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.040 Lot area and dimensions.

Figure 19.30.040 – Lot Dimensions
[IMAGE]


  

Table 19.30.040 – Lot Area and Dimensions  

	Land Use	Districts* and Lot Area	Lot Width/Depth	Related Standards

	Detached Single-Family Housing; Manufactured Homes on Lots 	Standard Residential District and Townhouse Overlay Zone:

Minimum: 6,000 square feet.

Maximum: 10,000 square feet.	Minimum Width: 30 feet at front property line, except for flag lots and lots served by private lanes (see FMC 19.30.050).

Maximum Depth: Three times the lot width; except as may be required by this code (e.g., to protect sensitive lands, etc.).	The average lot area and residential floor area in new developments shall conform to the standards in FMC 19.30.060, Residential density and building size.

	Old Town Overlay Zone:

Minimum: 7,500 square feet.

Maximum: 10,000 square feet.

	Lower Density Residential Overlay Zone:

Minimum: 10,000 square feet.

Maximum: None.

	Single-Family Attached Townhomes	MF Subdistrict and Townhouse Overlay Zone:

Minimum: 2,000 square feet.

Maximum: 4,500 square feet.

	Two-Family Attached Housing	Standard Residential District, Old Town Overlay Zone and Lower Density Residential Overlay Zone:

Minimum: 6,000 square feet.

Maximum: 10,000 square feet.

	Three-Family Attached Housing (Triplex)	MF Subdistrict:

Minimum: 6,000 square feet.

Maximum: 10,000 square feet.	Minimum Width: 60 feet at front property line, except for flag lots and lots served by private lanes (see FMC 19.30.050).

Maximum Depth: Three times the lot width; except as required to protect sensitive lands, etc.

	Multifamily Housing (Four Units or More)	MF Subdistrict:

Minimum Area: 2,500 square feet per unit.

Maximum Area: None. (The maximum lot/parcel area is controlled by the block area standards in Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.)	Minimum Width: 60 feet at front property line.

Maximum Depth: None.

	Manufactured Home Parks	MH Subdistrict:

See FMC 19.30.140 for special standards.	See FMC 19.30.140 for manufactured home park standards.

	Public and Institutional Uses	All Residential Districts:

Minimum Area: None.

Maximum Area: None. (See FMC 19.30.110 for special standards.)	Minimum Width: 0 feet at front property line for open space uses and 60 feet at front property line for all other uses.

Maximum Depth: None.	The maximum lot/parcel area is controlled by the block area standards in Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.

	Residential Commercial Uses	MF Subdistrict:

Minimum Area: None.

Maximum Area: None. (See FMC 19.30.130 for special standards.)	Minimum Width: 60 feet at front property line.

Maximum Depth: None.	The maximum lot/parcel area is indirectly controlled by the floor area standards for residential commercial development, as provided in FMC 19.30.130(C)(4).

	*See Table 19.30.020 for permitted uses and building types

(Ord. 3-2003; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.050 Flag lots and lots accessed by mid-block lanes.

As shown below, some lots in existing neighborhoods may have standard widths but may be unusually deep compared to other lots in the area. Essentially unused space at the back of a lot may provide room for one or more lots for infill housing. Infill lots may be developed as “flag lots” or “mid-block developments,” as defined below:

Figure 19.30.050 – Mid-Block Infill
[IMAGE]


A. Mid-Block Lanes. Lots may be developed without frontage onto a public street when lot access is provided by a series of mid-block lanes, as shown above. Mid-block lanes shall be required whenever practicable as an alternative to approving flag lots. The lanes shall meet the standards for alleys, per subsections B through E of this section.

B. Driveway and Lane Width. The minimum width of all shared drives and lanes shall be 12 feet; the maximum width is 20 feet, except as required by the Uniform Fire Code.

C. Dedication of Drive Lane. The owner shall dedicate 12 feet of right-of-way or record a 12-foot easement (i.e., six feet for each property sharing a drive) for vehicle access similar to an alley. The dedication or recording, as applicable, shall be so indicated on the face of the subdivision or partition plat.

D. Maximum Drive Lane Length. The maximum drive lane length is 400 feet unless a greater length is approved based upon the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code.

E. Future Street Plans. Building placement and alignment of shared drives shall be designed so that future street connections can be made as surrounding properties develop (i.e., as shown in the preceding graphic). (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.060 Residential density and building size.

A. Residential Density Standard. New development applications must achieve at least the minimum density of the zoning district in which they are located. Projects proposed at less than the minimum density must demonstrate on a site plan or other means, how, in all aspects, future intensifications of the site to the minimum density or greater can be achieved without a variance. For the purposes of this subsection, new development shall mean intensification of the site by adding new primary dwelling units, other than accessory dwelling units, or land division of the property. New development is not intended to refer to additions to existing structures, rehabilitation, renovation, remodeling, or other building modifications or revisions of existing structures.

B. Minimum Density Calculation. Multiply the total (gross) site area by .80 to obtain total net site area. Divide the total net site area by the maximum lot size and multiply that figure by .80 to determine the minimum density or the minimum number of required units.

For example, density for a five-acre parcel would be calculated in the following manner:

	Net site area	=	Total site area (217,800 sq. ft.) multiplied by .80 for streets and roads = 174,200 sq. ft.

	Density	=	Net site area (174,200 sq. ft.) divided by 6,000 sq. ft. (minimum lot area) = 29.03

	Minimum density	=	29.03 multiplied by .80 = 23.22. Therefore, 23 units is the minimum number of units which must be placed on the site.

This is only one example; actual lot sizes will vary based on the proposed building type and the lot area standards in FMC 19.30.040. The flag “pole” portion of the flag lot shall be considered buildable for the purpose of calculating densities. See Figure 19.30.060B.

Figure 19.30.060.B – Flag Lot (Typical)
[IMAGE]


1. The density standards may be averaged over more than one development phase (i.e., as in a master planned development). Duplex and triplex lots used to comply with the density standard shall be so designated on the final subdivision plat.

2. The following types of housing are exempt from the density standards: Residential care homes/facilities and partitions creating two lots.

C. Residential Building Size Standard. In order to implement the residential building intensity policies of the Comprehensive Plan and limit the mass of residential buildings in relation to the lot area, the following floor area standards are established:

1. Existing Development. On any lot where the adjusted floor area which existed on the effective date of this section exceeded or was within 100 square feet of the maximum adjusted floor area specified in subsection (C)(2) of this section, a building permit may be obtained for up to 100 square feet of additional adjusted floor area, without requiring a variance, where the proposed addition complies with all other provisions of this section.

2. Adjusted Floor Area. As used in this section, “adjusted floor area” is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of all principal and accessory buildings measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of the building(s), and all other enclosed volumes which could be utilized as floor area and have minimum dimensions of eight feet by 10 feet and seven and one-half feet head room, without additional excavation. Adjusted floor area excludes all unenclosed horizontal surfaces such as balconies, decks or porches; the first 500 square feet of garage space; the first 500 square feet of any accessory dwelling; and any areas below or predominately below both the natural and finished grade, measured at the perimeter of the building, which in the opinion of the planning director does not add to the visual mass of the building. Interpretation of this section made by the director may be appealed to the planning commission, as specified in Article IV of this title. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.070 Maximum lot coverage.

A. Maximum Lot Coverage. The following maximum lot coverage standards shall apply to all, subject to the maximum building size standards in FMC 19.30.060:

1. Single-family detached houses: 65 percent;

2. Duplexes and triplexes: 70 percent;

3. Single-family attached townhomes: 70 percent;

4. Multiple-family housing: 70 percent; and

5. Residential commercial and public/institutional uses: 85 percent.

B. Lot Coverage Defined. “Lot coverage” means all areas of a lot or parcel covered by buildings (as defined by foundation perimeters) and other structures with surfaces greater than 36 inches above the finished grade and all impervious surfaces (such as paved or bricked areas).

C. Compliance with other sections of this code may preclude development of the maximum lot coverage for some land uses. (Ord. 3-2002 § 1; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.080 Building height.

Figure 19.30.080 – Building Height Measurement (Composite of Several Roof Forms)
[IMAGE]


The following building height standards are intended to promote land use compatibility and support the principle of neighborhood-scale design:

A. Building Height Standard. Buildings within the residential district shall be no more than 35 feet or two and one-half stories in height, whichever is less. Building height within the multifamily housing district and for residential commercial buildings may be up to 45 feet or four stories. Building height may be restricted to less than these maximums when necessary to comply with the building height transition standard in subsection C of this section.

B. Method of Measurement. “Building height” is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof (see above examples). The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

1. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade.

2. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (B)(1) of this section is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. Not included in the maximum height are: chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flagpoles, and similar features which are not for human occupancy.

C. Building Height Transition. To provide compatible building scale and privacy between developments, taller buildings shall “step-down” to create a building height transition to adjacent single-story building(s).

1. This standard applies to new and vertically expanded buildings within 20 feet (as measured horizontally) of an existing single-story building with a height of 20 feet or less, as shown above.

2. The building height transition standard is met when the height of the taller building (“x”) does not exceed one foot of height for every one foot separating the two buildings (“y”), as shown in Figure 19.30.080.C.

Figure 19.30.080.C – Building Height Transition
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.090 Building orientation.

Figure 19.30.090.A – Typical Building Orientation (Multifamily/Attached Housing)
[IMAGE]


Figure 19.30.090.B – Typical Building Orientation (Residential Commercial Building)
[IMAGE]


A. Purpose. The following standards are intended to orient buildings close to streets to promote human-scale development, slow traffic down, and encourage walking in neighborhoods. Placing residences and other buildings close to the street also encourages security and safety by having more “eyes-on-the-street.”

B. Applicability. This section applies to: single-family detached housing (except for flag lot development); attached townhomes which are subject to site design review (three or more attached units); multifamily housing; residential commercial buildings; and public and institutional buildings, except that the standard shall not apply to public and institutional buildings which do not receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely for storage or for housing mechanical equipment; and similar uses.)

C. Building Orientation Standards. All developments listed in subsection B of this section shall be oriented to a street. The building orientation standard is met when all of the following criteria are met:

1. Compliance with the setback standards in FMC 19.30.030.

2. All buildings shall have their primary entrance(s) oriented to the street. Multifamily and neighborhood commercial building entrances may include entrances to individual units, lobby entrances, or breezeway/courtyard entrances (i.e., to a cluster of units or commercial spaces). Alternatively, a building may have its entrance oriented to a side yard when a direct pedestrian walkway is provided between the building entrance and the street in accordance with the standards in Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation. In this case, at least one entrance shall be provided not more than 20 feet from the closest sidewalk or street.

3. Off-street parking, drives or other vehicle areas shall not be placed between buildings and streets where building placement complies with this standard. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.100 Design standards.

A. Purpose. The architectural standards are intended to provide detailed, human-scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of building styles.

B. Applicability. This section applies to all of the following types of buildings, and shall be applied during site design review:

1. Single-family attached townhomes which are subject to site design review (three or more attached units);

2. Multifamily housing;

3. Public and institutional buildings; 

4. Residential commercial and mixed use buildings; and

5. Duplexes and triplexes.

C. Standards. All buildings which are subject to this section shall comply with all of the following standards. The graphics provided with each standard are intended to show examples of how to comply. Other building styles and designs can be used to comply, so long as they are consistent with the text of this section. An architectural feature (i.e., as shown in the graphics) may be used to comply with more than one standard.

Figure 19.30.100.C(1) – Building Form (Multifamily Housing Example)
[IMAGE]


1. Building Form. The continuous horizontal distance (i.e., as measured from end-wall to end-wall) of individual buildings shall not exceed 120 feet. All buildings shall incorporate design features such as offsets, balconies, projections, window reveals, or similar elements to preclude large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces, as shown in the above figure. Along the vertical face of a structure, such features shall occur at a minimum of every 35 feet, and on each floor shall contain at least two of the following features:

a. Recess (e.g., deck, patio, courtyard, entrance or similar feature) that has a minimum depth of five feet;

b. Extension (e.g., floor area, deck, patio, entrance, or similar feature) that projects a minimum of two feet and runs horizontally for a minimum length of four feet; and/or

c. Offsets or breaks in roof elevation of two feet or greater in height.

2. Eyes on the Street. All building elevations visible from a street right-of-way shall provide doors, porches, balconies, and/or windows. A minimum of 60 percent of front (i.e., street-facing) elevations, and a minimum of 30 percent of side and rear building elevations shall meet this standard. “Percent of elevation” is measured as the horizontal plane (lineal feet) containing doors, porches, balconies, terraces and/or windows. The standard applies to each full and partial building story.

Figure 19.30.100.C(2) – Examples of Design Details on a Duplex
[IMAGE]


3. Detailed Design. All buildings shall provide detailed design along all elevations (i.e., front, rear and sides). Detailed design shall be provided by using at least three of the following architectural features on all elevations, as appropriate for the proposed building type and style (may vary features on rear/side/front elevations):

a. Dormers;

b. Gables;

c. Recessed entries;

d. Covered porch entries;

e. Cupolas or towers;

f. Pillars or posts;

g. Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);

h. Off-sets in building face or roof (minimum 16 inches);

i. Window trim (minimum four inches wide);

j. Bay windows;

k. Balconies;

l. Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles, wainscoting, ornamentation, and similar features);

m. Decorative cornices and rooflines (e.g., for flat roofs);

n. An alternative feature providing visual relief, similar to options in subsections (C)(3)(a) through (m) of this section.

Figure 19.30.100.C(3) – Examples of Architectural Details
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.110 Special standards for certain uses.

This section supplements the standards contained FMC 19.30.010 through 19.30.100. It provides standards for the following land uses in order to control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the residential district:

A. “Zero-Lot Line” Single-Family Home. “Zero-lot line” houses are subject to the same standards as single-family housing, except that a side yard setback is not required on one side of a typical lot (as shown below). This type of housing is permitted to allow development on smaller (i.e., narrower) lots and still provide usable outdoor living area in side-oriented courtyards. The following standards are intended to promote compatibility and privacy between adjacent buildings and allow for building maintenance:

Figure 19.30.110.A – Zero-Lot Line Housing
[IMAGE]


1. Setbacks Adjacent to Non-Zero-Lot Line Development. When a zero-lot line house shares a side property line with a non-zero-lot line development, the zero-lot line building shall be set back from the common property line by a minimum of 10 feet;

2. Construction and Maintenance Easement. Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall submit a copy of a recorded easement for every zero-lot line house that guarantees rights for the purpose of construction and maintenance of structures and yards. The easement shall stipulate that no fence or other obstruction shall be placed in a manner that would prevent maintenance of structures on the subject lot; and

3. Buffering. The building placement, landscaping, and/or design of windows shall provide a buffer for the occupants of abutting lots. For example, this standard is met by placing ground-floor windows (along the zero setback) above sight lines with direct views into adjacent yards, or by directing views away from yards (e.g., bay window), or by using frosted/non-see-through windows, as necessary.

B. Accessory Dwelling. An accessory dwelling is an interior, attached, or detached dwelling unit that is used in connection with, or that is accessory to, a single-family dwelling. The housing density standard of the residential district does not apply to accessory dwellings, due to the small size and low occupancy level of the use. The following standards are intended to control the size and number of accessory dwellings on individual lots, to promote compatibility with adjacent land uses. Accessory dwellings shall comply with all of the following standards:

1. Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The structure complies with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code;

2. Owner-Occupied. The primary residence or accessory dwelling shall be owner-occupied. Alternatively, the owner may appoint a family member as a resident caretaker of the principal house or of the accessory dwelling;

3. One Unit. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per single-family detached dwelling;

4. Floor Area. The total square footage of an accessory dwelling shall not exceed 800 square feet, except where the entire floor of a dwelling existing as of January 18, 2019, is converted to an accessory dwelling and there is no maximum square footage for the converted floor; 

5. Building Height. The building height of detached accessory dwellings (i.e., separate cottages) shall not exceed 20 feet, as measured in accordance with FMC 19.30.080, except ADUs located above a detached garage shall comply with the building height standards for accessory uses and structures in subsections (G)(6)(d)(ii) and (iii) of this section;

6. Repealed by Ord. 7-2018.

7. Repealed by Ord. 7-2018.

8. Parking. One additional parking space shall be provided for each ADU; and

9. Lot Coverage. The accessory dwelling and all other buildings and impermeable surfaces shall not exceed the lot coverage requirements in FMC 19.30.070.

C. Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots. Manufactured homes are permitted on individual lots, subject to all of the following design standards. Exception: The following standards do not apply to units which existed on site prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

1. Floor Plan. The manufactured home shall be multisectional and have an enclosed floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet.

2. Roof. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope not less than three feet in height for each 12 feet in width (14 degrees).

3. Residential Building Materials. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are similar or superior to the exterior siding and roof materials used on nearby residences (e.g., horizontal wood or wood-appearance siding is considered “superior” to metal siding and roofing).

4. Garages and Carports. The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed of like materials when nearby residences have carports or garages. The city may require an attached or detached garage where that would be consistent with the predominance construction of immediately surrounding residences.

5. Thermal Envelope. The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the thermal envelope requirements equivalent to those for a single-family dwelling constructed under the State Building Code. Evidence demonstrating that the manufactured home meets “Super Good Cents” energy efficiency standards is deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope certification requirement. Additional manufacturers certification shall not be required.

6. Placement. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than 16 inches above grade, and complying with the minimum set-up standards of the adopted state Administrative Rules for Manufactured Dwellings, Chapter 918. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than 16 inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home.

7. Foundation Skirt. The foundation area of the manufactured home shall be fully skirted.

8. Prohibited. The manufactured home shall not be located in a designated historic district or immediately adjacent to a historic landmark (as is allowed by ORS 197.314(3)).

D. Residential Care Homes and Facilities. Residential care homes are residential treatment or training homes or adult foster homes licensed by the state of Oregon. They may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with treatment and/or training, for five or fewer individuals (“homes”) or six to 15 individuals (“facilities”) who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet state licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents and need not be related to each other or the residents. Residential care homes and facilities shall comply with the following standards, consistent with Oregon statutes:

1. Licensing. All residential care homes shall be duly licensed by the state of Oregon.

2. Parking. A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for each employee and typical number of visitors, in accordance with city parking requirements.

E. Single-Family Attached (Townhomes), Duplexes and Triplexes. Single-family attached housing (townhome units on individual lots), duplex and triplex developments shall comply with the standards in subsections (E)(1) through (E)(4) of this section. The standards are intended to control development scale; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic, parking, and design compatibility; and ensure management and maintenance of common areas.

Figure 19.30.110.E – Townhomes and Multiplex Housing with Alley Access
[IMAGE]


1. Building Mass Supplemental Standard. Within the residential district, the maximum number and width of consecutively attached town-homes on individual lots (i.e., with attached walls at property line) shall not exceed four units. Within the multifamily district, the number and width of consecutively attached townhome units on one lot shall not exceed six units.

2. Alley Access. Townhome, duplex, triplex and subdivisions (four or more lots) shall receive vehicle access only from a rear alley. Alley(s) shall be created at the time of subdivision approval, in accordance with FMC 19.165.020, Transportation standards, and Chapter 19.430 FMC, Land Divisions and Lot Line Adjustments. Alleys are not required when existing development patterns or topography make construction of an alley impracticable (see subsection (E)(3) of this section for standards). As necessary, the city shall require dedication of right-of-way or easements and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building breaks) to implement the standards in Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.

Figure 19.30.110.E(3) – Townhomes and Multiplex Housing With Street Access
[IMAGE]


3. Street Access Developments. Town-homes, duplexes and triplexes receiving access directly from a public or private street (and not an alley) shall comply with all of the following standards, in order to minimize interruption of adjacent sidewalks by driveway entrances, slow traffic, maximize on-street parking, improve appearance of the streets, and minimize paved surfaces for better stormwater management.

a. When garages face the street, they shall be recessed behind the front elevation (i.e., living area or covered front porch) by a minimum of four feet.

b. The maximum allowable driveway width facing the street is 12 feet per dwelling unit. The maximum combined garage width per unit is 50 percent of the total building width. For example, a 24-foot wide unit may have one 12-foot wide recessed garage facing the street.

c. Two adjacent garages shall share one driveway when individual driveways would otherwise be separated by less than 20 feet (i.e., the width of one on-street parking space). When a driveway serves more than one lot, the developer shall record an access and maintenance easement/agreement to benefit each lot, prior to building permit issuance.

4. Common Areas. “Common areas” (e.g., landscaping in private tracts, shared driveways, private alleys, and similar uses) shall be maintained by a homeowners association or other legal entity. A homeowners association may also be responsible for exterior building maintenance. A copy of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the city prior to building permit approval.

F. Community Services/Parks. Public and institutional uses (as listed in Table 19.30.020.A) are allowed in the residential district subject to the following land use standards, which are intended to control the scale of these developments and their compatibility with nearby residences:

1. Development Site Area. The maximum development site area shall be eight acres, except that this standard shall not apply to parks and open space uses. Larger developments may be approved as a conditional use, in accordance with Chapter 19.440 FMC, Conditional Use Permits, or as part of a master planned development, in accordance with Chapter 19.450 FMC.

2. Vehicle Areas and Trash Receptacles. All vehicle areas (i.e., parking, drives, storage, etc.) and trash receptacles shall be oriented away from adjacent residences to the greatest extent practicable, and shall be screened with an evergreen hedge or solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height.

G. Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and structures are of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot, except for accessory dwelling units. Typical accessory structures in the residential district include detached garages, sheds, workshops, greenhouses and similar structures. (For standards applicable to accessory dwellings, please refer to subsection B of this section.) All accessory structures shall comply with all of the following standards:

1. Primary Use Required. An accessory structure shall not be allowed without another permitted use (e.g., as listed in Table 19.30.020.A) pre-existing or developed simultaneously.

2. Restrictions. A structure shall not be placed over an easement that prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach into the public right-of-way.

3. Compliance with Land Division Standards. The owner may be required to remove an accessory structure as a condition of land division approval when removal of the structure is necessary to comply with setback standards.

4. Buffering. A minimum four-foot hedge or fence may be required to screen the accessory structure from dwellings on adjacent lots, unless a similar screen is provided or the distance to adjacent dwelling(s) is greater than 50 feet.

5. Lot Coverage. Existing lot coverage standards for the applicable district would apply.

6. Accessory structures are allowed subject to the following standards:

a. Accessory structures must comply with the setback requirements of the main building, except where specifically modified by this section.

b. Accessory structures 200 square feet or smaller must be located behind the front facade of the main building, but may be placed on the site with zero side and/or rear setbacks if in compliance with the Oregon Building Codes.

c. No accessory structure shall be erected or maintained and no existing accessory structure shall be altered, modified, converted, enlarged or moved unless such accessory structure is located on the lot in conformance with the following:

i. No accessory structure shall be located in a required front yard, nor shall an accessory structure be constructed on a lot which lacks a principal building.

ii. If attached to the principal building they shall fulfill the same front, side and rear yard setbacks as required of the principal building.

iii. No accessory structure shall encroach onto an easement of record unless detached, portable and written permission has been granted by the entity which is the grantee under the easement.

iv. The maximum size of an accessory structure on a lot up to one acre in size is 1,000 square feet. Lots larger than one acre shall have no accessory building size limit except as provided elsewhere in this code. An accessory dwelling unit may be combined with a detached garage as a second level unit on a lot up to one acre in size, provided the floor area of the accessory dwelling unit does not exceed 800 square feet and the floor area of the garage, excluding the accessory unit, does not exceed 1,000 square feet.

v. No accessory structure may be located closer than six feet from any other structure unless constructed to conform with the Oregon Building Codes.

vi. Lot coverage requirements apply to all accessory structures.

vii. Accessory structures situated on a corner lot and detached from the main building shall have a minimum side yard setback of 10 feet, except for accessory structures where private vehicles are stored and have an entrance from the street side yard, where a minimum street side yard setback of 20 feet shall be required.

viii. All accessory structures attached to the principal building shall meet the requirements of the Oregon Building Codes.

d. Accessory structures larger than 200 square feet must meet the following standards:

i. If located within five feet of the property line accessory structures shall be no more than 10 feet in height.

ii. If located at five feet or more, but less than the setback required for the principal structure, the building may be as tall as the main building or 20 feet in height, whichever is less.

iii. If located at a greater distance from the property line than the setback required for the principal building, the accessory structure may be as tall as the principal structure or 25 feet, whichever is less.

iv. Accessory structures 450 square feet or larger shall be constructed of materials that provide the same appearance, and be of a similar design to the main building.

H. Bed and Breakfast Inns.

1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the establishment of a bed and breakfast inn.

2. Accessory Use. A bed and breakfast inn must be accessory to a household already occupying the structure.

3. Maximum Size. The bed and breakfast structure is limited to a maximum of five bedrooms for guests and a maximum of six guests per night.

4. Employees. The bed and breakfast facility may have up to two nonresident employees for the facility.

5. Food Service. Food services may only be provided to overnight guests of the bed and breakfast inn.

6. Owner-Occupied. The bed and breakfast inn shall be owner-occupied and shall maintain the exterior physical characteristics of a single-family dwelling. No separate structures shall be allowed (except for usual residential accessory buildings such as sheds, or detached garages).

7. Signs. Allowed signage permits one non-illuminated on-premises sign identifying the name of the bed and breakfast and the operator shall be permitted. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in area.

8. Monitoring. All bed and breakfast inns must maintain a guest logbook. It must include the names and home address of the guest, guests’ license plate number if traveling by car, dates of stay and the room number of each guest. The log must be available for inspection by city staff upon request. (Ord. 7-2018 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 1-2012 § 4; Ord. 3-2010 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 3-2002 § 1; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.120 Additional residential districts.

A. Districts Authorized. These districts provide needed land for land uses that may not otherwise be accommodated in the underlying residential district. The Comprehensive Plan identifies a need for maintaining higher density development, providing small commercial services within residential neighborhoods, and encouraging the development of multifamily housing. Therefore, the city has adopted the following additional subdistricts: residential multifamily (MF), FMC 19.30.130, and mobile home park (MH), FMC 19.30.140.

B. Applicability. These districts are identified on the city’s official zoning map. Properties designated with the MF-1 and MH-1 districts shall comply with the provisions of the underlying residential district, except as may be modified by this section. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.130 Residential multifamily district (MF).

A. Purpose/Intent Statement. The multifamily district is designed to provide land for larger multiple-family housing and residential commercial uses. Multifamily housing is housing that provides four or more dwellings on an individual lot (e.g., multiplexes, apartments, condominiums, etc.). New multifamily developments shall comply with all of the following standards.

Figure 19.30.130.A – Multifamily Housing (Typical Site Layout)
[IMAGE]


B. Multifamily Housing Development Standards.

1. Common Open Space. Inclusive of required yard setbacks, a minimum of 10 percent of the site area shall be designated and permanently reserved as usable common open space in all multiple-family developments. The site area is defined as the lot or parcel on which the development is planned, after subtracting any required dedication of street right-of-way and other land for public purposes (e.g., public park or school grounds, etc.). Sensitive lands (e.g., wetlands, floodplains, steep hillsides) and historic buildings or landmarks open to the public and designated by the Comprehensive Plan or by the U.S. Department of the Interior may be counted toward meeting the common open space requirements.

2. Private Open Space. Private open space areas shall be required for ground-floor and upper-floor housing units based on all of the following standards:

a. Ground-floor housing units shall have front or rear patios or decks measuring at least 48 square feet. “Ground-floor housing” means the housing unit entrance (front or rear) is within five feet of the finished ground elevation (i.e., after grading and landscaping);

b. A minimum of 50 percent of all upper-floor housing units shall have balconies or porches measuring at least 48 square feet. “Upper-floor housing” means housing units which are more than five feet above the finished grade; and

c. Private open space areas shall be oriented toward common open space areas and away from adjacent single-family residences, and adjacent and on-site trash receptacles, parking and drives, to the greatest extent practicable.

3. Exemptions. Exemptions may be granted for the first 50 units of a larger project when these developments are within one-quarter mile (measured walking distance) of a public park; and there is a direct, accessible (i.e., Americans with Disabilities Act-compliant), lighted, and maintained pedestrian trail or sidewalk between the site and the park. An exemption shall be granted only when the nearby park provides active recreation areas such as play fields, children’s play area, sports courts, walking/fitness course, or similar facilities.

4. Trash Receptacles. Trash receptacles shall be oriented away from adjacent residences and shall be screened with an evergreen hedge or solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height. Receptacles must be accessible to trash pickup trucks.

C. Residential Commercial Standards.

1. Permitted Uses. Only those residential commercial uses specifically listed in Section 2 of Table 19.30.020.A are permitted. Residential and residential commercial uses may be mixed “vertically,” meaning that a residential use is developed above the commercial use (i.e., ground floor retail/office with upper-story apartments, town-homes, or condominiums), or may be mixed “horizontally,” meaning commercial and residential uses both occupy ground floor space. Automobile-oriented uses, as defined in FMC 19.65.090(E) or where only service vehicles are parked.

2. Location. Residential commercial uses shall locate the front facade of the building along a city-designated collector or arterial street.

3. Building Mass Supplemental Standard. The maximum width or length of a residential commercial or mixed use (residential and commercial) building shall not exceed 80 feet (from end-wall to end-wall).

4. Floor Area Supplemental Standards. The maximum commercial floor area shall not exceed 5,000 square feet total per residential commercial site within the residential commercial district. Floor area is measured by totaling the interior floor area of all building stories, except crawl spaces (i.e., with less than seven and one-half feet of vertical clearance).

5. Hours of Operation. Residential commercial land uses shall be limited to the following hours of operation: 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. with alternative hours proposed as a conditional use.

Figure 19.30.130.C – Residential Commercial (Typical Site Layout)
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.30.140 Residential manufactured home park district (MH).

A. Manufactured Home Park. Manufactured home parks are permitted on parcels of one acre or larger within the manufactured home park (MH) district, subject to compliance with subsections (A)(1) through (A)(5) of this section (in cases of conflict with state statutes, the statutes shall prevail, see ORS Chapters 197 and 446):

1. Permitted Uses. Manufactured homes, manufactured home park manager’s office, home occupations, and accessory structures which are necessary for the operation and maintenance of the manufactured home park (e.g., landscape maintenance). Home occupations shall comply with FMC 19.490.200, Home occupation permits.

2. Space. The minimum size pad or space for each home is 2,500 square feet; provided, that the overall density of the park does not exceed 14 units per acre. Each space shall be at least 30 feet wide and 40 feet long, in accordance with ORS 446.100(c).

3. Setbacks and Building Separation. The minimum setback between park structures and abutting properties is five feet. The minimum setback between park structures and public street rights-of-way is 15 feet. At least a 10-foot separation shall be provided between all dwellings. Dwellings shall be placed a minimum of 14 feet apart where flammable or combustible fuel is stored between units. Park structures shall be placed no closer than five feet to a park street or sidewalk/pathway. An accessory structure shall not be located closer than six feet to any other structure or dwelling, except that a double carport or garage may be built which serves two dwellings. When a double carport/garage is built, the carport/garage shall be separated from all adjacent structures by at least three feet.

4. Perimeter Landscaping. When manufactured homes are oriented with their back or side yards facing a public right-of-way, the city may require installation of fencing and planting of a 10-foot to 15-foot wide landscape buffer between the right-of-way and a manufactured home park for the privacy and security of residents or aesthetics of the streetscape.

5. House Design. Manufactured homes in parks shall meet the following design standards, consistent with ORS 197.314(6):

a. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope not less than three feet in height for each 12 feet in width (14 degrees).

b. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are similar or superior to the exterior siding and roof material used on nearby residences (e.g., horizontal wood or wood-appearance siding is considered “superior” to metal siding and roofing).

c. Exception. Subsections (A)(5)(a) and (b) of this section do not apply to manufactured homes sited within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.60 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) DISTRICT

Sections:

19.60.010    Purpose.

19.60.020    Permitted land uses.

19.60.030    Building setbacks.

19.60.040    Lot coverage – Building size.

19.60.050    Block layout and building orientation.

19.60.060    Building height.

19.60.070    Architectural guidelines and standards.

19.60.080    Pedestrian and transit amenities.

19.60.090    Special standards for certain uses.


19.60.010 Purpose.

This district is intended for convenience retail and service establishments of limited scale to serve primarily the needs of nearby residents rather than the city as a whole. Such uses shall be physically and visually compatible with adjacent residential development through appropriate use of landscaping, access, parking, signs and architectural design. This district will promote walking to nearby neighborhood services. Vertically and horizontally mixed housing will be allowed on a conditional basis to promote live/work units for small business owners, and convenient housing for the elderly and those who choose not to use an automobile. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.60.020 Permitted land uses.

A. Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 19.60.020.A are permitted in the neighborhood commercial district, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 19.60.020.A, and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 19.60.020.A, may be permitted. The land uses identified with a “CU” in Table 19.60.020.A require conditional use permit approval prior to development or a change in use.

B. Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in Chapter 19.480 FMC.

  

Table 19.60.020.A 

Land Uses and Building Types Permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial District  

	1. Residential

Multifamily on second floor or in back of commercial buildings only (CU)

2. Home Occupations

3. Commercial Uses

a. Day care center

b. Barber or beauty shop

c. Shoe repair store

d. Dressmaking or tailoring shop

e. Photography studio

f. Florist shop	g. Gift shop

h. Art supply store

i. Self-serve laundry

j. Business or professional office (CU)

k. Book or stationery store

l. Bicycle sales and service shop

m. Hardware, electrical appliance store or small appliance repair and sales, including radio, television and electronics

n. Small grocery or variety store	o. Restaurant, excluding drive in service

p. Similar uses to those listed above

4. Public and Institutional (CU)

Community service/parks

5. Telecommunications Facilities*

Antennas pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC

Telecommunications facilities: monopoles pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC

	Uses marked with an asterisk (*) are subject to the standards in FMC 19.60.090, Special standards for certain uses.

Land uses marked with a CU shall require a conditional use permit.

C. Land Uses Prohibited in the Commercial District. Only uses specifically listed in Table 19.60.020.A, and uses similar to those in Table 19.60.020.A, are permitted in this district. The following uses are expressly prohibited: industrial uses, drive-up, drive-in and drive-through facilities. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.60.030 Building setbacks.

In the neighborhood commercial district, buildings are placed close to the street to create a vibrant pedestrian environment, to slow traffic down, provide a storefront character to the street, and encourage walking. The setback standards are flexible to encourage public spaces between sidewalks and building entrances (e.g., extra-wide sidewalks, plazas, squares, outdoor dining areas, and pocket parks). The standards also encourage the formation of solid blocks of commercial and mixed use buildings for a walkable commercial area. Building setbacks are measured from the wall/facade to the respective property line. Setbacks for porches are measured from the edge of the deck or porch to the property line. The setback standards, as listed on the following page, apply to primary structures as well as accessory structures. The standards may be modified only by approval of a variance.

Building setbacks are as follows:

A. Front Setbacks.

1. Minimum Setback. There is no minimum front setback required.

2. Maximum Setback. The maximum allowable front setback is 10 feet. This standard is met when a minimum of 80 percent of the front building elevation is placed no more than 10 feet back from the front property line. On parcels with more than one building, this standard applies to the building with the largest street-facing facade. The setback standard may be increased by 50 percent (or five feet, which ever is greater) when a usable public space with pedestrian amenities (e.g., extra-wide sidewalk, plaza, pocket park, outdoor dining area or town square with seating) is provided between the building and front property line. (See also pedestrian amenities standards in FMC 19.60.080, and architectural standards in FMC 19.60.070 for related building entrance standards.)

B. Rear Setbacks.

1. Minimum Setback. The minimum rear setback for all structures shall be none for street-access lots, and eight feet for alley-access lots (distance from building to rear property line or alley easement) in order to provide space for parallel parking. If the property abuts a residential district, the side setback shall be the same as the base zone setback for the abutting residential property.

2. Through-Lots. For buildings on through-lots (lots with front and rear frontage onto a street), the front setbacks in subsection A of this section shall apply to both frontages.

C. Side Setbacks. There is no minimum side setback required, except that buildings shall conform to the vision clearance standards in Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation, and the applicable fire and building codes for attached structures, firewalls, and related requirements.

D. Setback Exceptions. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, cornices, awnings, canopies, porches, decks, pergolas, and similar architectural features may encroach into setbacks by no more than four feet, subject to compliance with applicable standards of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code. Walls and fences may be placed on the property line, subject to the requirements of Chapter 19.163 FMC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.60.040 Lot coverage – Building size.

A. Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage requirement, except that compliance with other sections of this code may preclude full (100 percent) lot coverage for some land uses.

B. Building Size. The building footprint is limited to 20,000 square feet. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.60.050 Block layout and building orientation.

This section is intended to promote the walkable, storefront character of the neighborhood commercial district by forming short blocks and orienting (placing or locating) buildings close to streets. Placing buildings close to the street also slows traffic down and provides more “eyes on the street,” increasing the safety of public spaces. The standards, as listed on the following page and illustrated above, compliment the front setback standards in FMC 19.60.030.

A. Applicability. This section applies to new land divisions and all of the following types of development (i.e., subject to site design review):

1. Commercial and mixed use buildings subject to site design review.

2. Compliance with all of the provisions of subsections B through E of this section shall be required.

Figure 19.60.050.A – Block Layout (Typical)
[IMAGE]


B. Block Layout Standard. New land divisions and developments which are subject to site design review shall be configured to provide an alley or interior parking court, as shown above. Blocks (areas bound by public street right-of-way) shall have a length not exceeding 200 feet, and a depth not exceeding 200 feet. Pedestrian pathways shall be provided from the street right-of-way to interior parking courts between buildings, as necessary to ensure reasonably safe, direct, and convenient access to building entrances and off-street parking.

Figure 19.60.050.B – Building Orientation (Typical)
[IMAGE]


C. Building Orientation Standard. All of the developments listed in subsection A of this section shall be oriented to a street. The building orientation standard is met when all of the following criteria are met:

1. The minimum and maximum setback standards in FMC 19.60.030 are met.

2. Buildings have their primary entrance(s) oriented to (facing) the street. Building entrances may include entrances to individual units, lobby entrances, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard entrances (i.e., to a cluster of units or commercial spaces). Alternatively, a building may have its entrance facing a side when a direct pedestrian walkway not exceeding 15 feet in length is provided between the building entrance and the street right-of-way.

3. Off-street parking, driveways or other vehicular circulation shall not be placed between a building and the street, which is used to comply with subsection B of this section. Corner lots, buildings and their entrances shall be oriented to the street corner, as shown above; parking, driveways and other vehicle areas shall be prohibited between buildings and street corners.

D. Variances. Variances will be made in accordance with Chapter 19.520 FMC. The standard may be varied to address topographic or other physical constraints, in accordance with the provisions for Class B or C variances in Article IV of this title. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.60.060 Building height.

All buildings in the commercial district shall comply with the following building height standards. The standards are intended to allow for development of appropriately scaled buildings with a storefront character:

Figure 19.60.060 – Building Height Diagram
[IMAGE]


A. Maximum Height. Buildings shall be no more than two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is greater.

B. Method of Measurement. “Building height” is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof (see Figure 19.60.060 for examples of measurement). The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

1. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade.

2. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (B)(1) of this section is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. Not included in the maximum height are chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flagpoles, and similar features, which are not for human occupancy. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.60.070 Architectural guidelines and standards.

A. Purpose and Applicability. The neighborhood commercial district architectural guidelines standards are intended to provide detailed, human-scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of building styles. This section applies to all of the following types of buildings:

1. Public and institutional buildings, except that the standard shall not apply to buildings which are not subject to site design review or those that do not receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely to house mechanical equipment, and similar uses); and

2. Commercial and mixed use buildings subject to site design review.

B. Guidelines and Standards. Each of the following standards shall be met. An architectural feature used to comply with one standard may be used to comply with another standard.

Figure 19.60.070 – Commercial District Building Design Elements (Typical)
[IMAGE]


1. Detailed Storefront Design. All buildings shall contribute to the storefront character and visual relatedness of commercial district buildings. This criterion is met by providing all of the architectural features listed in subsections (B)(1)(a) through (d) of this section along the front building elevation (i.e., facing the street), as applicable.

a. Corner building entrances on corner lots. Alternatively, a building entrance may be located away from the corner when the building corner is beveled or incorporates other detailing to reduce the angular appearance of the building at the street corner.

b. Regularly spaced and similar-shaped windows with window hoods or trim (all building stories).

c. Large display windows on the ground floor (nonresidential uses only). Bulkheads, piers and a storefront cornice (e.g., separates ground-floor from second story, as shown above) shall frame display windows.

d. Decorative cornice at top of building (flat roof); or eaves provided with pitched roof. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.60.080 Pedestrian and transit amenities.

A. Purpose and Applicability. This section is intended to complement the building orientation standards in FMC 19.60.050, and the street standards in Chapter 19.165 FMC by providing comfortable and inviting pedestrian spaces within the neighborhood commercial district. Pedestrian amenities serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting, and enjoyment of the city’s neighborhood commercial districts, and contribute to a walkable district. This section applies to all of the following types of buildings:

1. Public and institutional buildings, except that the standard shall not apply to buildings which are not subject to site design review or those that do not receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely to house mechanical equipment, and similar uses); and

2. Commercial and mixed use buildings subject to site design review.

Figure 19.60.080 – Pedestrian and Transit Amenities (Typical)
[IMAGE]


B. Guidelines and Standards. Every development shall provide one or more of the “pedestrian amenities” listed in subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section, and illustrated above. Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a public right-of-way when approved by the applicable jurisdiction.

1. A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the building entrance (minimum width of eight feet);

2. Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches or ledges between the building entrance and sidewalk (minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in width);

3. Building canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection (minimum projection of four feet over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space); 

4. Public art that incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture, etc.).

C. Transit Amenities. Development on sites that are adjacent to or incorporate transit streets shall provide improvements as described in this section at any existing or planned transit stop located along the site’s frontage, unless waived by the community development director.

1. Transit facilities include bus stops, shelters, and related facilities. Required transit facility improvements may include the dedication of land or the provision of a public easement.

2. Development shall at a minimum provide reasonably direct pedestrian connections, as defined in FMC 19.162.030, between building entrances and the transit facility and between buildings on the site and streets adjoining transit stops.

3. Improvements at Major Transit Stops. A proposed development that is adjacent to or includes an existing or planned major transit stop will be required to plan for access to the transit stop and provide for transit improvements, in consultation with TriMet and consistent with an agency adopted or approved plan at the time of development. Requirements apply where the subject parcel(s) or portions thereof are within 200 feet of a transit stop. Development requirements and improvements may include the following:

a. Intersection or mid-block traffic management improvements to allow for pedestrian crossings at major transit stops.

b. Building placement within 20 feet of the transit stop, a transit street or an intersection street, or a pedestrian plaza at the stop or at street intersections.

c. Transit passenger landing pads accessible to disabled persons to transit agency standards.

d. An easement or dedication for a passenger shelter and an underground utility connection to a major transit stop if requested by TriMet.

e. Lighting to TriMet standards.

f. Intersection and mid-block traffic management improvements as needed and practicable to enable marked crossings at major transit stops.

4. Any Type II land divisions where further divisions are possible, and all Type III land divisions, multiple-family developments, community services uses, and commercial or industrial uses located on an existing or future planned major transit street shall meet the TriMet transit facility requirements. Applicants shall consult with TriMet to determine necessary transit facility improvements in conjunction with the proposed development. Proposals shall be consistent with the road crossing improvements that are identified in the transportation system plan on streets with existing or planned transit service. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.60.090 Special standards for certain uses.

This section supplements the standards contained in FMC 19.60.030 to 19.60.080. It provides standards for the following land uses in order to control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the neighborhood commercial district:

•Residential Uses

•Accessory Uses and Structures

•Sidewalk Displays

A. Residential Uses. All residential developments shall comply with the standards in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(6) of this section which are intended to require mixed use development; conserve the community’s supply of commercial land for commercial uses; provide for designs which are compatible with a storefront character; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic and parking; and ensure proper management and maintenance of common areas. Residential uses, which existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, are exempt from this section.

Figure 19.60.090.A – Mixed Use Development in the Neighborhood Commercial District
[IMAGE]


1. Mixed Use Development Required. Residential uses shall be permitted only when part of a mixed use development (residential with commercial). Only “vertical” mixed use (housing above the ground floor) developments are allowed, subject to the standards in subsections (A)(2) through (A)(6) of this section.

2. Limitation on Street-Level Housing. No more than 50 percent of a single street frontage may be occupied by residential uses. This standard is intended to reserve storefront space for commercial uses and public/institutional uses; it does not limit residential uses above the street level on upper stories. For parcels with street access at more than one level (e.g., sloping sites with two street frontages), the limitation on residential building space shall apply to all street frontages.

3. Density. There is no minimum or maximum residential density standard. Density shall be controlled by the applicable lot, building size and building height standards.

4. Parking, Garages, and Driveways. All off-street vehicle parking, including surface lots and garages, shall be oriented to alleys, placed underground, placed in structures above the ground floor, or located in parking areas located behind or to the side of the building; except that side yards facing a street (i.e., corner yards) shall not be used for surface parking. All garage entrances facing a street (e.g., underground or structured parking) shall be recessed behind the front building elevation by a minimum of six feet. On corner lots, garage entrances shall be oriented to a side street when access cannot be provided from an alley.

5. Creation of Alleys. When a subdivision (e.g., four or more townhome lots) is proposed, a public or private alley shall be created for the purpose of vehicle access. Alleys are not required when existing development patterns or topography make construction of an alley impracticable. As part of a subdivision, the city may require dedication of right-of-way or easements, and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building breaks) to provide pedestrian connections through a development site, in conformance with Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.

6. Common Areas. All common areas (i.e., walkways, drives, courtyards, private alleys, parking courts, etc.) and building exteriors shall be maintained by a homeowners association or other legal entity. Copies of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the city prior to building permit approval.

B. Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and structures are of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot. Typical accessory structures in the neighborhood commercial district include small workshops, greenhouses, studios, storage sheds, and similar structures. Accessory uses and structures are allowed for all permitted land uses within the neighborhood commercial district, as identified in Table 19.60.020.A. Accessory structures shall comply with the following standards:

1. Primary Use Required. An accessory structure shall not be allowed before or without a primary use, as identified in Table 19.60.020.A.

2. Setback Standards. Accessory structures shall comply with the setback standards in FMC 19.60.030(A), except that the maximum setback provisions shall not apply.

3. Design Guidelines. Accessory structures shall comply with the Neighborhood Commercial design guidelines, as provided in FMC 19.60.070.

4. Restrictions. A structure shall not be placed over an easement that prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach into the public right-of-way.

5. Compliance with Subdivision Standards. The owner may be required to remove an accessory structure as a condition of land division approval when removal of the structure is necessary to comply with setback standards.

C. Sidewalk Displays. Sidewalk display of merchandise and vendors shall be limited to cards, plants, gardening/floral products, food, books, newspapers, bicycles, and similar small items for sale or rental to pedestrians (i.e., non-automobile oriented). A minimum clearance of four feet shall be maintained. Display of larger items, such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, buses, recreational vehicles/boats, construction equipment, building materials, and similar vehicles and equipment, is prohibited. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.65 TOWN CENTER COMMERCIAL (TCC) DISTRICT

Sections:

19.65.010    Purpose.

19.65.020    Permitted land uses.

19.65.030    Building setbacks.

19.65.040    Lot coverage, floor area ratio and maximum building size.

19.65.050    Block layout and building orientation.

19.65.060    Building height.

19.65.070    Architectural guidelines and standards.

19.65.080    Pedestrian and transit amenities

19.65.090    Special standards for certain uses.


19.65.010 Purpose.

A city goal is to strengthen the town center commercial district as the “heart” of the community and as the logical place for people to gather and create a business center. The town center commercial district is intended to support this goal through elements of design and appropriate mixed use development. This chapter provides standards for the orderly improvement of the district based on the following principles:

A. Efficient use of land and urban services;

B. A mixture of land uses to encourage walking as an alternative to driving, and to provide more employment and housing options;

C. Both formal and informal community gathering places;

D. A distinct storefront character that identifies commercial districts;

E. Connections to neighborhoods and other employment areas;

F. Reduced reliance on the automobile and reduced parking needs. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.65.020 Permitted land uses.

A. Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 19.65.020.A are permitted in the town center commercial district, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 19.65.020.A, and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 19.65.020.A, may be permitted. The land uses identified with a “CU” in Table 19.65.020.A require conditional use permit approval prior to development or a change in use.

  

Table 19.65.020.A 

Land Uses and Building Types Permitted in the Town Center Commercial District  

	1. Residential*

Single-Family

a. Single-family detached housing (existing housing only)

b. Zero-lot line housing (existing only)

c. Accessory dwellings

d. Manufactured homes – individual lots (existing housing only)

e. Single-family attached townhomes (CU)

Two-Family

f. Two-family housing (duplex) (CU)

Multifamily and Three-Family 

g. Multifamily housing and triplexes (CU)

Residential care

h. Residential care homes and facilities (CU)

i. Family day care (12 or fewer children)

2. Home occupations

3. Bed and breakfast inns and vacation rentals (CU)	4. Public and Institutional*

a. Churches and places of worship

b. Clubs, lodges, similar use

c. Government offices and facilities (administration, public safety, transportation, utilities, and similar uses)

d. Libraries, museums, community centers, concert halls and similar uses

e. Public parking lots and garages

f. Private utilities

g. Public parks and recreational facilities

h. Schools (public and private)

i. Special district facilities

j. Telecommunications equipment – antennas pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC

k. Telecommunications equipment – monopoles (CU) pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC

l. Uses similar to those listed above subject to applicable CU requirements

5. Accessory Uses and Structures*

6. Commercial

a. Auto-oriented uses and facilities (CU)*	b. Entertainment (e.g., theaters, clubs, amusement uses)

c. Hotels/motels

d. Medical and dental offices, clinics and laboratories

e. Mixed use development (housing and other permitted use)*

f. Office uses (i.e., those not otherwise listed)

g. Personal and professional services (e.g., child care center, catering/food services, restaurants, laundromats and dry cleaners, barber shops and salons, banks and financial institutions, and similar uses)

h. Repair services (must be enclosed within building)

i. Retail trade and services, except auto-oriented uses

j. Uses similar to those listed above (subject to CU requirements, as applicable)

7. Industrial*

Light manufacture (e.g., small-scale crafts, electronic equipment, furniture, similar goods when in conjunction with retail) (CU) 

	Uses marked with an asterisk (*) are subject to the standards in FMC 19.65.090, Special standards for certain uses.

Land uses marked with a CU shall require a conditional use permit.

B. Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in Chapter 19.480 FMC.

C. Land Uses Prohibited in the Commercial District. Only uses specifically listed in Table 19.65.020.A, and uses similar to those in Table 19.65.020.A, are permitted in this district.

The following uses are expressly prohibited: Industrial uses not permitted in section 7 of Table 19.65.020.A. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.65.030 Building setbacks.

In the town center commercial district, buildings are placed close to the street to create a vibrant pedestrian environment, to slow traffic down, provide a storefront character to the street, and encourage walking. The setback standards are flexible to encourage public spaces between sidewalks and building entrances (e.g., extra-wide sidewalks, plazas, squares, outdoor dining areas, and pocket parks). The standards also encourage the formation of solid blocks of commercial and mixed use buildings for a walkable commercial area.

Building setbacks are measured from the wall or facade to the respective property line. Setbacks for porches are measured from the edge of the deck or porch to the property line. The setback standards, as listed on the following page, apply to primary structures as well as accessory structures. The standards may be modified only by approval of a variance.

A. Front Setbacks.

1. Minimum Setback. There is no minimum front setback required.

2. Maximum Setback. The maximum allowable front setback is 10 feet. This standard is met when a minimum of 80 percent of the front building elevation is placed no more than 10 feet back from the front property line. On parcels with more than one building, this standard applies to the largest building. The setback standard may be increased when a usable public space with pedestrian amenities (e.g., extra-wide sidewalk, plaza, pocket park, outdoor dining area or town square with seating) is provided between the building and front property line. (See also pedestrian amenities standards in FMC 19.65.080, and architectural standards in FMC 19.65.070 for related building entrance standards.)

B. Rear Setbacks.

1. Minimum Setback. The minimum rear setback for all structures shall be zero feet, except for doorways which will be recessed to assure safe exiting, for street-access lots, and eight feet for alley-access lots (distance from building to rear property line or alley easement) in order to provide space for parallel parking. When a building abuts a residential district the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.

2. Through-Lots. For buildings on through-lots (lots with front and rear frontage onto a street), the front setbacks in subsection A of this section shall apply.

C. Side Setbacks. There is no minimum side setback required, except that buildings shall conform to the vision clearance standards in FMC 19.162.020 and the applicable fire and building codes for attached structures, firewalls, and related requirements.

D. Setback Exceptions. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, cornices, awnings, canopies, porches, decks, pergolas, and similar architectural features may encroach into setbacks by no more than four feet, subject to compliance with applicable standards of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code. Walls and fences may be placed on the property line, subject to the requirements of Chapter 19.163 FMC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.65.040 Lot coverage, floor area ratio and maximum building size.

A. Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage requirement, except that compliance with other sections of this code may preclude full (100 percent) lot coverage for some land uses.

B. Floor Area Ratio. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) controls the bulk and mass of development. FAR is measured by dividing the gross enclosed area of all floors of a building (or combination of buildings in a single development) by the net land area of the development (not including street rights-of-way). For example, a 1.0 FAR equals two building stories (approximately 25 to 30 feet high) with 50 percent lot coverage. A FAR of 4.0 equals six building stories (more than 75 feet high) with 67 percent lot coverage. The following standard shall be met in all commercial, industrial and mixed use (residential with nonresidential) developments:

1. The maximum floor area shall be 1.0 in the town center commercial district.

C. Maximum Building Size. Individual maximum building size is 60,000 square feet.

Figure 19.65.040 – Floor Area Ratio
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.65.050 Block layout and building orientation.

This section is intended to promote the walkable, storefront character of the town center commercial district by forming short blocks and orienting (placing or locating) buildings close to streets. Placing buildings close to the street also slows traffic down and provides more “eyes on the street,” increasing the safety of public spaces. The standards, as listed on the following page and illustrated above, complement the front setback standards in FMC 19.65.030.

A. Applicability. This section applies to new land divisions and all of the following types of development (i.e., subject to site design review):

1. Three or more single-family attached townhomes on their own lots (i.e., townhomes subject to site design review);

2. Duplex and triplex developments with more than one building (i.e., duplex and triplex developments subject to site design review);

3. Multifamily housing;

4. Public and institutional buildings, except that the standard shall not apply to buildings which are not subject to site design review or those that do not receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely to house mechanical equipment, and similar uses); and

5. Commercial and mixed use buildings subject to site design review.

Compliance with all of the provisions of subsections B through E of this section shall be required.

B. Block Layout Standard. New land divisions and developments, which are subject to site design review, shall be configured to provide an alley or interior parking court, as shown above. Blocks (areas bound by public street right-of-way) shall have a length not exceeding 200 feet, and a depth not exceeding 200 feet. Pedestrian pathways shall be provided from the street right-of-way to interior parking courts between buildings, as necessary to ensure reasonably safe, direct, and convenient access to building entrances and off-street parking. Exceptions to this standard may be approved when all of the provisions of subsection C of this section, superblock developments, are met.

Figure 19.65.050.B – Block Layout (Typical)
[IMAGE]


C. Superblock Developments. Commercial and mixed use developments may exceed the block width and depth standards in subsection B of this section, when the total floor area of those developments (i.e., one or more buildings on one or more lots) exceeds 40,000 square feet on the ground floor. These “superblock developments” shall conform to all of the standards in subsections (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section (see Figure 19.65.050.C):

1. Create a “Shopping Street.” Each development has at least one street or drive designed with the basic elements of a good pedestrian-oriented shopping street: buildings oriented (placed) close to both sides of a “main street,” which may be public or private; on-street parking; wide sidewalks (e.g., eight to 12 feet typical); street trees; pedestrian-scale lighting and other similar enhancements.

2. Provide Usable Pedestrian Space. “Pedestrian space” means a plaza or extra-wide pathway/sidewalk near one or more building entrances. Each development provides street trees or planters, space for outdoor seating, canopies or awnings, and on-street parking (in selected areas) to improve the pedestrian environment along internal private drives.

Figure 19.65.050.C – “Superblock” Layout (Typical)
[IMAGE]


D. Building Orientation Standard. All of the developments listed in subsection A of this section shall be oriented to a street. The building orientation standard is met when all of the following criteria are met:

1. The minimum and maximum setback standards in FMC 19.65.030 are met;

2. Buildings have their primary entrance(s) oriented to (facing) the street. Building entrances may include entrances to individual units, lobby entrances, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard entrances (i.e., to a cluster of units or commercial spaces). Alternatively, a building may have its entrance facing a side when a direct pedestrian walkway not exceeding 15 feet in length is provided between the building entrance and the street right-of-way.

3. Off-street parking, driveways or other vehicular circulation shall not be placed between a building and the street which is used to comply with subsection (D)(2) of this section. On corner lots, buildings and their entrances should be oriented to the street corner, as shown above; parking, driveways and other vehicle areas shall be prohibited between buildings and street corners.

Figure 19.65.050.D – Building Orientation (Typical)
[IMAGE]


E. Variances. Variances will be made in accordance with Chapter 19.520 FMC. The standard may be varied to address topographic or other physical constraints, in accordance with the provisions for Class B or C variances in Chapter 19.520 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.65.060 Building height.

All buildings in the town center commercial district shall comply with the following building height standards. The standards are intended to allow for development of appropriately scaled buildings with a storefront character:

Figure 19.65.060 – Building Height Diagram (Credit for Housing)
[IMAGE]


A. Maximum Height. Buildings shall be no more than three stories or 45 feet in height, whichever is greater. The maximum height may be increased by 12 feet when housing is provided above the ground floor (“vertical mixed use”), as shown above. The building height increase for housing shall apply only to that portion of the building that contains housing.

B. Method of Measurement. “Building height” is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof (see Figure 19.65.060 for examples of measurement). The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

1. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade;

2. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (B)(1) of this section is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. Not included in the maximum height are: chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flagpoles, and similar features which are not for human occupancy. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.65.070 Architectural guidelines and standards.

A. Purpose and Applicability. The town center commercial district architectural guidelines standards are intended to provide detailed, human-scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of building styles. This section applies to all of the following types of buildings:

1. Three or more single-family attached townhomes on their own lots (i.e., townhomes subject to site design review);

2. Duplex and triplex developments with more than one building (i.e., duplex and triplex developments subject to site design review);

3. Multifamily housing;

4. Public and institutional buildings, except that the standard shall not apply to buildings which are not subject to site design review or those that do not receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely to house mechanical equipment, and similar uses); and

5. Commercial and mixed use buildings subject to site design review.

B. Guidelines and Standards. Each of the following standards shall be met. An architectural feature used to comply with one standard may be used to comply with another standard.

1. Detailed Storefront Design. All buildings shall contribute to the storefront character and visual relatedness of town center commercial district buildings. This criterion is met by providing all of the architectural features listed in subsections (B)(1)(a) through (e) of this section along the front building elevation (i.e., facing the street), as applicable.

a. Corner building entrances on corner lots. Alternatively, a building entrance may be located away from the corner when the building corner is beveled or incorporates other detailing to reduce the angular appearance of the building at the street corner.

b. Regularly spaced and similar-shaped windows with window hoods or trim (all building stories).

c. Large display windows on the ground floor (nonresidential uses only). Bulkheads, piers and a storefront cornice (e.g., separates ground-floor from second story, as shown above) shall frame display windows.

d. Decorative cornice at top of building (flat roof); or eaves provided with pitched roof.

e. All residential buildings subject to design review shall comply with the residential district architectural guidelines, as listed in FMC 19.30.100.

Figure 19.65.070.B(1) – Town Center Commercial District Building Design Elements (Typical)
[IMAGE]


[Note: the example shown above is meant to illustrate required building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a required architectural style.]

Figure 19.65.070.B(2) – Design of Large-Scale Buildings and Developments (Typical)
[IMAGE]


[Note: the example shown above is meant to illustrate examples of these building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a required architectural style.]

2. Design of Large-Scale Buildings and Developments. The standards in subsection (B)(2)(c) of this section shall apply to large-scale buildings and developments, as defined in subsections (B)(2)(a) and (b):

a. Buildings with greater than 20,000 square feet of enclosed ground-floor space (i.e., “large-scale”). Multitenant buildings shall be counted as the sum of all tenant spaces within the same building shell; 

b. Multiple-building developments with a combined ground-floor space (enclosed) greater than 40,000 square feet (e.g., shopping centers, public/institutional campuses, and similar developments);

c. All large-scale buildings and developments, as defined in subsections (B)(2)(a) and (b) of this section, shall provide human-scale design by conforming to all of the following criteria:

i. Incorporate changes in building direction (i.e., articulation) and divide large masses into varying heights and sizes, as shown above. Such changes may include building offsets; projections; changes in elevation or horizontal direction; sheltering roofs; terraces; a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials; and use of windows, screening trees; small-scale lighting (e.g., wall-mounted lighting, or up-lighting); and similar features.

ii. Every building elevation adjacent to a street with a horizontal dimension of more than 100 feet, as measured from end-wall to end-wall, shall have a building entrance; except that building elevations that are unable to provide an entrance due to the internal function of the building space (e.g., mechanical equipment, areas where the public or employees are not received, etc.) may not be required to meet this standard. Pathways shall connect all entrances to the street right-of-way, in conformance with Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.65.080 Pedestrian and transit amenities

A. Purpose and Applicability. This section is intended to complement the building orientation standards in FMC 19.65.050, and the street standards in Chapter 19.165 FMC, by providing comfortable and inviting pedestrian spaces within the town center commercial district. Pedestrian amenities serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting, and enjoyment of the city’s town center commercial district, and contribute to a walkable district. This section applies to all of the following types of buildings:

1. Three or more single-family attached townhomes on their own lots (i.e., townhomes subject to site design review);

2. Duplex and triplex developments with more than one building (i.e., duplex and triplex developments subject to site design review);

3. Multifamily housing;

4. Public and institutional buildings, except that the standard shall not apply to buildings which are not subject to site design review or those that do not receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely to house mechanical equipment, and similar uses); and

5. Commercial and mixed use buildings subject to site design review.

B. Guidelines and Standards. Every development shall provide one or more of the “pedestrian amenities” listed in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(5) of this section. Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a public right-of-way when approved by the applicable jurisdiction.

1. A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the building entrance (minimum width of eight feet);

2. Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches or ledges) between the building entrance and sidewalk (minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in width);

3. Building canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection (minimum projection of four feet over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space);

4. Public art which incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture, etc.);

5. Transit amenity, such as bus shelter or pullout, in accordance with the city’s transportation system plan and guidelines established by Tri-Met. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.65.090 Special standards for certain uses.

This section supplements the standards contained in FMC 19.65.030 through 19.65.080. It provides standards for the following land uses in order to control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the Town Center Commercial District:

•Residential Uses

•Public and Institutional Uses

•Accessory Uses and Structures

•Automobile-Oriented Uses and Facilities

•Outdoor Storage and Display

A. Residential Uses. Higher density residential uses, such as multifamily buildings and attached townhomes, are permitted to encourage housing near employment, shopping and services. All residential developments shall comply with the standards in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(6) of this section which are intended to require mixed use development; conserve the community’s supply of commercial land for commercial uses; provide for designs which are compatible with a storefront character; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic and parking; and ensure proper management and maintenance of common areas. Residential uses which existed prior to the effective date of this code are exempt from this section.

Figure 19.65.090.A – Mixed Use Development in the Town Center Commercial District
[IMAGE]


1. Mixed Use Development Required. Residential uses shall be permitted only when part of a mixed use development (residential with commercial or public/institutional use). Both “vertical” mixed use (housing above the ground floor), and “horizontal” mixed use (housing on the ground floor) developments are allowed, subject to the standards in subsections (A)(2) through (A)(6) of this section.

2. Limitation on Street-Level Housing. No more than 50 percent of a single street frontage may be occupied by residential uses. This standard is intended to reserve storefront space for commercial uses and public/institutional uses; it does not limit residential uses above the street level on upper stories, or behind street-level storefronts. For parcels with street access at more than one level (e.g., sloping sites with two street frontages), the limitation on residential building space shall apply to all street frontages.

3. Density. There is no minimum or maximum residential density standard. Density shall be controlled by the applicable floor area and building height standards.

4. Parking, Garages, and Driveways. All off-street vehicle parking, including surface lots and garages, shall be oriented to alleys, placed underground, placed in structures above the ground floor, or located in parking areas located behind or to the side of the building; except that side yards facing a street (i.e., corner yards) shall not be used for surface parking. All garage entrances facing a street (e.g., underground or structured parking) shall be recessed behind the front building elevation by a minimum of five feet. On corner lots, garage entrances shall be oriented to a side street when access cannot be provided from an alley.

5. Creation of Alleys. When a subdivision (e.g., four or more townhome lots) is proposed, a public or private alley shall be created for the purpose of vehicle access. Alleys are not required when existing development patterns or topography make construction of an alley impracticable. As part of a subdivision, the city may require dedication of right-of-way or easements, and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building breaks) to provide pedestrian connections through a development site, in conformance with Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.

6. Common Areas. All common areas (e.g., walkways, drives, courtyards, private alleys, parking courts, etc.) and building exteriors shall be maintained by a homeowners association or other legal entity. Copies of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the city prior to building permit approval.

B. Public and Institutional Uses. Public and institutional uses (as listed in Table 19.65.020.A) are allowed in the town center commercial district, except that automobile-oriented uses shall comply with the standards in subsection D of this section. Typical automobile oriented uses in this category include public works yards, equipment storage and repair, school bus companies, and similar facilities that store, repair or service automobiles, trucks, buses, heavy equipment and construction materials.

C. Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and structures are of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot. Typical accessory structures in the town center commercial district include small workshops, greenhouses, studios, storage sheds, and similar structures. Accessory uses and structures are allowed for all permitted land uses within the town center commercial district, as identified in Table 19.65.020.A. Accessory structures shall comply with the following standards:

1. Primary Use Required. An accessory structure shall not be allowed before or without a primary use.

2. Setback Standards. Accessory structures shall comply with the setback standards in FMC 19.65.030, except that the maximum setback provisions shall not apply.

3. Design Guidelines. Accessory structures shall comply with town center commercial district design guidelines, as provided in FMC 19.65.070.

4. Restrictions. A structure shall not be placed over an easement that prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach into the public right-of-way.

5. Compliance with subdivision standards. The owner may be required to remove an accessory structure as a condition of land division approval when removal of the structure is necessary to comply with setback standards.

D. Automobile-Oriented Uses and Facilities. Automobile-oriented uses and facilities, as defined below, shall conform to all of the following standards in the town center commercial district. The standards are intended to provide a vibrant storefront character, slow traffic, and encourage walking.

1. Parking, Garages, and Driveways. All off-street vehicle parking, including surface lots and garages, shall be accessed from alleys, placed underground, placed in structures above the ground floor, or located in parking areas located behind or to the side of a building; except that side yards on corner lots shall not be used for surface parking. All garage entrances facing a street (e.g., underground or structured parking) shall be recessed behind the front elevation by a minimum of five feet. On corner lots, garage entrances shall be oriented to a side street (i.e., away from the more major street) when vehicle access cannot be provided from an alley. Individual surface parking lots shall not exceed a total of 200 parking spaces, or one-half city block, whichever is smaller; larger parking areas shall be in multiple story garages.

2. Automobile-Oriented Uses. “Automobile-oriented use” means automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of the use. These uses are restricted because, when unrestricted, they detract from the pedestrian-friendly, storefront character of the district and can consume large amounts of land relative to other permitted uses. Automobile-oriented uses shall comply with the following standards:

a. Vehicle Repair, Sales, Rental, Storage, Service. Businesses that repair, sell, rent, store, or service automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, buses, recreational vehicles/boats, construction equipment, and similar vehicles and equipment are permitted when the use does not exceed 5,000 square feet (indoor and outdoor). Outdoor storage and display for these uses is prohibited unless the use is in a fully enclosed structure.

b. Drive-Up, Drive-In, and Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through facilities (e.g., associated with restaurants, banks, car washes, and similar uses) are permitted only when accessory to a primary commercial “walk-in” use, and shall conform to all of the following standards:

i. The facility receives access from an alley or driveway, and not a street;

ii. None of the drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities (e.g., driveway queuing areas, windows, teller machines, service windows, drop-boxes, and similar facilities) are located within 20 feet of a street and shall not be oriented to a street corner. (Walk-up only teller machines and kiosks may be oriented to a corner);

iii. The facility is subordinate to a primary permitted use. “Subordinate” means all components of the facility, in total, occupy less street frontage than the primary commercial or public/institutional building; and

iv. No more than one drive-up, drive-in, or drive-through facility shall be permitted on one block, or for a distance of 400 linear feet along the same street frontage, whichever is less.

E. Sidewalk Displays. Sidewalk display of merchandise and vendors shall be limited to cards, plants, gardening/floral products, food, books, newspapers, bicycles, and similar small items for sale or rental to pedestrians (i.e., non-automobile-oriented). A minimum clearance of five feet shall be maintained. Display of larger items, such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, buses, recreational vehicles/boats, construction equipment, building materials, and similar vehicles and equipment, is prohibited.

F. Light Industrial Uses.

1. High Traffic-Generating Uses. Uses which are likely to generate “significant” levels of vehicle traffic (e.g., due to shipping, receiving, and/or customer traffic) shall require a conditional use permit, in accordance with Chapter 19.440 FMC. “Significant traffic” means that the average number of daily trips, or the average number of peak hour trips, on any existing street would increase by 10 percent or greater as a result of the development. The city may require a traffic impact analysis prepared by a qualified professional prior to deeming a land use application complete, and determining whether the proposed use requires conditional use approval. Applicants may be required to provide a traffic analysis for review by Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) for developments that increase traffic on state highways. The conditional use permit shall include appropriate transportation improvement requirements, as identified by the traffic analysis, in conformance with Chapter 19.165 FMC.

2. Wireless Communication Equipment. Wireless communication equipment, including radio (i.e., cellular), television and similar types of transmission and receiving facilities are permitted, subject to the standards for wireless communication equipment in Chapter 19.245 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.70 CORRIDOR COMMERCIAL (CC) DISTRICT

Sections:

19.70.010    Purpose.

19.70.020    Permitted land uses.

19.70.030    Corridor commercial setback standards.

19.70.040    Lot coverage and floor area ratio.

19.70.050    Site layout and building orientation.

19.70.060    Building height.

19.70.070    Architectural guidelines and standards.

19.70.080    Pedestrian and transit amenities.

19.70.090    Special standards for certain uses.


19.70.010 Purpose.

The corridor commercial district is intended to allow auto-accommodating commercial development while encouraging walking, bicycling, and transit. The district allows a full range of retail and service businesses with a local or regional market. Industrial uses are allowed but are limited in size to avoid adverse effects and ensure that they do not dominate the character of the commercial area. The district’s development standards promote attractive development, an open and pleasant street appearance and compatibility with adjacent residential areas. Development is intended to be aesthetically pleasing for motorists, transit users, pedestrians, and the businesses themselves. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.70.020 Permitted land uses.

A. Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 19.70.020.A are permitted in the corridor commercial district, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 19.70.020.A, and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 19.70.020.A, may be permitted. The land uses identified with a “CU” in Table 19.70.020.A require conditional use permit approval prior to development or a change in use.

B. Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in Chapter 19.480 FMC, Code Interpretations.

  

Table 19.70.020.A 

Land Uses and Building Types Permitted in the Corridor Commercial District  

	1. Commercial

a. Auto-oriented uses and facilities*

b. Entertainment (e.g., theaters, clubs, amusement uses)

c. Hotels/motels

d. Medical and dental offices, clinics and laboratories

e. Mixed-use development*

f. Office uses (i.e., those not otherwise listed)

g. Personal and professional services (e.g., child care center, catering/food services, restaurants, laundromats and dry cleaners, barber shops and salons, and similar uses)

h. Repair services (must be enclosed within building)

i. Retail trade and services (e.g., grocery, hardware and variety stores, banks and financial institutions)

j. Uses similar to those listed above (subject to CU requirements, as applicable)	2. Industrial*

a. Light manufacture (e.g., small-scale crafts, electronic equipment, furniture, similar goods when in conjunction with retail or if determined by the planning commission to be compatible with the purposes of the district and other uses in the district) (CU)

3. Public and Institutional (CU)

a. Churches and places of worship

b. Clubs, lodges, similar uses

c. Government offices and facilities (administration, public safety, transportation, utilities, and similar uses)

d. Libraries, museums, community centers, concert halls and similar uses

e. Public parking lots and garages

f. Private utilities

g. Public parks and recreational facilities

h. Schools (public and private)

i. Special district facilities	j. Telecommunications equipment – antennas pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC

k. Telecommunications equipment – monopoles (CU) pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC

l. Uses similar to those listed above subject to applicable CU requirements

4. Residential*

a. Residential mixed use*

b. Manufactured homes – individual lots (existing housing only)

c. Residential care homes and facilities (CU)

d. Family day care (12 or fewer children) (CU)

5. Accessory Uses and Structures

	Land uses marked with an asterisk (*) use the special standards for certain uses in FMC 19.70.090.

Land uses marked with a CU shall require a conditional use permit according to Article IV of this title.

(Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.70.030 Corridor commercial setback standards.

A. Building Setbacks. In the corridor commercial district, setback standards are intended to support the purpose of the district to create an aesthetically pleasing, open and pleasant street appearance; to complement the building orientation standard; and to enhance visibility of commercial uses from the street. Building setbacks are measured from the wall or facade to the respective property line. The setback standards apply to primary structures as well as accessory structures. The standards may be modified only by approval of a variance.

1. Front Setbacks.

a. Minimum Setback. There is no minimum front setback.

b. Maximum Setback. The maximum setback is 20 feet.

c. Frontage Requirement. Building facades shall occupy a minimum of 50 percent of the frontage width at the maximum setback line.

2. Rear Setbacks.

a. Minimum Setback. The minimum rear setback for all structures shall be zero feet for street-access lots, and eight feet for alley-access lots (distance from building to rear property line or alley easement) in order to provide space for parallel parking. When a building abuts a residential district the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.

b. Through-Lots. For buildings on through-lots (lots with front and rear frontage onto a street), the front setbacks in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall apply.

3. Side Setbacks. There is no minimum side setback required, except that buildings shall conform to the vision clearance standards in Chapter 19.162 FMC, the landscaping and buffering requirements in Chapter 19.163 FMC, and the applicable fire and building codes for attached structures, firewalls, and related requirements.

4. Setback Exceptions.

a. Architectural Features. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, cornices, awnings, canopies, porches, decks, pergolas, and similar architectural features may encroach into setbacks by no more than four feet, subject to compliance with applicable standards of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code. Walls and fences may be placed on the property line, subject to the requirements of Chapter 19.163 FMC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.70.040 Lot coverage and floor area ratio.

There are no maximum lot coverage or floor area ratio requirements, except that compliance with other sections of this code may preclude full (100 percent) lot coverage for some land uses. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.70.050 Site layout and building orientation.

This section is intended to encourage the efficient use of space, and connectivity to parking areas. The standards, as listed on the following page and illustrated above, complement the front setback standards in FMC 19.70.030.

A. Applicability. This section applies to all new land divisions, site design review, and conditional use applications.

B. Pedestrian Access Standard. New land divisions and developments, which are subject to site design review or conditional use permits, shall provide pedestrian pathways as necessary to ensure reasonably safe, direct, and convenient access to building entrances and off-street parking.

1. From adjoining street right-of-way to building entrances and off-street parking these pathways shall be provided with an average maximum interval of 100 feet along the street right-of-way.

2. Between adjoining developments where practical.

3. In conformity with applicable requirements in Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.

C. Building Orientation Standard. All of the developments listed in subsection A of this section shall be oriented to a street. The building orientation standard is met when all of the following criteria are met:

1. Buildings shall have their primary entrance(s) oriented to (facing) the street with a direct pedestrian walkway connecting with the adjoining street right-of-way. Building entrances may include entrances to individual units, lobby entrances, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard entrances (i.e., to a cluster of units or commercial spaces). Alternatively, a building may have its entrance facing a side when a direct pedestrian walkway not exceeding 30 feet in length is provided between the building entrance and the street right-of-way.

2. Off-street parking, driveways or other vehicular circulation shall not be placed between a building and the street. On corner lots, buildings and their entrances should be oriented to the street corner. Parking, driveways and other vehicle areas shall not be permitted adjacent to street corners. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.70.060 Building height.

All buildings in the corridor commercial district shall comply with the following building height standards. The standards are intended to allow for development of appropriately scaled buildings.

A. Maximum Height. Buildings shall be no more than 45 feet in height.

B. Method of Measurement. “Building height” is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

1. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade;

2. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (B)(1) of this section is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. Not included in the maximum height are: chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flag poles, and similar features which are not for human occupancy.

C. Performance Option. The allowable building height may be increased to 55 feet, when approved as part of a conditional use permit. The development approval may require additional setbacks, stepping-down of building elevations, visual buffering, screening, and/or other appropriate measures to provide a height transition between the development and adjacent development. Roof equipment and other similar features which are necessary to a commercial or industrial operation shall be screened, and may not exceed eight feet in height without approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.70.070 Architectural guidelines and standards.

A. Purpose and Applicability. The corridor commercial district architectural guidelines are intended to provide detailed, human-scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of building styles. This section applies to all development applications that are subject to site plan review or conditional use permits.

B. Guidelines and Standards. Each of the following standards shall be met. An architectural feature used to comply with more than one standard in this title.

1. Pedestrian-Oriented Design. All buildings shall contribute to the desired pedestrian-friendly character of corridor commercial district buildings. This criterion shall be met by providing all of the architectural features listed in subsections (B)(1)(a) through (d) of this section, along the front building elevation (i.e., facing the street), as applicable.

a. Corner building entrances on corner lots. Alternatively, a building entrance may be located away from the corner when the building corner is beveled or incorporates other detailing to reduce the angular appearance of the building at the street corner.

b. Regularly spaced and similar-shaped windows with window hoods or trim (all building stories).

c. Large display windows on the ground floor. Bulkheads, piers and a storefront cornice (i.e., separates ground floor from second story) shall frame display windows.

d. Decorative cornice at the top of a building (flat roof); or eaves provided with pitched roof.

Figure 19.70.070.B(2) – Design of Large-Scale Buildings and Developments (Typical)
[IMAGE]


[Note: the example shown above is meant to illustrate examples of these building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a required architectural style.]

2. Design of Large-Scale Buildings and Developments. The standards in subsection (B)(2)(c) of this section shall apply to large-scale buildings and developments, as defined in subsections (B)(2) (a) and (b) of this section:

a. Buildings with greater than 20,000 square feet of enclosed ground-floor space (i.e., “large-scale”). Multitenant buildings shall be counted as the sum of all tenant spaces within the same building shell; 

b. Multiple-building developments with a combined ground-floor space (enclosed) greater than 40,000 square feet (i.e., shopping centers, public/institutional campuses, and similar developments);

c. All large-scale buildings and developments, as defined in subsections (B)(2)(a) and (b) of this section, shall provide human-scale design by conforming to all of the following criteria:

i. Incorporate changes in building direction (i.e., articulation), and divide large masses into varying heights and sizes, as shown above. Such changes may include building offsets; projections; changes in elevation or horizontal direction; sheltering roofs; terraces; a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials; and use of windows, screening trees; small-scale lighting (i.e., wall-mounted lighting, or up-lighting); and similar features.

ii. Every building elevation adjacent to a street with a horizontal dimension of more than 100 feet, as measured from end-wall to end-wall, shall have a building entrance, which is open during business hours. Pathways shall connect all entrances to the street right-of-way, in conformance with Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation, unless waived by the approval authority when the applicant can demonstrate that the building(s) is unable to provide such an entrance because the function of the building and/or the characteristics of the site do not allow an alternative floor plan or building orientation that could reasonably provide it. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.70.080 Pedestrian and transit amenities.

A. Purpose and Applicability. This section is intended to complement the building orientation standards in FMC 19.70.050, and the street standards in Chapter 19.165 FMC, by providing pedestrian spaces within the corridor center commercial district. This section applies to all development applications that are subject to site design review or conditional use permits.

B. Guidelines and Standards. Every development shall provide at least one of the “pedestrian amenities” listed in subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section. Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a public right-of-way when approved by the applicable jurisdiction.

1. A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the building entrance (minimum width of eight feet);

2. Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches or ledges between the building entrance and sidewalk (minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in width);

3. Building canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection (minimum projection of four feet over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space);

4. Public art which incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture, etc.).

C. Transit Amenities. Development on sites that are adjacent to or incorporate transit streets shall provide improvements as described in this section at any existing or planned transit stop located along the site’s frontage, unless waived by the community development director.

1. Transit facilities include bus stops, shelters, and related facilities. Required transit facility improvements may include the dedication of land or the provision of a public easement.

2. Development shall at a minimum provide reasonably direct pedestrian connections, as defined in FMC 19.162.030, between building entrances and the transit facility and between buildings on the site and streets adjoining transit stops.

3. Improvements at Major Transit Stops. A proposed development that is adjacent to or includes an existing or planned major transit stop will be required to plan for access to the transit stop and provide for transit improvements, in consultation with TriMet and consistent with an agency adopted or approved plan at the time of development. Requirements apply where the subject parcel(s) or portions thereof are within 200 feet of a transit stop. Development requirements and improvements may include the following:

a. Intersection or mid-block traffic management improvements to allow for pedestrian crossings at major transit stops.

b. Building placement within 20 feet of the transit stop, a transit street or an intersection street, or a pedestrian plaza at the stop or at street intersections.

c. Transit passenger landing pads accessible to disabled persons to transit agency standards.

d. An easement or dedication for a passenger shelter and an underground utility connection to a major transit stop if requested by TriMet.

e. Lighting to TriMet standards.

f. Intersection and mid-block traffic management improvements as needed and practicable to enable marked crossings at major transit stops.

4. Any Type II land divisions where further divisions are possible, and all Type III land divisions, multiple-family developments, community services uses, and commercial or industrial uses located on an existing or future planned major transit street shall meet the TriMet transit facility requirements. Applicants shall consult with TriMet to determine necessary transit facility improvements in conjunction with the proposed development. Proposals shall be consistent with the road crossing improvements that are identified in the transportation system plan on streets with existing or planned transit service. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.70.090 Special standards for certain uses.

This section supplements the standards contained in FMC 19.70.030 through 19.70.080. It provides additional standards for the following land uses in order to control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the corridor commercial district:

•Accessory Uses and Structures

•Automobile-Oriented Uses and Facilities

•Sidewalk Displays

•Light Industrial

•Residential Mixed-Use Development

A. Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and structures are of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot. Typical accessory structures in the corridor commercial district include small workshops, greenhouses, studios, storage sheds, and similar structures. Accessory uses and structures are allowed for all permitted land uses within the corridor commercial district, as identified in Table 19.70.020.A. Accessory structures shall comply with the following standards:

1. Primary Use Required. An accessory structure shall not be allowed before or without a primary use.

2. Setback Standards. Accessory structures shall comply with the setback standards in FMC 19.70.030, except that the maximum setback provisions shall not apply.

3. Design Guidelines. Accessory structures shall comply with corridor commercial district design guidelines, as provided in FMC 19.70.070.

4. Restrictions. A structure shall not be placed over an easement that prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach into the public right-of-way.

5. Compliance with Subdivision Standards. The owner may be required to remove an accessory structure as a condition of land division approval when removal of the structure is necessary to comply with setback standards.

B. Automobile-Oriented Uses and Facilities. Automobile-oriented uses and facilities, as defined below, shall conform to all of the following standards in the corridor commercial district. The standards are intended to provide a vibrant commercial character and encourage walking, bicycling, and transit.

1. Parking, Garages, and Driveways. On corner lots, parking lot or garage entrances shall be oriented to a side street (i.e., away from the more major street), unless topography, ownership patterns or unreasonable expense would make this requirement not practicable.

2. Automobile-Oriented Uses. “Automobile-oriented use” means automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of the use. These uses are restricted because, when unrestricted, they detract from the pedestrian-friendly character of the district and can consume large amounts of land relative to other permitted uses. Automobile-oriented uses shall comply with the following standards:

a. Vehicle Repair, Sales, Rental, Storage, Service. Outdoor storage and display for these uses is prohibited unless the use is in a fully enclosed structure.

b. Drive-Up, Drive-In, and Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through facilities (i.e., associated with restaurants, banks, car washes, and similar uses) are permitted only when accessory to a primary commercial “walk-in” use, and shall conform to all of the following standards:

i. The facility receives access from an alley or driveway, and not a street;

ii. None of the drive-up, drive-in, or drive-through facilities (i.e., driveway queuing areas, windows, teller machines, service windows, drop-boxes, and similar facilities) are located within 20 feet of a street and shall not be oriented to a street corner. (Walk-up only teller machines and kiosks may be oriented to a corner); and

iii. The facility is subordinate to a primary permitted use. “Subordinate” means all components of the facility, in total, occupy less street frontage than the primary commercial or public/institutional building.

C. Sidewalk Displays. Sidewalk display of merchandise and vendors shall be limited to cards, plants, gardening/floral products, food, books, newspapers, bicycles, and similar small items for sale or rental to pedestrians (i.e., non-automobile-oriented). A minimum clearance of five feet shall be maintained. Display of larger items, such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, buses, recreational vehicles/boats, construction equipment, building materials, and similar vehicles and equipment, is prohibited.

D. Light Industrial Uses.

1. High Traffic-Generating Uses. Uses which are likely to generate “significant” levels of vehicle traffic (e.g., due to shipping, receiving, and/or customer traffic) shall require a conditional use permit. “Significant traffic” means that the average number of daily trips, or the average number of peak hour trips, on any existing street would increase by 10 percent or greater as a result of the development. The city may require a traffic impact analysis prepared by a qualified professional prior to deeming a land use application complete, and determining whether the proposed use requires conditional use approval. Applicants may be required to provide a traffic analysis for review by Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) for developments that increase traffic on state highways. The conditional use permit shall include appropriate transportation improvement requirements, as identified by the traffic analysis and/or ODOT, in conformance with Chapter 19.165 FMC.

2. Wireless Communication Equipment. Wireless communication equipment, including radio (i.e., cellular), television and similar types of transmission and receiving facilities are permitted, subject to the standards for wireless communication equipment in Chapter 19.245 FMC. Wireless communication equipment shall also comply with required setbacks, lot coverage and other applicable standards of the corridor commercial district. 

E. Residential Mixed-Use Development. The following standards apply to support the commercial and light manufacturing intent of the corridor commercial zoning district and the direction of the Comprehensive Plan:

1. Nonresidential uses must occupy the ground floor along 75 percent of the street-facing facade width.

2. Except for property located at the corner of NE 223rd and Sandy Boulevard, residential mixed-use development is prohibited within the corridor commercial zone east of NE 223rd Avenue. (Ord. 9-2019 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.80 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LI) DISTRICT

Sections:

19.80.010    Purpose.

19.80.020    Permitted land uses.

19.80.030    Development setbacks.

19.80.040    Lot coverage.

19.80.050    Building height.

19.80.060    Building orientation.

19.80.070    Architectural guidelines and standards.

19.80.080    Special standards for certain uses.


19.80.010 Purpose.

The light industrial district accommodates a range of light manufacturing, industrial-office uses, automobile-oriented uses (e.g., lodging, restaurants, auto-oriented retail), and similar uses which are not appropriate in the town center areas. The district’s standards are based on the following principles:

A. To ensure efficient use of land and public services;

B. To provide a balance between jobs and housing, and encourage mixed use development;

C. To provide transportation options for employees and customers;

D. To provide business services close to major employment centers;

E. To ensure compatibility between industrial uses and nearby residential areas;

F. To provide appropriately zoned land with a range of parcel sizes for industry;

G. To provide for automobile-oriented uses, while preventing strip-commercial development in highway corridors. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.80.020 Permitted land uses.

A. Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 19.80.020.A are permitted in the light industrial district, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses which are specifically listed in Table 19.80.020.A, and land uses which are approved as “similar” to those in Table 19.80.020.A, may be permitted. The land uses identified with a “CU” in Table 19.80.020.A require conditional use permit approval prior to development or a change in use.

  

Table 19.80.020.A 

Land Use Types Permitted in the Light Industrial District  

	1. Industrial*

a. Light manufacture (e.g., electronic equipment, printing, bindery, furniture, and similar goods)

b. Laboratories

c. Warehousing and distribution

d. Mini-warehouse and storage

e. Similar uses

2. Commercial*

a. Automobile-oriented uses (vehicle repair, sales, rental, storage, service; drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through facilities; and similar uses) (CU) 

b. Delicatessen shop (CU)

c. Entertainment (e.g., theaters, amusement uses) (CU)

d. Hotels and motels (CU) 

e. Medical and dental clinics and laboratories (CU)	f. Outdoor commercial uses (e.g., outdoor storage, sales and display) (CU)

g. Personal and professional services (e.g., child care, catering/food services, restaurants, laundromats and dry cleaners, barber shops and salons, banks and financial institutions, and similar uses) (CU)

h. Repair services (CU)

i. Retail trade and services, not exceeding 5,000 square feet of floor area per building

j. Wholesale trade and services, not exceeding 5,000 square feet of floor area per building

k. Professional, executive and administrative offices (CU)

l. Uses similar to those listed above (CU)	3. Civic and Semi-Public Uses (CU)*

a. Government facilities (e.g., public safety, utilities, school district bus facilities, public works yards, transit and transportation, and similar facilities)

b. Utilities (e.g., natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable, and similar facilities)

c. Special district facilities (e.g., irrigation district, and similar facilities) 

d. Trade or commercial schools

e. Churches

f. Uses similar to those listed above

4. Accessory Uses

5. Wireless Communication Equipment (CU)*

	Land uses with an asterisk (*) are subject to the standards in FMC 19.80.080.

Items with a CU require a conditional use permit subject to the procedure and standards in Chapter 19.440 FMC, Conditional Use Permits.

B. Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in Chapter 19.480 FMC, Code Interpretations.

C. Only uses specifically listed in Table 19.80.020.A, and uses similar to those in Table 19.80.020.A, are permitted in this district. The following uses are expressly prohibited: new housing, and similar facilities, and nonvocational schools. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.80.030 Development setbacks.

Development setbacks provide building separation for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering, and visual separation. Building setbacks are measured from the building foundation to the respective property line.

A. Front Setbacks. The minimum front building setback shall be none, except that additional setback may be required to provide for planned widening of an adjacent street.

B. Rear Setbacks. There is no required rear setback, except that buildings shall be setback from the residential district by a minimum of 20 feet.

C. Side Setbacks. There are no required side setbacks, except that buildings shall be set back from the residential district by a minimum of 20 feet.

D. Other Requirements.

1. Buffering. A 20-foot minimum buffer zone shall be required between development and any adjacent residential district. The buffer zone shall provide landscaping to screen parking, service and delivery areas, and walls without windows or entries, as applicable. The buffer may contain pedestrian seating but shall not contain any trash receptacles or storage of equipment, materials, vehicles, etc. The landscaping standards in Chapter 19.163 FMC may require buffering other situations, as well.

2. Neighborhood Access. Construction of pathway(s) and fence breaks in setback yards may be required to provide pedestrian connections to adjacent neighborhoods or other districts, in accordance with Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.

3. Building and Fire Codes. All developments shall meet applicable fire and building code standards, which may require greater setbacks than those listed above (e.g., for combustible materials, etc.). (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.80.040 Lot coverage.

The maximum allowable lot coverage in the light industrial district is 85 percent. The maximum allowable lot coverage is computed by calculating the total area covered by buildings and impervious (paved) surfaces, including accessory structures, as a percentage of total lot area. Compliance with other sections of this code may preclude development of the maximum lot coverage for some land uses. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.80.050 Building height.

The following building height standards are intended to promote land use compatibility and flexibility for industrial development at an appropriate community scale:

A. Base Requirement. Buildings shall be no more than three stories or 45 feet in height, whichever is greater.

B. Performance Option. The allowable building height may be increased to 55 feet, when approved as part of a conditional use permit. The development approval may require additional setbacks, stepping-down of building elevations, visual buffering, screening, and/or other appropriate measures to provide a height transition between the development and adjacent non-industrial development. Roof equipment and other similar features which are necessary to the industrial operation shall be screened, and may not exceed eight feet in height without approval of a conditional use permit.

C. Method of Measurement. “Building height” is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

1. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade;

2. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection A of this section is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. Not included in the maximum height are: chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flagpoles, and similar features which are not for human occupancy. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.80.060 Building orientation.

All of the following standards shall apply to new development within the light industrial district in order to reinforce streets as public spaces and encourage alternative modes of transportation, such as walking, bicycling and use of transit.

A. Building Entrances. All buildings shall have a primary entrance oriented to a street. “Oriented to a street” means that the building entrance faces the street, or is connected to the street by a direct and convenient pathway not exceeding 30 feet in length. Streets used to comply with this standard may be public streets, or private streets that contain sidewalks and street trees, in accordance with the design standards in Chapter 19.163 FMC.

B. Corner Lots. Buildings on corner lots shall have their primary entrance oriented to the street corner, or within 15 feet of the street corner (i.e., as measured from the lot corner). In this case, the street corner shall provide an extra-wide sidewalk or plaza area with landscaping, seating or other pedestrian amenities. The building corner shall provide architectural detailing or beveling to add visual interest to the corner.

C. Pathway Connections. Pathways shall be placed through setbacks as necessary to provide direct and convenient pedestrian circulation between developments and neighborhoods. Pathways shall conform to the standards in Chapter 19.162 FMC.

D. Arterial Streets. When the only street abutting a development is an arterial street, the building’s entrance(s) may be oriented to an internal drive. The internal drive shall provide a raised pathway connecting the building entrances to the street right-of-way. The pathway shall conform to the standards in Article III of this title.

E. Buffers. The city may require a 30-foot landscape buffer (including berms, noise abatement structure, sound wall, etc.) between development in the light industrial district and adjacent residential district(s) to reduce light, glare, noise, and aesthetic impacts.

F. Commercial Developments. Commercial buildings and uses comprising more than 40,000 square feet of total ground-floor building space shall additionally conform to the block layout and building orientation standards for the town center commercial district, as contained in FMC 19.65.050. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.80.070 Architectural guidelines and standards.

All developments in the light industrial district shall be evaluated during site design review for conformance with the criteria in subsections A and B of this section.

A. Building Mass. Where building elevations are oriented to the street in conformance with FMC 19.80.060, architectural features such as windows, pedestrian entrances, building off-sets, projections, detailing, change in materials or similar features, shall be used to break up and articulate large building surfaces and volumes.

B. Pedestrian-Scale Building Entrances. Recessed entries, canopies, and/or similar features shall be used at the entries to buildings in order to create a pedestrian-scale. 

Figure 19.80.070.A – Architectural Features (Typical)
[IMAGE]


[Note: the example shown above is meant to illustrate typical building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a required architectural style.]

(Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.80.080 Special standards for certain uses.

A. High Traffic-Generating Uses. Uses which are likely to generate “significant” levels of vehicle traffic (e.g., due to shipping, receiving, and/or customer traffic) shall require a conditional use permit, in accordance with FMC 19.80.020(A). “Significant traffic” means that the average number of daily trips, or the average number of peak hour trips, on any existing street would increase by 10 percent or greater as a result of the development. The city may require a traffic impact analysis prepared by a qualified professional prior to deeming a land use application complete, and determining whether the proposed use requires conditional use approval. Applicants may be required to provide a traffic analysis for review by Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) for developments that increase traffic on state highways. The conditional use permit shall include appropriate transportation improvement requirements, as identified by the traffic analysis, in conformance with Chapter 19.165 FMC.

B. Wireless Communication Equipment. Wireless communication equipment, including radio (i.e., cellular), television and similar types of transmission and receiving facilities are permitted, subject to the standards for wireless communication equipment in Chapter 19.245 FMC. Wireless communication equipment shall also comply with required setbacks, lot coverage and other applicable standards of the light industrial district.

C. Watchperson’s Quarters. To be occupied by no more than two people, not to exceed 1,000 square feet in size, and such permit shall be renewed annually by the planning commission. In addition, use of the watchperson’s quarters, if approved, would be permitted only as long as the site need exists, with the assumption, rebuttable, that if the concerned area and use was no longer operational, the need would cease and be cause for revocation of permit. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.85 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (GI) DISTRICT

Sections:

19.85.010    Purpose.

19.85.020    Permitted land uses.

19.85.030    Development setbacks.

19.85.040    Lot coverage.

19.85.050    Development orientation.

19.85.060    Building height.

19.85.070    Special standards for certain uses.

19.85.080    Special standards for city of Fairview adopted Metro Title 4 industrial properties.


19.85.010 Purpose.

This district is intended for a broad range of uses, which can be located in areas where they do not directly affect the livability of residential neighborhoods and the quality and viability of commercial areas in the city. This district provides for the normal operation of an industry, which can meet and maintain the standards set in this section in order to reasonably protect nearby residential and commercial districts. The general industrial district accommodates a range of light and heavy industrial land uses. It is intended to segregate incompatible developments from other districts, while providing a high-quality environment for businesses and employees. This chapter guides the orderly development of industrial areas based on the following principles:

A. Provide for efficient use of land and public services;

B. Provide transportation options for employees and customers;

C. Provide appropriate design standards to accommodate a range of industrial users, in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.85.020 Permitted land uses.

A. Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 19.85.020.A are permitted in the general industrial district, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses which are specifically listed below, and land uses which are approved as “similar” to those listed below, may be permitted. The land uses identified with a “CU” in Table 19.85.020.A require conditional use permit approval prior to development or a change in use.

  

Table 19.85.020.A 

Land Uses Types Permitted in the General Industrial District  

	1. Industrial*

a. Heavy manufacturing, assembly, and processing of raw materials (CU)

b. Light manufacture (e.g., electronic equipment, printing, bindery, furniture, and similar goods)

c. Warehousing and distribution

d. Junk yard, motor vehicle wrecking yards, and similar uses

e. Columbia River industrial uses north of Marine Drive

f. Uses similar to those listed above 

2. Residential*

One caretaker unit shall be permitted for each development, subject to the standards in FMC 19.85.070(B). Other residential uses are not permitted, except that residences existing prior to the effective date of this code may continue, subject to the requirements for nonconforming uses and developments

3. Commercial (CU)

Offices and other commercial uses are permitted when they are integral to a primary pre-existing or concurrently established industrial use (e.g., administrative offices, wholesale of goods produced on location, and similar uses).	a. Retail and commercial service uses up to 5,000 square feet in gross floor area (e.g., convenience market, small restaurant, secondary use for wholesaler, similar use)

4. Community Services/Parks Uses (CU)*

a. Government facilities (e.g., public safety, utilities, school district bus facilities, public works yards, transit and transportation, and similar facilities where the public is generally not received)

b. Private utilities (e.g., natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable, and similar facilities)

c. Passive open space (e.g., natural areas)

d. Special district facilities (e.g., irrigation district, and similar facilities)

e. Vocational schools co-located with parent industry or sponsoring organization

f. Uses similar to those listed above	5. Wireless Communication Equipment – subject to the standards in Chapter 19.245 FMC

6. Accessory Uses and Structures 

7. Uses Requiring Groundwater Protection Compliance

a. Machine shop with drop hammer or punch press

b. Dry cleaning or dyeing using explosive materials

c. Enameling and metal coating (galvanizing)

d. Ornamental metal works

e. Welding or sheet metal shop and other manufacturing of a similar nature

f. Any other uses, including similar to those listed in FMC 19.85.020, as may be determined by the city to pose a high potential risk to the ground and surface water resources

g. All uses occurring within the city’s groundwater protection area

	Land uses with an asterisk (*) are subject to the standards in FMC 19.85.070, Special standards for certain uses.

Conditional Uses (CU) shall require a conditional use permit when they generate significant noise, light/glare, dust and vibration impacts, or traffic; or when they include resource extraction.

B. Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in Chapter 19.480 FMC, Code Interpretations.

C. Land Uses Prohibited in General Industrial District. Only uses specifically listed in Table 19.85.020.A, and uses similar to those in Table 19.85.020.A, are permitted in this district. The following uses are expressly prohibited: new housing, churches and similar facilities and schools. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.85.030 Development setbacks.

Development setbacks provide separation between industrial and nonindustrial uses for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering, and visual separation.

A. Front, Side and Rear Setbacks.

1. None, unless the property abuts a parcel of land in a more restrictive manufacturing district (i.e., LI), or a commercial district, in which case the requirements of the abutting property shall apply. If an established building line exists, the setback may be the same as the established building line following approval by the planning commission.

2. If any use in this district abuts or faces any residential zone, a setback of 50 feet on the side abutting or facing the residential district may be required.

3. Setbacks for Insufficient Right-of-Way. Setbacks shall be established when a lot abuts a street having insufficient right-of-way width to serve the area. The necessary right-of-way widths and the setback requirements in such cases shall be based upon the Comprehensive Plan and applicable ordinances and standards.

B. Other Requirements.

1. Buffering. The city may require landscaping, walls or other buffering in setback yards to mitigate adverse noise, light, glare, and aesthetic impacts to adjacent properties.

2. Neighborhood Access. Construction of pathway(s) within setbacks may be required to provide pedestrian connections to adjacent neighborhoods or other districts, in accordance with Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.

3. Building and Fire Codes. All developments shall meet applicable fire and building code standards, which may require setbacks different from those listed above (e.g., combustible materials, etc.).

4. Groundwater Protection. All development shall meet the standards for the groundwater protection area. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.85.040 Lot coverage.

The maximum allowable lot coverage in the general industrial district is 85 percent. The maximum allowable lot coverage is computed by calculating the total area covered by buildings and impervious (paved) surfaces, including accessory structures. Compliance with other sections of this code may preclude development of the maximum lot coverage for some land uses. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.85.050 Development orientation.

Industrial developments shall be oriented on the site to minimize adverse impacts (e.g., noise, glare, smoke, dust, exhaust, vibration, etc.) and protect the privacy of adjacent uses to the extent possible. The following standards shall apply to all development in the general industrial district:

A. Mechanical equipment, lights, emissions, shipping/receiving areas, and other components of an industrial use that are outside enclosed buildings, shall be located away from residential areas, schools, parks and other nonindustrial areas to the maximum extent practicable; and

B. The city may require a landscape buffer, or other visual or sound barrier (fence, wall, landscaping, or combination thereof) to mitigate adverse impacts that cannot be avoided through building orientation standards alone.

Figure 19.85.050 – Industrial Development Orientation
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.85.060 Building height.

The following building height standards are intended to promote land use compatibility and flexibility for industrial development at an appropriate community scale:

A. Base Requirement. Buildings shall be no more than three stories or 45 feet in height, whichever is greater, and shall comply with the building setback standards in FMC 19.85.030.

B. Performance Option. The allowable building height may be increased to 55 feet, when approved as part of a conditional use permit. The development approval may require additional setbacks, stepping-down of building elevations, visual buffering, screening, and/or other appropriate measures to provide a height transition between industrial development and adjacent nonindustrial development. Smoke stacks, cranes, roof equipment, and other similar features which are necessary to the industrial operation may not exceed 20 feet in height without approval of a conditional use permit.

C. Method of Measurement. “Building height” is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

1. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade;

2. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (C)(1) of this section is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. Not included in the maximum height are: chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flagpoles, and similar features which are not for human occupancy. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.85.070 Special standards for certain uses.

A. Uses With Significant Noise, Light/Glare, Dust, Vibration, or Traffic Impacts. The following uses shall require conditional use permit approval, in addition to development review or site design review:

1. Uses with Significant Noise, Light/Glare, Dust and Vibration Impacts. Uses which are likely to create significant adverse impacts beyond the industrial district boundaries, such as noise, light/glare, dust, or vibration, shall require conditional use approval, in conformance with Article IV of this title. The following criteria shall be used in determining whether the adverse impacts of a use are likely to be “significant”:

a. Noise. The noise level beyond the property line exceeds 65 dBA (24-hour average) on a regular basis.

b. Light/Glare. Lighting and/or reflected light from the development exceeds ordinary ambient light and glare levels (i.e., levels typical of the surrounding area).

c. Dust and/or Exhaust. Dust and/or exhaust emissions from the development exceeds ambient dust or exhaust levels, or levels that existed prior to development.

2. Traffic. Uses which are likely to generate unusually high levels of vehicle traffic due to shipping and receiving. “Unusually high levels of traffic” means that the average number of daily trips on any existing street would increase by 10 percent or more as a result of the development. The city may require a traffic impact analysis prepared by a qualified professional prior to deeming a land use application complete, and determining whether the proposed use requires conditional use approval. Applicants may be required to provide a traffic analysis for review by ODOT for developments that increase traffic on state highways.

3. Resource extraction, such as the operation of mineral and aggregate quarries and similar uses, shall require a conditional use permit in conformance with Article IV of this title. The applicant shall also be required to prepare a site reclamation plan for review and approval by the city and other affected agencies, prior to commencing resource extraction. The required scope of the reclamation plan shall be identified by the conditional use permit, and shall comply with applicable requirements of state natural resource regulatory agencies.

B. Residential Caretakers. One residential caretaker unit shall be permitted for each primary industrial use, subject to the following conditions:

1. The unit shall be served with public water and sanitary sewerage disposal, in conformance with city engineering requirements.

2. Caretaker units shall be required to meet applicable fire safety and building code requirements, in addition to the applicable setback standards of this chapter.

C. Wireless Communication Equipment. Wireless communication equipment includes radio (i.e., cellular), television and similar types of transmission and receiving facilities. The requirements for wireless communication equipment are provided in Chapter 19.245 FMC. Wireless communication equipment shall also comply with required setbacks, lot coverage and other applicable standards of the general industrial district.

D. Columbia River Uses Located North of Marine Drive.

1. Lot Coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage in the general industrial district is 90 percent. The maximum allowable lot coverage is computed by calculating the total area covered by buildings and impervious (paved) surfaces, including accessory structures. Compliance with other sections of this code may preclude development of the maximum lot coverage for some land uses.

2. Building Height. The following building height standards are intended to promote land use compatibility and flexibility for industrial development at an appropriate community scale:

a. Base Requirement. Buildings shall be no more than 60 feet in height, and shall comply with the building setback/height standards in FMC 19.85.030, unless subject to additional standards in the airport overlay zone.

b. Performance Option. The allowable building height may be increased to 70 feet, when approved as part of a conditional use permit. The development approval may require additional setbacks, stepping-down of building elevations, visual buffering, screening, and/or other appropriate measures to provide a height transition between industrial development and adjacent non-industrial development. Smoke stacks, cranes, roof equipment, and other similar features, which are necessary to the industrial operation, may not exceed 20 feet in height without approval of a conditional use permit.

c. Method of Measurement. “Building height” is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

i. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade;

ii. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (D)(2)(c)(i) of this section is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. Not included in the maximum height are: chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flagpoles, and similar features which are not for human occupancy.

Figure 19.85.070 – Building Height Measurement (Composite of Several Roof Forms)
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.85.080 Special standards for city of Fairview adopted Metro Title 4 industrial properties.

A. The purpose of this section is to impose special standards to protect and preserve the supply of industrial lands in Fairview in accordance with the limitations set out in Title 4 of Metro’s Urban Growth Management Functional Plan (see Figure 9-C in the Comprehensive Plan for all Fairview Adopted Title 4 Industrial and Employment Lands).

1. Limitation on Retail/Commercial Service Land Uses. Retail and commercial service uses (in accordance with FMC 19.85.020) are limited in size to a maximum of 5,000 square feet in gross floor area for a single outlet (e.g., convenience market, small restaurant, secondary use for wholesaler, similar use) and up to 20,000 square feet in gross floor area for a multi-building project.

2. Freight Network Analysis Required. A freight network impact statement is to be included in all traffic studies for proposed developments on properties identified as industrial lands in Title 4 of the Metro Urban Growth Management Functional Plan. The purpose of this statement is to analyze potential adverse effects of the proposed development on the regional freight system as identified in the regional transportation plan (RTP) and the Fairview transportation system plan. Freight routes located in Fairview include Interstate 84, Marine Drive, 223rd Avenue, Fairview Parkway, Sandy Boulevard, and Glisan Street.

3. Land Division Standards. Properties in the general industrial district that are identified as industrial lands as shown on the Title 4 Properties Map in the Comprehensive Plan shall be subject to certain land division restrictions. All land divisions in the general industrial district shall be in accordance with Chapter 19.430 FMC, Land Divisions and Lot Line Adjustments.

B. The following standards shall apply to all general industrial properties included in the Fairview Title 4 industrial land inventory:

1. Lots smaller than 50 acres may be divided into any number of smaller lots.

2. Lots 50 acres or larger may be divided into smaller lots and parcels pursuant to a master plan approved by the city or county so long as the resulting division yields at least one lot or parcel of at least 50 acres in size.

3. Lots 50 acres or larger may be divided (including those created pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section) into any smaller lots or parcels pursuant to a master plan approved by the city or county so long as at least 40 percent of the area of the lot or parcel has been developed with industrial uses or uses accessory to industrial use. (Ord. 5-2009 § 1 (Att. 1))


Chapter 19.95 AIRPORT OVERLAY

Sections:

19.95.010    Uses.

19.95.020    Purpose.

19.95.030    Compliance.

19.95.040    Special definitions.

19.95.050    Permitted uses within the airport approach surface zone.

19.95.060    Conditional uses within the airport surface zone.

19.95.070    Procedures.


19.95.010 Uses.

Uses permitted in the airport overlay district are any permitted in the zoning district in which the land is located, except as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.95.020 Purpose.

In order to carry out the provisions of this overlay zone, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the airport imaginary surfaces as they apply to the city of Fairview. Such zones are shown on the current airport approach and clear zone map, prepared by Oregon State Aeronautics Division.

This overlay zone is intended to prevent the establishment of air space obstructions in airport approaches and surrounding areas through height restrictions and other land use controls as deemed essential to protect the health, safety and welfare of Fairview and Multnomah County. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.95.030 Compliance.

In addition to complying with the provisions of the primary zoning district, uses and activities shall comply with the provisions of this overlay zone. In the event of any conflict between any provisions of this overlay zone and the primary zoning district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.95.040 Special definitions.

A. “Airport approach safety zone” means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface and extends to a width of: 1,250 feet for a utility runway having only visual approaches; 2,500 feet for a runway other than a utility runway having only visual approaches; 2,000 feet for a utility runway having a nonprecision instrument approach; and 3,500 feet for a nonprecision instrument runway other than utility, having visibility minimums greater than three-fourths of a statute mile. The airport approach surface extends for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet at a slope of 20 feet for each one foot upward (20:1) for all utility and visual runways and 10,000 feet at a slope of 34 feet for each one foot upward (34:1) for all nonprecision instrument runways other than utility.

B. “Airport hazard” means any structure, tree or use of land, which exceeds height limits established by the airport imaginary surfaces.

C. “Airport imaginary surfaces” means those imaginary areas in space which are defined by the airport approach safety zone, transitional zone, horizontal zone, clear zone and conical surface and in which any object extending above these imaginary surfaces is an obstruction.

D. “Clear zone” extends from the primary surface to a point where the approach surface is 50 feet above the runway and elevation.

E. “Conical surface” extends one foot upward for each 20 feet outward (20:1) for 4,000 feet beginning at the edge of the horizontal surface (5,000 feet from the center of each end of the primary surface of each visual and utility at 150 feet above the airport elevation) and upward extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.

F. “Horizontal surface” means a horizontal plane of 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet from the center of each end of the primary surface of each visual or utility runway and 10,000 feet from the center of each of the primary surface of all other runways connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.

G. “Noise impact” means noise levels exceeding 55 Ldn.

H. “Place of public assembly” means a structure or place which the public may enter for such purposes as deliberation, education, worship, shopping, entertainment, amusement, awaiting transportation or similar activity.

I. “Primary surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. When the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is 250 feet for utility runways having only visual approaches, 500 feet for utility runways having nonprecision instrument approaches and 500 feet for other than utility runways.

J. “Transitional zones” extend one foot upward for each seven feet outward (7:1) beginning on each side of the primary surfaces which point is the same elevation as the runway surface, and from the sides of the approach surfaces thence extending upward to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation (horizontal surface).

K. “Utility runway” means a runway is constructed and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or less. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.95.050 Permitted uses within the airport approach surface zone.

A. Farm uses, excluding the raising and feeding of animals, which would be adversely affected by aircraft passing overhead.

B. Landscape nursery, cemetery or recreational areas, which do not include buildings or structures.

C. Roadways, parking areas and storage yards located in such manner that vehicle lights will not make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between landing lights and vehicle lights or result in glare, or in anyway impair visibility in the vicinity of the land approach surfaces must clear these areas by a minimum of 15 feet.

D. Pipeline.

E. Underground utility wire.

F. Single-family dwellings, mobile homes, duplexes and multifamily dwellings. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.95.060 Conditional uses within the airport surface zone.

A. A structure or building accessory to a permitted use.

B. Commercial and industrial uses, when authorized in the primary zoning district; provided the use does not result in the following:

1. Creating electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft.

2. Making it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights or others.

3. Impairing visibility.

4. Creating bird strike hazards.

5. Endangering or interfering with the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.

6. Attracting large number of people.

C. Buildings and uses of public works, public service or public utility nature. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.95.070 Procedures.

A. To meet the standards and reporting requirements established in FAA Regulations, Part 77, no structure shall penetrate into the airport imaginary surfaces.

B. No place of public assembly shall be permitted in the airport approach safety zone.

C. No structure or building shall be allowed within the clear zone.

D. Whenever there is a conflict in height limitations prescribed by this overlay zone and the primary zoning district, the lowest height limitations fixed shall govern; provided, however, that the height limitations here imposed shall not apply to such structures customarily employed for aeronautical purposes.

E. No glare producing materials shall be used on the exterior of any structure located within the airport approach safety zone. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.100 CULTURALLY SENSITIVE LANDS

Sections:

19.100.010    Purpose.

19.100.020    Area affected.

19.100.030    Culturally sensitive permit required.

19.100.040    Exceptions.

19.100.050    Application for culturally sensitive permit.

19.100.060    Culturally sensitive permit – Required findings.

19.100.070    Decision by planning commission.

19.100.080    Scope of conditions.

19.100.090    Criteria for approval of culturally sensitive permit.


19.100.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the culturally sensitive lands designation is to protect and conserve valuable cultural areas, while permitting appropriate development activities when carried out in a sensitive manner with minimal impacts on identified cultural resource values. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.100.020 Area affected.

This chapter shall apply to those lands designated culturally sensitive in the Fairview Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.100.030 Culturally sensitive permit required.

All uses permitted under the provision of the underlying zone are permitted on lands listed as having a culturally significant site; provided, however, that the location and design of any use, or change or alteration of a use, except as provided in FMC 19.100.040, shall be subject to a culturally sensitive permit.

Where an activity requires a permit or other approval from the state or other government entity, the applicant is encouraged to obtain final approval prior to submitting an application for a culturally sensitive permit. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.100.040 Exceptions.

A culturally sensitive permit shall not be required for the following:

A. Existing farm use, including accessory buildings and structures.

B. Activities to protect, conserve, enhance and maintain public recreational, scenic, historical and natural uses on public lands.

C. The expansion of capacity or the replacement of existing communication or energy distribution and transmission systems, except substations.

D. The maintenance and repair of existing flood control facilities.

E. Uses legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that any change or alteration of such use shall require a culturally sensitive permit as provided herein. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.100.050 Application for culturally sensitive permit.

An application for a culturally sensitive permit for a use or for the change or alteration of an existing use on land designated culturally sensitive shall address the applicable criteria for approval and shall be filed with the city with the appropriate fees to be heard by the Fairview planning commission.

Applications for extraction of aggregates and minerals, depositing of dredge spoils and similar activities must, where applicable, include a copy of any necessary approval(s) from the Department of Environmental Quality regarding any applicable standards for water quality, noise, vibration and toxic or noxious matter as well as a copy of any necessary approval(s) from the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries for surface mining operations. Where such approvals are subject to conditions, the applicant shall provide a statement regarding compliance with those conditions. Where final approval is not obtained prior to submitting the application, the applicant will provide a statement from the relevant jurisdiction or other evidence that such approval is feasible. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.100.060 Culturally sensitive permit – Required findings.

A decision on an application for a culturally sensitive permit shall be based upon findings of consistency with the purposes of the culturally sensitive zone and with the criteria for approval specified in FMC 19.100.090. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.100.070 Decision by planning commission.

A. A decision on a culturally sensitive permit application shall be made by the planning commission when an archaeological report demonstrates presence of culturally or historically significant materials.

B. The planning commission may approve or deny the proposal or approve it with such modifications and conditions as may be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and necessary to assure compatibility with FMC 19.100.090. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.100.080 Scope of conditions.

A. Conditions of approval of a culturally sensitive permit, if any, shall be designed to bring the application into conformance with the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan. Said conditions may relate to the locations, design and maintenance of existing and proposed improvements, including but not limited to buildings, structures and use areas, parking, pedestrian and vehicular circulation and access, natural vegetation and landscaped areas, fencing, screening and buffering, excavations, cuts and fills, signs, graphics, and lighting.

B. Approval of a culturally sensitive permit shall be deemed to authorize associated public utilities, including energy and communication facilities. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.100.090 Criteria for approval of culturally sensitive permit.

A. Buildings, structures and sites of historic significance shall be preserved, protected, enhanced, restored, and/or maintained with issuance of the culturally sensitive permit.

B. Archaeological sites shall be preserved for their historic, scientific and cultural value and protected from vandalism or unauthorized entry or, where preservation is not practical, inventoried.

C. Development activity within culturally sensitive areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow lawful use of the overall site, as determined by the planning commission at the time of review, and based upon the standards and purposes of this chapter.

D. Areas of erosion or potential erosion shall be protected from loss according to provisions specified in the city’s erosion control ordinance.

E. The Comprehensive Plan policies which pertain to natural resource sites shall be satisfied. (Ord. 3-2012 § 2 (Att. 1))


Chapter 19.105 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY

Sections:

19.105.010    Purpose.

19.105.020    Definitions.

19.105.030    General provisions.

19.105.040    Administration.

19.105.050    Conditional uses.

19.105.060    Prohibited uses.

19.105.070    General standards for flood hazard reduction.

19.105.080    Variance and appeal procedure.


19.105.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: (1) protect human life and health; (2) minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects; (3) minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; (4) minimize prolonged business interruptions; (5) minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; (6) help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; (7) ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and (8) ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.105.020 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them their meaning in common usage and give these regulations their most reasonable application/scope.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Appeal” means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

B. “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on a community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

C. “Area of special flooding hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.”

D. “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

E. “Basement” means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

F. “Below-grade crawl space” means an enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height – measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation – does not exceed four feet at any point.

G. “Breakaway wall” means a wall not part of the structural support of a building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.

H. “City” means the city of Fairview, Oregon.

I. “Council” or “city council” means the Fairview city council or such person(s) or entity(ies) designated by that body to perform the appeal or variance review functions given it by the terms of this chapter.

J. “Critical facility” means a facility where a slight chance of flooding may be too great. Critical facilities include:

1. Schools;

2. Nursing homes;

3. Hospitals;

4. Police, fire and other emergency response installations; and

5. Installations producing, using or storing hazardous materials or waste.

K. “Director” means the city’s community development director or designate.

L. “DEQ” means the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

M. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.

N. “DLCD” means the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development.

O. “Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

P. Flood or Flooding.

1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

c. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)(a) of this definition.

Q. “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

R. “Flood insurance study” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.

S. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height (one foot).

T. “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of these regulations.

U. “Manufactured dwelling” means a structure transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling” does not include a “recreational vehicle.” The term “manufactured dwelling” is synonymous with the term “manufactured home.”

V. “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

W. “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvement to such structures.

X. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Y. “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was lawfully issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a “substantial improvement,” the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

Z. “State building code” means the combined specialty codes.

AA. “Structure” means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured dwelling.

BB. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

CC. “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as a “historic structure.”

DD. “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.

EE. “Water dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1))


19.105.030 General provisions.

A. This chapter applies to all areas of “special flood hazards” within the city as described in subsection (B) of this section.

B. The areas of “special flood hazard” are those areas identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for the Multnomah County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas” (dated February 1, 2019; hereinafter “study”) along with accompanying FIRMs. Those documents are adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. A copy of the maps and study are on file in the office of the public works director. The best available information for flood hazard area identification shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued.

C. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter. The city may seek any remedy lawfully available to it to effect compliance and, in the event the city is compelled to seek judicial redress for violation(s) of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys and expert witness fees both at trial and on appeal.

D. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where these regulations and another local, state or federal law conflict, the more restrictive shall control.

E. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.

F. These regulations shall be considered minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the city, and not deemed to either limit or repeal any other powers granted the city by state or federal law or its inherent plenary powers.

G. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1))


19.105.040 Administration.

A. Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be obtained prior to construction or development within any area of special flood hazard. The permit shall be for all structures and development as defined in FMC 19.105.020.

B. Application for Development Permit. Application(s) for a development permit shall be on forms furnished by the city, submitted to the director, and include plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing:

1. The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the development area;

2. Existing and/or proposed structures;

3. Fill;

4. Storage of materials; and

5. Drainage facilities.

6. In addition to the foregoing, the following information is to be provided on the plans at the time application is made:

a. Elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in relation to mean sea level;

b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of flood-proofing in any structure;

c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or Oregon licensed architect that flood-proofing methods for nonresidential structure(s) meet the requirements set out in FMC 19.105.070(A)(2); and

d. Description of the extent (if any) to which a watercourse may be altered as a result of the development.

C. Designation and Duties of Floodplain Administrator. The director is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications with its provisions; duties include (but are not limited to) the following:

1. Review of all development permit applications and all resulting permits to ensure compliance with requirements imposed by this chapter;

2. Determine whether appropriate federal, state, and/or local regulatory permits have been obtained;

3. Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter for public inspection;

4. Notify adjacent communities, DLCD, and other appropriate state and federal agencies prior to the alteration/relocation of a watercourse and cause the submission of evidence thereof to the Federal Insurance Administration as well as requiring that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished;

5. Make interpretations as to the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal;

6. Determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If the proposed development is located in a floodway, ensure the appropriate provisions of FMC 19.105.070 are met;

7. When base flood elevation data has not been provided (A and V zones), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state, or other sources in order to administer FMC 19.105.070;

8. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or otherwise, the director shall obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements and below grade crawlspaces) of all new or substantially improved structures and whether the structure contains a basement;

9. For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or as required in this section;

a. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and

b. Maintain flood-proofing certifications required by this section;

10. Provide to building officials the base flood elevation and freeboard applicable to any building requiring a building permit; and

11. Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed development qualifies as a substantial improvement under this chapter.

D. Requirement to Submit New Technical Data.

1. Notify FEMA within six months of project completion when an applicant has obtained a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA, or when development altered a watercourse, modified floodplain boundaries, or modified base flood elevations. This notification shall be provided as a letter of map revision (LOMR).

2. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing technical data to support the LOMR application and paying any processing application fees to FEMA.

3. Upon occurrence, notify the administrator in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that all FHBMs and FIRMs accurately represent the community’s boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1))


19.105.050 Conditional uses.

The following uses are permitted conditionally in accordance with the specific and general standards outlined in this chapter:

A. All uses allowed in the base zone or existing flood hazard overlay zone. 

B. Excavation and fill required to plant any new trees or vegetation.

C. Restoration or enhancement of floodplains, riparian areas, upland and streams. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.105.060)


19.105.060 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are not permitted:

A. Any use otherwise prohibited in the base zone or existing flood hazard overlay zone.

B. Any uncontained area of hazardous materials as defined by DEQ. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.105.070)


19.105.070 General standards for flood hazard reduction.

A. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following is required:

1. Anchoring.

a. All new construction and substantial improvement(s) shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; and

b. All manufactured dwellings shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement and installed using methods and practices designed to minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of overthe-top or frame ties to ground anchors (see FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas”).

2. Construction Materials and Methods.

a. All new construction and substantial improvement(s) shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

b. All new construction and substantial improvement(s) shall be constructed using methods and practices designed to minimize flood damage; and

c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning and other service equipment/facilities shall be designed and/or elevated or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during flooding.

3. Utilities.

a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and

c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with rules adopted by DEO.

4. Subdivision Proposals.

a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities/facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

d. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided nor available from an authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.

5. Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is unavailable through the flood insurance study, FIRM or other authoritative source, building permit applications shall be reviewed with the aim of promoting safety from flooding. Use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc. should be used where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

6. AH Zone Drainage. Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

B. In areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided (Zones A1-30, AH, AE, and A), the following requirements are to be met:

1. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. Fully enclosed areas subject to flooding below the lowest floor are either prohibited or to be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by an Oregon registered/licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; and

d. If a building has more than one enclosed area below the lowest floor, each area shall be equipped with adequate flood openings.

2. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and/or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

a. Be flood-proofed such that below the base flood level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c. Be certified by a Oregon registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.

3. Elevated Nonresidential Structures. All elevated nonresidential structures not flood proofed and with space below the lowest floor are either prohibited or must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by an Oregon registered/licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; and

d. If a building has more than one enclosed area below the lowest floor, each area shall be equipped with adequate flood openings.

4. Persons flood-proofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the flood-proofed level (e.g., a building flood-proofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below.)

5. Manufactured Dwellings.

a. Manufactured dwellings supported on solid foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings that comply with subsection (B)(1) of this section;

b. The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be at or above the BFE;

c. The manufactured dwelling shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques); and

d. Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE.

6. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites in special flood hazard zones are required to:

a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and

b. Be licensed and ready for highway use on its wheels or jacking system and attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and security devices; and

c. Have no permanently attached additions; or, alternatively,

d. Meet the requirements for manufactured dwellings in subsection (B)(5) of this section, including but not limited to the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured dwellings.

7. Below-Grade Crawlspaces. Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject to standards found in FEMA’s Technical Bulletin 11-01, “Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas”:

a. The building must be designed and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement as a result of hydrodynamic and/or hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can be addressed through openings described below.

b. Crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless designed by an Oregon registered/licensed architect or professional engineer.

c. The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) and must have openings equalizing hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters with the bottom of each flood vent opening no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

d. Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE.

e. Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above BFE or designed so floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.

f. The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

g. The height of the below-grade crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall must not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analysis and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.

h. There must be a drainage system providing for removal of floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace such that the area is drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The system will vary as a result of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and installation of drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone top allowing for drainage by gravity or mechanical means.

i. The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used.

For more detailed information refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01.

8. Floodway Not Established. Where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvement(s) or other development (including fill) is permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the city’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect(s) of the proposed development, when combined with other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city.

9. Floodway Established. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply to areas designated as floodways:

a. No encroachments (including fill), new construction, substantial improvement(s) and other development shall occur unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments will not result in any increase in base flood or floodway elevations during a base flood discharge.

b. If subsection (B)(9)(a) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvement(s) shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions.

c. Manufactured dwellings may be located in floodways only under the following circumstances:

i. If there is an existing manufactured dwelling, placement was permitted at the time of the original installation and its continued use is not a threat to life, health, property, or the general welfare of the public; or

ii. A new manufactured dwelling is replacing an existing one where the original placement was permitted at the time and the replacement will not be a threat to life, health, property or the general welfare of the public; and

iii. The location of the dwelling meets all the following:

(A) Demonstration that the manufactured dwelling and any accessory building(s), structure(s) or other improvement(s) will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of a base flood discharge;

(B) The replacement dwelling and any accessory building(s)/structure(s) are elevated so that the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam is at or above the BFE;

(C) The replacement dwelling is placed, anchored and secured to a foundation support system designed by an Oregon professional engineer or architect and approved by the city;

(D) The replacement dwelling, its foundation supports and any accessory building(s)/structure(s) or property improvement(s) do not displace water so as to cause a rise in water level or divert water in a manner likely to cause erosion/damage to other properties;

(E) The replacement dwelling is appropriately zoned; and

(F) Location of the replacement dwelling will not violate any other local, state or federal law.

10. Shallow Flooding Areas. The following restrictions apply in shallow flooding areas:

a. New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured homes shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, a minimum of one foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM and at least two feet if no depth number is specified.

b. New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either:

i. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, one foot or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or

ii. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level such that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.

c. Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

d. Recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:

i. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and

ii. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

iii. Meet the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured dwellings set out above.

11. Critical Facilities.

a. Construction of new critical facilities shall, to the extent possible, be located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain).

b. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the facility should be protected to the height noted. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1))


19.105.080 Variance and appeal procedure.

All variance requests are processed by the city according to the specifications set forth below.

A. The planning commission shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

B. The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination by the planning commission in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

C. Those aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission who have standing in the land use procedure may appeal such decision to the city council.

D. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items listed in subsections E to N of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification for issuing the variance increases.

E. In reviewing an application for variance to the floodplain standards, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. The susceptibility of any proposed development and its contents to flood damage and the impact of such damage on the owner(s) thereof;

4. The importance of services provided by the proposed development facility to the city and community;

5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6. The availability of alternative location(s) for the proposed use not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

F. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the Statewide Inventory of Historic Properties, without regard to procedures set forth in this section, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

G. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

H. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

I. Variances will only be issued upon:

1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;

2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

3. A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threat(s) to public safety, extraordinary public expense, creation of a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public nor otherwise conflict with existing local laws or regulations.

J. Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

K. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood-proofing than watertight or dry flood-proofing where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection D of this section and otherwise complies with FMC 19.105.070.

L. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.

M. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection E of this section, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

N. The local floodplain administrator/director shall maintain records of all written notices, appeal actions, variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and shall report such variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 19.106 NATURAL RESOURCE REGULATIONS

Sections:

19.106.010    Purpose.

19.106.020    Definitions.

19.106.030    Coordination with other regulations.

19.106.035    Columbia Riverfront redevelopment exceptions.

19.106.040    Resource protection area requirements.

19.106.050    Fairview Creek and Clear Creek conservation easements within Fairview Village.

19.106.060    Fairview Lake.

19.106.070    Permit process for permitted uses.

19.106.080    Map amendments and administration.

19.106.090    Nonconforming uses and structures within resource protection areas.

19.106.100    Floodplain ordinance.

19.106.110    Emergency exemption.

19.106.120    Drainage district exemption.

19.106.130    Penalty.


19.106.010 Purpose.

A. The city has determined through review, investigation and development of appropriate regulation and guidelines to promote the application and utilization of the city’s Comprehensive Plan, that the city’s major water features the Columbia River, Fairview Creek, Osburn Creek, No Name Creek, Raintree Creek, Salmon Creek, Clear Creek, Fairview Lake, Columbia Slough, and associated wetlands and riparian areas, and upland habitat areas, as defined herein, are a valuable and irreplaceable natural resource to the community. It is the intention of the Fairview city council to protect and regulate the city’s natural resources with the following purposes:

1. To protect the natural functions of the city’s natural resources, including its soil structure and vegetation, to maintain water quantity and quality, store recharge and discharge groundwater, and reduce needs for future stormwater treatment, collection and control facilities.

2. To prevent property damage and degradation from storms and floods and to promote bank stabilization.

3. To protect and enhance valuable fisheries and wildlife habitat.

4. To provide an aesthetically pleasing and healthy environment.

5. To implement the city’s Comprehensive Plan.

6. To allow for the storage and conveyance of stream flows through existing and natural flood conveyance systems.

7. To minimize flood impacts, flood peak flows and wind and wave impacts.

8. To maintain water quality by reducing and sorting sediment loads, processing chemical and organic wastes and reducing nutrients.

9. To protect and enhance wildlife habitat.

10. To maintain water quality through the implementation of total maximum daily load (TMDL) requirements.

11. To promote recreational and education opportunities and public access to open spaces and natural resources.

12. Find the appropriate balance between resource protection and enhancement and reasonable development. Variable riparian resource protection areas of 35 feet, 40 feet, 55 feet and 75 feet are established as shown on the city’s adopted natural resources inventory map.

B. The purpose of the upland habitat areas is to protect habitat and wildlife areas while permitting appropriate development when carried out in a sensitive manner with minimal impacts on identified natural resource values.

C. The objectives of the natural resource code provisions are:

1. To protect waterbodies from chemical pollution and siltation by maintaining the vegetative cover and stability of the land surrounding them.

2. To maintain lower water temperatures by maintaining or enhancing vegetative cover.

3. To maintain an appropriate quantity, quality and rate of runoff from sites during and after any alteration, including construction, excavation, filling, earth removal, dredging, et al.

4. To reduce adverse impacts to wetland functions and values from adjacent development.

5. To slow the rate of stormwater runoff, thereby reducing flooding and erosion, and to improve summer water release, by maintaining healthy floodplains and wetlands.

6. To enhance in-stream habitat by protecting and enhancing silt-free rock and gravel bottoms, by maintaining in-stream boulders and woody debris that do not create or foster hazardous conditions.

7. To provide clear and objective standards and a discretionary review process, applicable to development in natural resource areas.

8. To allow and encourage habitat friendly development, while minimizing the impacts on fish and wildlife habitat functions.

9. To provide mitigation standards for the replacement of ecological functions and values lost through development in or adjacent to the city’s designated natural resource areas. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Alteration” means any change, addition, or modification to any existing structure or improvement on the site, including changes to site access, when such changes result in any one of the following: (1) intensification of the use(s) on the site, (2) intensification of the improvements on the site, or (3) changes that may have a detrimental effect on surrounding properties or a natural resource area. Alteration may or may not involve an increase in gross floor area. Alteration does not include “normal maintenance and repair.”

B. “Bank” means the land area bordering and/or confining a waterbody. The bank has a steeper slope than the bed, and usually has steeper slope than the surrounding landscape. The top of the bank is the first significant break in the slope between the toe of the bank at waterline and the surrounding landscape.

C. “Buffer averaging” means decreasing a portion of the riparian buffer within a proposed development site and increasing the buffer in another portion of the site if the buffer as adjusted will provide equivocal protection or enhance functions of the buffer area for water quality and habitat, provided the total area of the buffer on the development proposal site does not decrease.

D. “Canopy” means area of the tree above the ground, measured in mass or volume including the trunk and branches.

E. “Channelize” means to change the location of a drainage way by digging a new channel and diverting the water from the old channel into the new one.

 

F. “Cutting” means the falling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that naturally results in the death or substantial destruction of a tree. “Cutting” does not include normal trimming or pruning, but does include topping of healthy trees. Topping of hazard trees to alleviate the hazard is not considered cutting.

G. “Dangerous tree” means the condition or location of the tree presents a clear public safety hazard or an imminent danger of property damage, and such hazard or danger cannot reasonably be alleviated by treatment or pruning.

H. “Dead tree” means the tree is lifeless.

I. “Disturbance” means to make changes to the existing physical status of the land that are made in connection with development.

J. “Disturbed areas” means areas within natural resources and associated protection areas lack significant values and functions associated with the resource.

K. “Dying tree” means the tree is diseased, infested by insects, deteriorating, or rotting, and cannot be saved by reasonable treatment or pruning, or must be removed to prevent the spread of infestation or disease to other trees.

L. “Erosion” means the detachment of solid particles by water, wind, ice, or other physical activity.

M. “Excessive tree trimming or cutting” means any act which causes, or may reasonably be expected to cause, the healthy tree to die by cutting or removing of crown, trunk, or root system of a plant; the uprooting or severing of the main trunk of the tree including without limitation damage inflicted upon the root system by machinery, storage materials, or soil compaction; substantially changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk; excessive pruning; or paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious materials. This definition does not apply to dying or hazardous trees.

N. “Habitat assessment” means an approach for identifying and assessing the elements of a resources habitat. It is based on a simple protocol using observations of water and upland resource habitat characteristics and major physical attributes. A habitat assessment is useful as: (1) a screening tool to identify habitat stressors and (2) a method for learning about water ecosystems and environmental stewardship.

A habitat assessment includes a general description of the site, a physical characterization and water quality assessment, and a visual assessment of in-stream and riparian habitat quality.

O. “Major pruning” means removal of over 20 percent of the tree’s canopy, or injury to, or cutting of over 10 percent of the root system, during any 12-month period.

P. “Map” means the adopted city of Fairview natural resource map.

Q. “Normal maintenance and repair” includes maintenance, repair, or demolition of existing legal structures and facilities provided there is no change in the location or increase in the footprint of any building, impervious surface, or outdoor storage within the resource protection area, no other site changes are proposed that could result in the increased direct stormwater discharge to the natural resource area.

R. “Qualified professional” means an individual who is professionally qualified and has proven expertise and experience in a given natural resource field.

S. “Resource protection area” means the actual mapped resource and includes any of the following: 35-, 40-, 55-, or 80-foot riparian resource protection area, 50-foot wetland buffer, 50-foot Fairview Lake buffer, or upland habitat area. All identified on the Fairview natural resource map. The riparian resource areas shall be measured from centerline of the water feature in each direction to create a 160-foot corridor (80 feet in each direction from creek centerline), 110-foot corridor (55 feet in each direction from creek centerline), and 80-foot corridor (40 feet in each direction from creek centerline), and 70-foot corridor (35 feet in each direction from creek centerline).

T. “Riparian” means the environment (soil, plants, animals) adjacent to a river or lake which affects the waterbody and which is affected by it.

U. “Stormwater” means surface water that washes off land, including impervious surfaces such as roofs and pavement, during periods of precipitation.

V. “Stream” means a body of moving water including creeks, brooks, and rivers, which moves in a definite channel.

W. “Top of bank” means first significant break in the slope between the toe at the bank of the water line and the surrounding landscape.

X. “Upland habitat area” means vegetated areas adjacent to or near water features that provide valuable functions to the city’s riparian and wetland areas for fish and wildlife.

Y. “Waterbody” means an area, which is covered by surface or near-surface groundwater, either continually or for sufficiently long periods to become the primary factor determining the landscape and the vegetative community. The term shall include rivers, streams, other drainage ways, lakes, ponds, and wetlands.

Z. “Wetland” means land that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted to life in saturated soil conditions. (Ord. 10-2015 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.030 Coordination with other regulations.

A. Implementation of this chapter is in addition to, and shall be coordinated with, FMC Title 19, Development Code, and FMC Title 16, Environmental Regulations.

B. When this chapter conflicts with other sections of the Fairview Municipal Code, the more restrictive provision shall apply.

C. The requirements of this chapter apply in addition to all applicable local, regional, state, and federal regulations, including those for wetlands and flood management areas. Where this chapter imposes restrictions that are more stringent than regional, state, and federal regulations, the more stringent regulation shall apply.

D. Development in or near wetlands and streams may require permits from the Oregon Department of State Lands (DSL) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps). If a federal permit is required, a water quality certification from the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) may also be required. The public works director shall notify DSL and the Corps when an application for development within streams and wetlands is submitted. Applicants are encouraged to contact the above-mentioned agencies first before preparing development plans. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.035 Columbia Riverfront redevelopment exceptions.

The redevelopment of parcels with map and tax lots 1N3E2200504, 1N3E2200503, and 1N3E2100100 to river oriented uses, as defined below, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. The exemption shall be from the mapped riparian resource of the Columbia River. However, all applicable state and federal requirements relating to natural resource protection shall apply. The applicant shall submit demonstration of state and federal approvals with the applicable city of Fairview applications for redevelopment in order to demonstrate the proposal complies with state and federal requirements and conditions of approval. Continuation of and improvements to the existing on-site development (at time of the code adoption – September 5, 2012) and redevelopment to uses other than river oriented uses as described below will be subject to the 50-foot riparian buffer requirements of this chapter.

“River oriented redevelopment” means the redevelopment of industrial properties along the Columbia River consistent with the goals of providing river-oriented recreational, residential, and commercial development as described in the 2004 Comprehensive Plan.

The activities exempt from the city’s natural resource review process as described above include: roadway construction, utility extensions, recreational facilities, residential and commercial developments, tourist facilities, parking facilities, bike paths, walkways, promenades, docks, wharfs, piers, scenic view points, marinas, and related boating services along the Columbia River. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.040 Resource protection area requirements.

A. Standards outlined in this section apply to the city’s riparian resources and upland habitats as shown on the city of Fairview natural resource map adopted by the city council on September 5, 2012, (hereon referred to as “the map”) which includes the Columbia River and Fairview Creek, Osburn Creek, No Name Creek, Salmon Creek, Rain Tree Creek, and Clear Creek, and mapped wetlands and upland habitat.

B. Each resource has been designated with a specific protection area as shown on the map. The map shows Fairview’s riparian resources that are subject to either a 35-, 40-, 55-, or 80-foot riparian buffer resource protection area. The protection areas are measured from the centerline of the creek in each direction either 35, 40, 55, or 80 feet as shown on the map. Where there are multiple reaches of waterbodies the protection area shall be measured from the centerline of each reach.

Other water resources that appear on the map, but are enclosed in pipes, culverts, or similar structures, are not subject to the provisions of this chapter, except where a proposed activity such as an excavation will expose or directly disturb the protected water feature. Site development on properties containing unexposed mapped water quality features shall not prevent the future possibility of daylighting the water feature. If an applicant chooses to daylight a water feature, the maximum buffer width of the underlying designation may not apply to the portion that will be daylighted/exposed. However, a minimum buffer width of 25 feet from centerline shall be applied.

1. Riparian Resource Protection Areas. The riparian resource protection area includes the mapped resource and the area of land immediately adjacent to the edges of banks located along the Columbia River and Fairview Creek, Osburn Creek, No Name Creek, Salmon Creek, Rain Tree Creek, and Clear Creek.

Each resource protection area has a specific required buffer of either 80 feet (160-foot total width), 55 feet (110-foot total width), 40 feet (80-foot total width), and 35 feet (70-foot total width) as set forth below and as shown on the adopted map. The resource protection area shall be measured from the centerline of the creek.

a. The 80-foot resource protection area applies to:

• Fairview Creek from the city’s southern boundary of Glisan Street to the eastern portion of Fairview Community Park. However, the platted buffer designated with the development of the Fairview Village shall apply to the northern portion of Fairview Creek where it abuts the Village commercial, Village apartment and Village townhouse zones as shown on the adopted map. The southern side of Fairview Creek where it abuts city of Fairview property is subject to an 80-foot resource protection area as shown on the map.

b. The 55-foot resource protection area applies to:

• Fairview Creek at the property line between the northern property line of 15 Matney Street and the southern property line of 2010 Fairview Avenue, as shown on the adopted map, running northward to Fairview Lake.

• Salmon Creek

• Columbia River; the Columbia River protection area shall be measured from the mean high water line.

c. The 40-foot resource protection area applies to:

• Fairview Creek from the city detention pond located just north of Fairview Village north toward Smith Memorial Church, as shown on the adopted map.

• No Name Creek

• Rain Tree Creek

d. The 35-foot resource protection area applies to:

• Osburn Creek

e. Previously Platted Protection Areas. Previous subdivision developments set aside resource areas for Fairview Creek and Osburn Creek (and associated wetlands) in easements and tracts. Development was permitted around the resource and the buffer was reviewed at time of development. The map shows the protection area as the mapped tract or easement and development is only permitted within the mapped areas as provided on the plat and/or conditions of the development approval.

i. Lakeshore Estates 2.

ii. Heron Point.

iii. Pelfrey South Shore Estates 1 and 2.

2. Wetland Resource Protection Areas. A buffer area which measures at least 50 feet shall be established between any mapped wetland areas identified on the map and any proposed development. Permitted uses within the underlying zone are allowed to be constructed on properties with mapped wetlands when the development is not located within the wetland or the 50-foot wetland buffer. However, development within 15 feet of a wetland buffer is subject to a Type I wetland boundary verification process (FMC 19.106.070(A)). Mitigation shall be required for all development within the required wetland buffer (subsection (E)(2)(b) of this section).

Minor development is permitted through the Type I and Type II land use process as shown in Table 19.106.040(B).

Significant development within the 50-foot buffer may be permitted subject to a Type III land use application and when the applicant demonstrates:

• The development is the minimum necessary to allow legal use of the property; and

• The development complies with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Division of State Land permit requirements.

3. Upland Habitat Resource Protection Areas. Upland habitat areas provide valuable functions to the city’s riparian and wetland areas and to fish and wildlife. The purpose of this section is to encourage habitat friendly development while minimizing impact on water quality and fish and wildlife habitat functions. Development within 15 feet of a mapped upland habitat area is subject to a Type I boundary verification process.

Development of uses listed in Table 19.106.040(B) is permitted on areas mapped with an upland habitat designation subject to the exception process in subsection (D) of this section. To achieve the goals of re-establishing forest canopy that meets the ecological values and functions when development intrudes into an upland habitat area, tree replacement and vegetation planting are required per subsection (E) of this section, Mitigation.

Table 19.106.040(B) 

Permitted and Prohibited Uses  

	A	Vegetation Management	35-foot RPA	40-foot RPA	55-foot RPA	80-foot RPA	50-foot Wetland Buffer	Upland Habitat

	1	Vegetation removal, excessive tree trimming or cutting, or disturbance of ground cover or removal of forest debris without an approved permit.	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited

	2	Planting of vegetation listed as nuisance on the Metro Native Plant List.	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited

	3	Invasive vegetation removal of 300 square feet or less (per calendar year).	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted

	4	Removal of more than 300 square feet of plants categorized as a nuisance or invasive species on the Metro Native Plant list. After removal all open soils shall be replanted with native vegetation and/or protected from erosion (per calendar year).	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I

	5	Native plantings and vegetation management plans.	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I

	6	Maintenance of existing landscaping and gardens. This exemption extends to the installation of new irrigation and drainage facilities and/or erosion control features as well as to landscaping activities that do not involve:

a. Removal of native plants or required mitigation.

b. Planting of any vegetation identified as a nuisance or invasive species on the Metro Native Plant List.

c. Anything that produces an increase in impervious area.

d. Other changes that could result in increased direct stormwater discharges to the resource area.	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted

	B	Tree Removal and Pruning	35-foot RPA	40-foot RPA	55-foot RPA	80-foot RPA	50-foot Wetland Buffer	Upland Habitat

	1	Tree removal for trees that present an emergency situation with immediate danger to persons or property. Emergency situations may include, but are not limited to, situations in which a tree or portion of a tree has been compromised and has damaged or is damaging structures or utilities, or private or public property or where a tree or portion of a tree is prohibiting safe passage in the public right-of-way. Examples include trees that have fallen into or against an occupied building or trees downed across power lines or roadways. The emergency exemption is limited to removal of the trees or portion of the tree as necessary to eliminate the hazard. Damages or impacts to vegetation within the resource area resulting from the tree removal shall be repaired after the emergency has been resolved.	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	 Permitted

	2	Limited tree removal or major pruning of trees six inches or greater in diameter under the following circumstances:

a. The tree is dead, diseased or dying and cannot be saved as determined by a certified arborist. The tree should be topped to alleviate the hazard.

b. For major pruning, if a tree is pruned in excess causing it to die, three trees six inches in diameter or greater must be planted as mitigation.

**Tree removal associated with a development permit or land use application will be reviewed through the applicable application process.	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I

	C	Maintenance and Repair	35-foot RPA	40-foot RPA	55-foot RPA	80-foot RPA	50-foot Wetland Buffer	Upland Habitat

	1	Normal maintenance, repair, alteration, or demolition of existing legal structures and facilities; provided, that the following criteria are met:

a. There is no change in the location or increase in the footprint of any building, impervious surface, or outdoor storage within the resource protection area.

b. No other site changes are proposed that could result in the increased direct stormwater discharge to the natural resource area.

c. Legally nonconforming structures within resource protection areas are subject to FMC 19.106.090, Nonconforming uses and structures within resource protection areas.	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I



	2	Emergency procedures or activities that are necessary to remove or abate hazards to person or property; provided, that the time frame for such remedial or preventative action is too short to allow for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. After the emergency, the person or agency undertaking the action shall repair any impacts to the designated natural resource resulting from the emergency action; example, remove any temporary flood protection such as sandbags, restore hydrologic connections, or replant disturbed areas with native vegetation.	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted

	3	Normal maintenance and repair of existing stormwater facilities in accordance with stormwater management plan approved by the city.	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted

	4	Routine maintenance of existing public recreation, utility facilities, access, streets, driveways, and/or parking improvements that disturbed a resource area, provided such activities provide a mitigation plan for restoration of the disturbed area.	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I

	D	Site Development/Alteration	35-foot RPA	40-foot RPA	55-foot RPA	80-foot RPA	50-foot Wetland Buffer	Upland Habitat

	1	Activities prohibited by an easement.	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited

	2	Earth disturbing activities not associated with an approved permit.	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited

	3	Activities prohibited by Chapter 19.105 FMC, Floodplain Overlay.	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited

	4	Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous or sanitary waste fills and uncontained hazardous materials, as defined by DEQ.	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited

	5	Development of permitted structures allowed in the underlying zone within the resource protection area subject to FMC 19.106.040(D), Exception Process.	Prohibited	Type III*	Type III*	Type III*	Type III	 Type III

	6	Type I boundary verification process to demonstrate proposed development is not located within a designated natural resource area or required protection area (FMC 19.106.070(A)).	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I

	7	Alteration of a stream bank, bed, or water flow without approved permits.	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited

	8	Alteration of stream bank, bed or water flow.	 Type III	 Type III	Type III	Type III	 	 

	9	Direct stormwater discharge into waterbodies without obtaining a permit.	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited	Prohibited

	10	Installation of required storm management facilities.	Type III	Type III	Type III	Type III	Type III	Type III



	11	Public and private pathways, trail systems, and boardwalks, subject to construction standards of FMC 19.106.040(C).	Type II	Type II	Type II	Type II	Type II	Type II

	12	Impervious pathways and pathways greater than five feet in width.	Type III	Type III	Type II	Type III	Type II	Type II

	13	Viewing areas on parcels zoned for commercial and public use provided no more than 300 square feet of impervious surface is disturbed per 100 feet by 100 feet of resource protection area. For properties with commercial zoning, outdoor patio or seating areas utilizing the aesthetics associated with the adjacent natural resource may occupy no more than 500 square feet of the resource protection area. Encroachments may be subject to buffer averaging where feasible.	Type II	Type II	Type II	Type III	Type III	Type II

	14	Benches and outdoor furniture and interpretive signage and displays provided such facilities do not disturb more than 20 square feet of impervious surface within the designated natural resource area.	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I	Type I

	 	Uses listed as “Permitted” means they are permitted outright and a land use permit is not required.	 	 	 	 	 	 

*Type III – Subject to standards of FMC 19.106.040(D)(1)(e), Buffer Averaging.

C. Development and Construction Standards. The following standards apply to development and construction in the resource protection areas identified in this section (this section and as permitted in Table 19.106.040(B)). These standards do not apply to Fairview Lake or natural resources located within Fairview Village. An applicant wishing to deviate from these standards to increase the allowable development footprint may make a request to the planning commission through the Type III review process and the exception process listed in subsection D of this section. The request may only be made for permitted uses listed in Table 19.106.040(B).

1. All plantings installed must be native plantings approved on the Metro Native Plant List and be deemed compatible with the environment in which they are to be planted. Plantings shall be in compliance with subsection E of this section, Mitigation.

2. Benches may not exceed eight feet in length and may be no larger than the average industry standards for bench width.

3. Areas disturbed for seating and viewing cannot exceed 300 square feet of applicable resource protection area. Only one seating or viewing area may be installed per 100 feet by 100 feet of applicable resource protection area. Mitigation shall be provided consistent with subsection E of this section.

4. Private natural pathways or trails shall be no wider than 30 inches. Where trails or paths include stairs, the stair width shall not exceed 50 inches. Trails and pathways shall be constructed using nonhazardous, pervious materials where applicable. Raised boardwalks may be considered by the public works director only when needed to lessen impacts to resource areas. Trails shall provide the most direct access to the resource area and shall not excessively meander.

5. Public pathways on public property or easements shall be no wider than five feet and shall be constructed using nonhazardous, pervious materials where applicable. Pathways may be larger than five feet if necessary to comply with ADA requirements or if the public works director deems necessary. Trails shall be constructed using nonhazardous, pervious materials where applicable. Raised boardwalks may be considered only when the applicant demonstrates they are needed to lessen negative impacts to the resource area.

6. Stream bank, bed, or water alteration proposals and applications shall be prepared by a qualified professional and must include submission of a city of Fairview habitat assessment form.

7. Minor encroachments in commercial areas for outdoor seating or resource viewing may not exceed 500 square feet in area per 100 lineal feet of resource buffer. Encroachments are subject to mitigation requirements and resource protection area buffer averaging.

8. Use of heavy machinery or herbicides for invasive and nonnative plant removal is not permitted unless special exception is granted by the public works director.

9. Erosion/sedimentation control devices shall be installed between the area to be disturbed by the proposed development and construction and the adjacent water feature; these devices shall comply with specifications and procedures outlined in the soil erosion control ordinance (Chapter 16.15 FMC), must be installed prior to any soil disturbance, and remain in place during construction and afterwards until the soil has stabilized.

10. Stormwater detention and filtration facilities which are designed according to the best management practices described in the standard specifications ordinance and related ordinances and technical guidance manuals shall be provided when applicable.

11. Bridges, culverts and similar structures shall be designed and constructed to facilitate fish passage during periods of low stream flow.

12. Roads, bridges, culverts, and utility crossings of a waterbody or associated riparian buffer area shall conform with Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) requirements for such crossings or obtain ODFW approval for any deviation from them; however, such crossings shall be avoided when practical alternative routing exists, and roads shall be constructed away from waterbodies and riparian areas, except at crossings, which shall be aligned perpendicular to the resource site.

13. Temporary disturbances may not exceed more than 25 percent of the area of the applicable resource protection area. Temporary disturbances are those that occur during an allowed or approved development activity but will not persist beyond completion of the project. Temporary disturbances include, but are not limited to, construction access ways, material staging and stockpile areas, and excavation areas for building foundations, utilities, stormwater facilities, etc.

14. Protection of Resource Protection Area During Site Development. During development of any site containing an applicable resource protection area identified in this section, the following standards apply:

a. Work areas shall be marked to reduce potential damage to resource areas.

b. Trees within applicable resource protection areas shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing construction equipment.

c. Native soils disturbed during development shall be conserved on the property.

d. An erosion and sediment control plan is required and shall be prepared in compliance with requirements set forth by the city’s public works standards.

e. Site preparation and construction practices shall be followed that prevent drainage of hazardous materials or erosion, pollution, or sedimentation to any applicable resource protection area adjacent to the project area.

15. Additional Development Standards for Mapped Wetlands. The following standards apply to all wetland areas identified on the map:

a. A buffer area which measures at least 50 feet shall be established between the wetland areas and the proposed development as a condition of development permit approval. The required buffer area width as well as its treatment or enhancement shall be established during the land use review process, after consultation with DSL or ODFW staff.

b. Properties which contain wetland areas shall have a preliminary delineation of the wetland boundary approved by Division of State Land (DSL) or Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) staff before any development permit is issued. If the preliminary delineation requires an additional “jurisdictional delineation” study of the boundary, this must be completed by the applicant’s biologist and approved by DSL staff before building permits are issued. If the preliminary delineation demonstrates that the development will occur outside of the 50-foot buffer, a Type I land use permit is required to demonstrate and document that the development is in fact outside the 50-foot buffer of the delineated wetland.

c. Wetland areas shall be protected in their natural state to preserve water quality and maintain water retention, overflow and natural functions as follows:

i. Activity within wetland areas is subject to the permit requirements of the Division of State Lands (DSL) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. No building permit will be issued for such activity unless all pertinent state and federal requirements are met. The Division of State Lands will be notified of any regulated development proposed in a wetland area. Proposed activities within the wetland area are subject to a Type III land use application and mitigation requirements outlined in subsection (E)(3) of this section.

ii. Any proposed dredging or filling of a wetland area will require issuance of a DSL permit or a finding by the agency that a permit is not necessary, before building permits are issued by the city. All such activity (which requires a DSL permit) will require the applicant to demonstrate, as part of a Type III land use application, that the activity is necessary to develop on that part of the property outside of the wetland, that there is no practical alternative to impacting the wetland, and that measures (described in the application) will be taken to minimize the fill area and other negative impacts. These findings may be waived if, in the opinion of DSL or ODFW, the applicant proposes to create a replacement wetland area on the property that will be of superior value to wildlife compared to the impacted area. Any approved work within the designated wetland buffer is subject to mitigation requirements of subsection (E)(3) of this section.

iii. The city will not approve a partition or subdivision in a wetland area that proposes to create a lot, which because more than 50 percent of its area is a designated wetland, would be unbuildable without variance approval.

iv. Construction sites adjacent to wetland areas shall be required to install erosion/sedimentation control devices between the land area to be disturbed and the wetland area. All such devices shall conform with the specifications and procedure outlined in the city’s erosion control ordinance.

v. Developments adjacent to wetland areas which have significant impervious surface areas must have stormwater detention and filtration facilities as part of their approved design. The design of such facilities shall conform to the best management practices (BMPs) described in the city’s standard specifications ordinance and related ordinances and technical/guidance manuals.

vi. The city may also require the use of tools such as dedication and conservation easements as a means to fully protect wetland areas during the development review process.

D. Exception Process. Any proposed development within a riparian resource protection area, upland habitat areas, or the required 50-foot buffer for wetland areas must file an exception application with the city of Fairview. The intent of the exception process is to allow reasonable development of property while providing protection for water and wildlife resources.

The exception process does not apply to:

• Mapped buffers within the Fairview Village; or

• Properties abutting Fairview Lake.

1. The applicant may utilize the following methods for avoiding or minimizing development within the upland habitat area and riparian resource protection areas. Exception applications must demonstrate compliance with the following criteria:

a. Building setback flexibility to avoid or minimize development within the upland habitat or riparian resource protection area. The minimum building setback of the base zone may be reduced to any distance between the base zone minimum and zero, unless the reduction conflicts with fire or life safety requirements.

b. Flexible landscaping requirements to avoid or minimize development within the habitat or resource protection area. Minimum percentage landscaping requirements, apart from those required for parking lots, street trees, buffers, and required mitigation areas, may be met by preserving the upland habitat area.

c. Facilities that infiltrate stormwater on site, including the associated piping, may be placed within the upland habitat or riparian resource protection area so long as the forest canopy and areas within the drip lines of trees are not disturbed. However, if disturbance cannot be avoided, then the disturbed areas shall be mitigated per subsection (E)(2) of this section, Option 2. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, vegetated swales, rain gardens, vegetated filter strip, and vegetated infiltration basins. Only native vegetation may be planted in these facilities.

d. Flexible site design (on-site density transfer) to avoid or minimize development within the upland habitat or riparian resource protection area.

i. Residential development proposals on lands with upland habitat or riparian resource protection areas may transfer up to 50 percent of the permitted density permitted on the mapped upland habitat portion or riparian resource protection area of the site onto the portion of the site that is not designated as upland habitat area when the proposal completely avoids development within the resource protection or upland habitat area.

ii. In order to accommodate any transferred residential densities, dimensional standards and lot sizes may be adjusted by no more than 20 percent.

iii. Density transfers on commercial and industrial zoned land. The transfer credit of 10,000 square feet floor area ratio (FAR) per acre of land with an upland habitat or riparian resource protection designation on the project site is permitted when development is not proposed in the protected area.

iv. Mixed-Use Zones. The density transfer credit can be factored using subsections (D)(1)(d)(i) and (D)(1)(d)(ii) of this section, depending on the type of development proposed.

v. All remaining upland habitat or riparian resource protection areas shall be permanently restricted from development and maintained for habitat functions by making a public dedication or executing a restrictive covenant.

e. Buffer Averaging. Buffer averaging is permitted for new development activities, excluding any existing building footprint area already encroaching into the riparian resource area. Reductions from the standard buffer setback distances shall be accomplished through averaging the buffer distance on a site. Buffer averaging involves decreasing a portion of the riparian buffer within the proposed development site and increasing the buffer in another area. The new buffer area will need to provide equivalent or enhanced protection of the functions or values of the riparian resource area and provided the total area contained in the buffer on the proposed development site does not decrease. 

i. Criteria for buffer averaging include:

(A) The resource protection area may not be reduced more than 60 percent (or 24 feet) in the 40-foot resource protection area, 50 percent in the 55-foot resource protection area (or 27.5 feet) and 40 percent in the 80-foot resource protection area (or 32 feet).

(B) Buffering averaging is allowed with the following site assessment prepared by a qualified professional. At a minimum the assessment shall contain:

(1) A description of the proposed development, including a site plan and distance to property lines.

(2) A description and illustration of the relationship between the proposed development and the riparian resource protection area. 

(3) An assessment and illustration of the existing condition of the riparian resource protection area within and adjacent to the project area. This assessment must include, when appropriate, a wetland delineation report approved by DSL and acreage. 

(4) An analysis, based upon best available science, of how the averaged buffer area will provide protection that is equal to or better than the current buffer area.

(5) A discussion of alternatives that would have less impact on the resource protection area and associated buffer.

(C) Any proposed buffer averaging requires enhancement and mitigation of the remaining resource protection area and the new buffer averaging area. A mitigation plan must be prepared that meets subsection E of this section, Mitigation. 

(D) Wherever practical, reductions in the buffer distance shall occur adjacent to lower value or less sensitive areas within the buffer site and the expansion of the buffer in compensation shall occur within higher value or more sensitive areas. 

(E) To the extent practicable, wherever riparian buffers are reduced from the standard setbacks, the buffer shall be increased on the opposite bank of the channel across from the area where the reduction is allowed. 

(F) A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard. Requirements for the permit as well as specific and general standards are outlined in Chapter 19.105 FMC.

f. Disturbance of upland habitat areas cannot exceed 50 percent of the designated upland habitat area.

2. Mitigate Development Impacts. All development approved through the exception process must comply with mitigation requirements of subsection E of this section. Mitigation must be targeted to the most degraded portions, as identified by the resource habitat assessment process, of the resource protection area first. Remaining mitigation requirements shall be spread throughout the resource protection area.

3. Exception Application Procedures and Requirements. All exception applications must be approved by the planning commission at a public hearing.

The applicant must submit a written narrative, site plan, and Fairview habitat assessment form that demonstrates the following:

a. Narrative description and associated site plan demonstrating how the proposal complies with exception requirements as set forth in this section.

b. Completed city of Fairview habitat assessment form. The public works director may require the applicant to hire a qualified professional to conduct the habitat assessment.

c. Application requirements listed in FMC 19.106.070.



E. Mitigation. The purpose of mitigation is to compensate for negative impacts that occur to the natural resource and designated protection area as a result of development activity. Vegetation mitigation is required for the following activities and development:

1. Tree Removal within a Resource Protection Area, Not Associated with a Development.

a. Dead, Diseased or Dying Trees. Regardless if associated with development or not, all dead, diseased, or dying trees that are removed from a designated protection area shall be replaced with one new tree of at least two-inch caliper or at least six feet overall height after planting. Tree replacement is not required for diseased trees that may spread the disease to adjacent trees.

An arborist report will be required if the tree does not display any signs that the tree is dead, diseased, or dying. An exception to the requirement for mitigation may be granted by the public works director when the applicant demonstrates that a replacement tree has already been planted in anticipation of tree removal, or if the existing site conditions otherwise preclude tree replacement (due to existing dense canopy coverage or other ecological reasons).

Trees and large wood debris that are cut down shall remain within the buffer area to the greatest extent feasible to provide wildlife habitat. All hazardous trees to be removed shall only remove the portion necessary to alleviate the hazard.

b. Removal of Viable Trees. Removal of any healthy, viable trees greater than six inches in diameter when not associated with a development within a resource protection area is subject to the mitigation requirements listed in Table 19.106.040(E)(1).

Trees and large wood debris that are cut down shall remain within the buffer area when feasible to provide wildlife habitat.

2. Mitigation Requirements Associated with Development. Mitigation is required for all development:

• Within a designated resource protection area (riparian areas, wetlands, and upland habitat areas).

• Within 10 feet of the outer boundary of the 40-foot riparian resource protection area.

An applicant may choose between Option 1 and Option 2 listed below. However, if development is proposed that does not include removal of trees, that applicant must comply with Option 2.

Option 1. Mitigation is based on the number of trees removed. Dead, diseased, or dying trees must be mitigated per subsection (E)(1)(a) of this section.

Table 19.106.040(E)(1)  

	Size of Viable/Healthy Tree Removed	Mitigation Required per Tree Removed

	6- to 12-inch diameter	1 tree and 1 shrub

	13- to 18-inch diameter	2 trees and 3 shrubs

	19- to 24-inch diameter	3 trees and 6 shrubs

	25- to 30-inch diameter	4 trees and 9 shrubs

	Over 30-inch diameter	5 trees and 15 shrubs

Option 2. The mitigation option shall be calculated based on the size of disturbance area within the mapped protection area. Native trees and shrubs are required to be planted at a rate of one tree and five shrubs for every 100 square feet of disturbance area. All fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number of trees and shrubs. Bare ground must be planted or seeded with native grasses or herbs.

3. Mitigation Plan and Planting Requirements (For All Types of Required Mitigation). A mitigation plan including a calculation demonstrating compliance with vegetation mitigation requirements must be submitted with the land use application and consistent with this subsection E and shall include the following:

a. A tree removal plan showing all trees greater than six inches in diameter to be removed must be submitted with the land use application. The tree removal plan must clearly label healthy/viable trees, and dead, diseased, or hazardous trees.

b. Plant Size. Replacement trees must be at least two inches in caliper measured at six inches above the ground level for field grown trees or above the soil for container grown trees. Oak or madrone trees shall be a minimum one-gallon size. Shrubs must be in at least a one-gallon container or equivalent ball and burlap and must be at least 12 inches in height.

c. Plant Spacing. When feasible, trees shall be planted between eight and 12 feet on plant center and shrubs shall be planted between four and five feet on center or clustered in single species groups of no more than four plants, with each cluster planted between eight and 10 feet on center.

d. Plant Diversity. Shrubs must consist of at least two different species. If 10 trees or more are planted, no more than 50 percent of the trees may be of the same genus.

e. Native Plants. Only resource-specific native plants identified on the most updated version of the Metro Native Plant List are permitted.

f. Location of Mitigation Area. All vegetation must be planted on the applicant’s site within the resource protection area first. If there is not sufficient room within the resource protection area, planting may occur contiguous to the resource protection area. If the vegetation is planted outside the resource protection area, then the applicant shall preserve the contiguous area by executing a deed restriction such as a restrictive covenant.

g. Invasive Vegetation. Invasive, nonnative or noxious vegetation must be removed within the mitigation area prior to planting mitigation vegetation.

h. Tree and Shrub Survival. A minimum of 80 percent of the trees and shrubs planted shall remain alive on the fifth anniversary of the date that the mitigation planting is complete.

i. Monitoring and Reporting. Monitoring of the mitigation site is the ongoing responsibility of the property owner. Plants that die must be replaced in kind. For a period of five years, the property owner must submit an annual report to the city of Fairview public works director documenting the survival of the trees and shrubs on the mitigation site.

j. To enhance survival of mitigation plantings the following practices are recommended, but not required:

i. Mulching. Mulch new plantings a minimum of three inches in depth and 18 inches in diameter to retain moisture and discourage weed growth.

ii. Irrigation. Water new plantings one inch per week between June 15th and October 15th for the three years following planting.

iii. Weed Control. Remove or control nonnative or noxious vegetation throughout maintenance period.

4. Vegetation Mitigation Bank. An applicant seeking to vary the number and size of trees and shrubs required to be planted on site under this subsection E but who will comply with all other provisions of this subsection E may seek approval to utilize the vegetation mitigation bank.

a. The applicant shall submit:

i. A calculation of the number of trees and shrubs the applicant would be required to plant under subsection (E)(1), (E)(2) or (E)(3) of this section.

ii. The number and size of trees and shrubs that the applicant proposes to plant on the development site within designated protection areas.

iii. The applicant’s mitigation site monitoring and reporting plan.

b. Approval Criteria. A request to vary the number and size of trees and shrubs to be planted shall be approved if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed planting will achieve, at the end of the fifth year after initial planting, comparable or better mitigation results than the number and size required under subsection E of this section.

c. Upon demonstration that required vegetation mitigation cannot be planted within the protection area, the applicant may request the public works director to determine which of the following mitigation bank methods will be used. The applicant may appeal the public works director’s decision to the planning commission.

i. Require the applicant to plant the vegetation on a city owned property.

ii. Require the applicant to plant the vegetation on a private property within the designated natural resource protection area. If vegetation is planted outside of the resource protection area, the planted vegetation shall be placed in a conservation easement.

iii. Pay a fee in lieu of the required vegetation for the city to use on other restoration projects.

d. Application Process. The request to utilize the mitigation bank shall be reviewed with the applicable land use application submitted for the proposed development. Mitigation bank requests for Type III activities shall be reviewed along with the Type III application. Mitigation bank requests for Type II activities shall be reviewed along with the Type II application. (Ord. 10-2015 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.050 Fairview Creek and Clear Creek conservation easements within Fairview Village.

A. Concurrent with development of any site containing Fairview Creek or Clear Creek, a conservation easement shall be granted to the city. The conservation easement of approximately 100 feet for Fairview Creek and 75 feet for Clear Creek will provide a control mechanism for these creek corridors. The easements, which shall extend not less than 50 feet from Fairview Creek centerline and not less than 37.5 feet from Clear Creek centerline in either direction, will protect water quality, provide for wildlife movement and enhance the neighborhood aesthetics by providing a greenbelt through the single-family residential area.

B. Within the 100-foot protected area along Fairview Creek, development and resource alteration, other than mitigation or enhancement, will be prohibited within 70 feet of the corridor centered on the creek. The other 15 feet remaining on either side may allow wooden fences up to six feet in height and plantings using only materials shown on the Fairview Village plant list. Trees existing within the 100-foot corridor shall be nurtured and protected. Plantings that appear on the approved list are encouraged especially where they would provide shade to the creek from direct sun.

C. Within the 75-foot protected area along Clear Creek, development and resource alteration, other than mitigation or enhancement, will be prohibited within 45 feet of the corridor centered on the creek. The other 15 feet remaining on either side may allow wooden fences up to six feet in height with plantings using only materials shown on the Fairview plant list (Fairview uses the Metro Plant List). Trees existing within the 75-foot corridor shall be nurtured and protected. Plantings that appear on the approved list are encouraged especially where they would provide shade to the creek from direct sun.

D. Variance. An applicant may apply for a Class C variance to the conservation easement standards provided in subsections A through C of this section. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.060 Fairview Lake.

The provisions of this section only apply to Fairview Lake. A protected riparian buffer of 50 feet from the top of Fairview Lake’s bank, or 50 feet from the annual mean high water level (11.4 feet NGVD) of Fairview Lake in those areas where there is no bank or significant break in slope along the shoreline is required. These requirements also apply to the portion of the submerged lake bottom that is within city of Fairview limits.

A. Riparian Vegetation. A major purpose and goal of the riparian buffer is to preserve, to the maximum extent possible, riparian vegetation within the buffer area. Trimming of vegetation to alleviate a hazard is allowed. Removal of riparian vegetation, as defined in “Alteration” (subsection B of this section), is allowed only after a permit has been granted by the city of Fairview. Replacement vegetation must be riparian species as approved in the permit.

B. Alteration. An alteration is a change in the topography or vegetation of a waterbody or its riparian environment, as regulated by this section, which may affect the functions and values of Fairview Lake. Alteration of the riparian buffer area is subject to the permit procedure and standards of this chapter. No alteration will be allowed which would appreciably diminish the values or functions of Fairview Lake, as set forth in FMC 19.106.010. For the purposes of this section:

1. Alteration includes the following in the riparian buffer area of Fairview Lake:

a. Dredging, filling, excavating or placing riprap or a mooring with rock, trees, wood, etc.

b. The clearing of any native riparian vegetation or the removal of any native tree which has a diameter of six inches or greater at four feet above grade.

c. Construction of buildings and other structures, including the installation of a bridge, culvert, pipeline, retaining wall or deck or any other development as defined by this code.

d. Changing the course or banks.

e. Construction of public streets, including bridges, when part of an approved future street plan, subdivision plan construction, improvement or alteration consistent with the city transportation plan.

f. Construction of public bicycle pedestrian paths.

g. Construction of public parks and recreational facilities.

h. Construction of private driveways or pedestrian paths where necessary to afford access between portions of private property that may be bisected by a riparian buffer.

i. Construction of public utilities such as water, stormwater and sanitary sewer lines.

j. Water detention, filtration facilities and erosion control improvements. Such projects include detention ponds, biofiltration swales or ponds, check dams and bank stabilization measures.

k. In the Fairview Lake Area. Decks and similar structures; provided, that no more than 20 percent of the lot width within the buffer setback area be occupied by such a structure or structures.

2. The following applications will be required for alterations in the Fairview Lake buffer area:

a. Planting vegetation shall be a Type I application (FMC 19.413.010).

b. Placement of docks, rock buffers, pathways or other activities that may negatively impact the values and/or purposes of this section shall be a Type II application (FMC 19.413.020).

c. Alterations involving the installation and construction of applications with structures or other more intrusive activities shall be processed as a Type III application (FMC 19.413.030).

3. Applications for an alteration permit must demonstrate compliance with the following standards:

a. A development site plan must be submitted with the alteration permit which identifies the areas where construction activity will occur. Construction activity may not occur on more than 25 percent of the Fairview Lake buffer area.

b. Erosion/sedimentation control devices must be installed between the area where alterations will occur and Fairview Lake; these devices shall comply with specifications and procedures outlined in the soil erosion control ordinance (Chapter 16.15 FMC) and must be installed prior to any soil disturbance and must remain in place during construction and until the soil has stabilized.

c. Stormwater detention and filtration facilities must be designed according to the best management practices described in the standard specifications ordinance and related ordinances and technical guidance manuals.

d. Any alterations that require/involve planting riparian type trees, shrubs and ground cover to supplement existing vegetation or to replace removed vegetation must be installed in accord with the following standards:

i. A minimum of six trees, 12 shrubs and ground cover plantings per 100 lineal feet of riparian buffer area.

ii. Plant materials shall be guyed and staked to nursery industry standards.

iii. Deciduous trees shall be fully branched and have a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches at the time of planting.

iv. Evergreen trees shall be fully branched and have a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting.

v. Shrubs shall be supplied in one-gallon containers or eight-inch burlap balls with a minimum spread of 12 inches.

vi. Ground cover plantings shall be planted at a maximum of 30 inches on center and 30 inches between rows. Rows of plants shall be staggered for a more effective covering. Ground cover planting shall be supplied in a minimum four-inch size container.

e. Bridges, culverts and similar structures must be designed to facilitate fish passage during periods of low stream flow.

f. Roads, bridges, culverts, and utility crossings on or adjacent to Fairview Lake or associated Fairview Lake riparian buffer area must conform with Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) requirements for such crossings or ODFW approval must be obtained for any deviation; however, such crossings shall be avoided when practical alternative routing exists, and roads shall be constructed away from Fairview Lake and its riparian areas, except at crossings, which shall be aligned perpendicular to the resource site.

C. Application requirements for development adjacent to Fairview Lake are subject to FMC 19.106.070, Permit process for permitted uses. (Ord. 1-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.070 Permit process for permitted uses.

A. Boundary Verification. To determine whether the standards of this chapter apply to a proposed development activity at any given location, the boundaries of any designated natural resources on or near the site shall be verified. A Type I boundary verification application is not required when the applicant demonstrates that the development will be greater than 40 feet from the estimated outer boundary of the mapped resource protection area. This shall be shown on the applicant’s site plan submitted with the development (building permit) application.

The Type I boundary verification process is required for activities proposed within:

 

Table 19.106.070(A)  

	Resource Type	Location of Development	Application Required

	35-foot and 40-foot resource protection area	Greater than 15 feet from the outer limits of the 35- or 40-foot resource protection area	Type I boundary verification required prior to site development or earth disturbing activity

	55-foot and 80-foot resource protection area	Development or earth disturbing activities outside of the designated resource or resource protection area	Type I boundary verification process. Boundary verification is not required if the proposed development is greater than 40 feet from the estimated mapped resource

	Wetlands	Development or earth disturbing activities outside the delineated wetland or 50-foot resource protection area when located within 15 feet of the outer boundary of the 50-foot buffer	Type I boundary verification process

	Upland habitat	Development or earth disturbing activities located within 25 feet of the outer boundary of the upland habitat	Type I boundary verification process

	Clear Creek and Fairview Creek within Fairview Village (Special Standards on the Map)	Development within the buffer is strictly limited per FMC 19.106.050	Subject to FMC 19.106.050

	Development outside the designated conservation area	Type I boundary verification

	Fairview Lake	On the same parcel, but outside the 50-foot buffer	Type I boundary verification process

B. Boundary Verification Process. A Type I boundary verification process is required as defined in Table 19.106.070(A) in order to verify the proximity of the proposed development to a mapped resource or associated protection area and to identify the required land use application type. The applicant shall submit the following:

1. Detailed property description and scaled site plan of the property that includes all existing conditions on site.

2. A copy of the applicable natural resource map section.

3. The latest available aerial photo of the property with property lines shown.

4. A scaled site plan demonstrating the location and boundary of the natural resource and designated protection area in relation to the proposed development. The site plan must be drawn to an architect or engineer scale.

5. Any other factual information that the applicant wished to provide to support the boundary verification.

6. The public works director may require a wetland delineation be conducted based on the proximity of the development to the mapped wetland.

C. Land Use Application Requirements. Before a permit is issued for an alteration or development within or adjacent to a mapped natural resource or protection area, an application must be submitted to the city of Fairview by the person or entity requesting the alteration or development. The application shall include:

1. All proposed developments on parcels with a designated natural resource protection area require a site plan to demonstrate the proximity of a development to the mapped resource areas. The site plan shall include:

a. Verification of boundaries of the designated resource protection areas (FMC 19.106.070(A)).

b. Identification of existing disturbed areas within the applicable resource protection buffer. Required mitigation will focus on restoring the existing disturbed areas.

c. Location of the 100-year floodplain and floodway boundaries as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

d. Topography shown by contour lines of two-foot intervals for slopes less than 15 percent and by 10-foot intervals for slopes 15 percent or greater.

e. Identification of the proposed development including all building footprints or building/development envelope, site property improvements, utilities and landscaping.

f. Show the proposed limits of any grading required for the project.

2. A completed land use application form with legal description and address of the concerned property, owner’s authorization, and the information requested thereon.

3. Application fee as set forth by resolution.

4. A written narrative which describes:

a. The proposed alteration or development.

b. Materials to be used.

c. The purpose or reasons for the alteration or development.

d. Alterations considered to determine no practicable alternatives exist to the proposed encroachment, alteration, or development.

e. How the impacts have been minimized and/or mitigated.

5. Scaled drawing or drawings of the proposed alteration showing:

a. Overall specifications and dimensions for the proposed alterations or development.

b. The location of any wetlands or waterbodies on the property including the delineation of the designated natural resource protection area.

c. Location of the:

i. 100-year floodplain and floodway boundary as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

ii. Distance from the development to the resource protection areas.

iii. Resource features such as waterbodies or wetlands.

d. Degraded resource areas as identified through the habitat assessment process.

e. Depth of cuts and fills, final slopes, descriptions of fill material, etc.

f. Proposed erosion control measures.

6. Vegetation mitigation plan and monitoring plan. Description of any vegetation that will be removed and of vegetation to be planted, including a landscaping plan showing plant types, location, size and quantities.

7. Habitat assessment form and narrative as required by FMC 19.106.040(D), Exception Process.

8. Written documentation that all required or pertinent state and federal permits have been submitted. Permits may be required from the State Division of Lands, the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and/or other agencies.

D. Expiration of Approved Applications. The approval of a land use application shall be valid for two years. Approved land use applications and plans may be renewed through the Type I review process for an additional two years upon demonstrating that the original approved plan still meets the applicable criteria provided in this chapter. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.080 Map amendments and administration.

A. The natural resources map (“map”) shows the locations of riparian resources, wetlands, upland habitat and other special resource features. The natural resources map (“map”) is a general indicator of protected resources and their associated vegetated corridors; the location of actual resource protection areas is determined according to the parameters established in Table 19.106.080(A).

 

Table 19.106.080(A) 

Riparian Resources  

	Resource Type	Protected Feature	Width of Resource Protection Area

	80-foot resource protection area 	Fairview Creek from Glisan Street to the eastern portion of Community Park.1	80 feet in each direction measured from the centerline of creek. Total width 160 feet.

	55-foot resource protection area	Fairview Creek from property addressed 65 Bridge Street north to Fairview Lake

 

Salmon Creek

 

Columbia River	55 feet measured in each direction from the centerline of the creek. Total width 110 feet.

	40-foot resource protection area	Fairview Creek from Halsey Street to northern property line of 15 Matney Street

 

No Name Creek

 

Rain Tree Creek	Total resource width 80 feet, measured 40 feet in each direction from centerline of creek.

	35-foot resource protection area	Osburn Creek	Total resource width 70 feet, measured 35 feet in each direction from centerline of creek.

	Fairview Lake	Shoreline of Fairview Lake	50 feet measured from top of the bank, or 50 feet from the annual mean high water level (11.4 feet NGVD) of the lake in those areas where there is no bank or significant break of slope along the shoreline. Includes the submerged lake bottom within city limits.

	Wetlands	All mapped wetlands on the natural resources map	50-foot buffer measured from the outer wetland boundary.

	Upland habitat	All mapped upland habitat areas on the natural resources map.	Areas as shown as upland habitat on the map.

	Special Standards for Fairview Village	Protected Feature	Width of Resource Protection Area

	Fairview Creek	Conservation easement	100 feet, 50 feet on each side measured from centerline of the stream.

	Clear Creek	Conservation easement	75 feet, 37.5 feet on each side measured from centerline of the stream.

	Previously platted resource areas	Conservation easement, or plat language	Lakeshore Estates 2

Heron Point

Pelfrey South Shore Estates 1 and 2

	1 The platted conservation easement within the Fairview Village development shall apply where it abuts the Village commercial, Village apartments, and Village townhouse zones as shown on the adopted map. The southern side of Fairview Creek where it abuts city of Fairview property is subject to the 75-foot resource protection area.

B. Boundary Amendments. In some cases changes and corrections may need to be made to the map. Changes to resource boundaries shall be reviewed through the Type II land use process. To propose a correction or change to the map, the applicant shall submit the following information depending on the resource type:

1. Waterbodies (Rivers, Streams, Springs, and Lakes). An applicant who believes that a waterbody as shown on the map should be corrected may submit a map amendment request that includes the following:

a. A hydrology report prepared by a professional engineer, demonstrating whether or not the drainage meets the definition of a protected water feature.

b. A topographic map of the site with contour intervals of five feet or less that shows the specific location on the subject property.

c. A report prepared by a qualified professional that gives a detailed reasoning for the proposed map amendment. The report must also include a description of the qualifications and experience of all persons that contributed to the report.

d. A description of the incorrect mapping and reasoning supporting the proposed amendments. A map shall also be submitted showing the mapped boundaries and the proposed boundary changes. The map shall be drawn to an engineer or architect scale.

e. Any additional information necessary to address each of the detailed verification criteria provided in this section.

2. Wetlands. An applicant who believes that a wetland area shown on the map should be corrected may submit a map amendment request that includes the following:

a. A wetland delineation report, prepared by a professional wetland specialist in accordance with the 1996 Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology and following the wetland delineation process established by Department of State Lands (DSL), demonstrating the location of any wetlands on the site.

b. The delineation report will be accepted by the city only after approval by DSL.

c. A description of the incorrect mapping and reasoning supporting the proposed amendments. A map shall also be submitted showing the mapped boundaries and the proposed boundary changes. The map shall be drawn to an engineer or architect scale.

d. A topographic map of the site with contour intervals of five feet or less, that shows the specific location of the wetland on the subject property.

e. The public works director shall confer with DSL and Metro to confirm delineation and the hydrology report, as may be needed, prior to issuing a notice of decision on a requested map correction.

f. A report prepared by a qualified professional that gives a detailed reasoning for the proposed map amendment. The report must also include a description of the qualifications and experience of all persons that contributed to the report.

g. Any additional information necessary to address each of the detailed verification criteria provided in this section.

3. Upland Habitat Areas. An applicant who believes that an upland habitat area shown on the map should be corrected may submit a map amendment request that includes the following:

a. A city of Fairview habitat assessment form demonstrating the values and functions of the upland habitat area.

b. A report prepared by a qualified professional that gives a detailed reasoning for the proposed map amendment. The report must also include a description of the qualifications and experience of all persons that contributed to the report.

c. A description of the incorrect mapping and reasoning supporting the proposed amendments. A map shall also be submitted showing the mapped boundaries and the proposed boundary changes. The map shall be drawn to an engineer or architect scale.

d. Any additional information necessary to address each of the detailed verification criteria provided in this section.

4. Boundary Modification Approval Criteria. The city shall update the map if the wetland or hydrology report submitted demonstrates the following:

a. That there was an error in the original mapping.

b. That the boundaries of the resource have changed since the most recent update to the map (“map”).

c. That a protected water feature or resource no longer exists because that area has been legally filled, culverted, or developed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

C. Map Administration.

1. Updates to the Map. When a boundary verification, conducted in accordance with the standards of FMC 19.106.070(B) demonstrates an error in the location of a resource area shown on the map, the city shall update the map to incorporate the corrected information as soon as practicable. Changes to the map are not considered amendments to the city’s Comprehensive Plan, the applicable Comprehensive Plan map, or to the zoning map.

2. Mapping Implications of Allowed Disturbances.

a. Riparian Resources. Permanent disturbances within a riparian resource, whether they legally occurred prior to the adoption of this section or are allowed according to the standards of FMC 19.106.040, do not affect the way related riparian resources are shown on the map.

b. Upland Habitat Areas. When disturbances are allowed within the upland habitat area, in accordance with the applicable standards of FMC 19.106.040, the city may update the map to show that the permanently disturbed area is no longer considered an upland habitat area. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.090 Nonconforming uses and structures within resource protection areas.

Should a nonconforming structure, development footprint, or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent more than 75 percent of its current value as assessed by the Multnomah County assessor, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the current development code.

Rebuilding of nonconforming structures and development footprints destroyed less than 75 percent of the current value assessed by the Multnomah County assessor shall be rebuilt within five years from the date the structure was destroyed/damaged. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.100 Floodplain ordinance.

Areas adjacent to any of the city of Fairview’s water resources are also regulated by the city’s floodplain overlay district. All riparian buffer alterations must be in compliance with the applicable standards of the floodplain overlay zone before permit issuance. Where regulations of the natural resource overlay zone differ from those found in the floodplain overlay zone, the more restrictive standards shall apply. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.110 Emergency exemption.

The city of Fairview shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter if, during a flooding event, the city administrator determines that a portion of the creek channel must be immediately altered in some manner in order to avoid substantial property damage. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.120 Drainage district exemption.

A. For resource protection areas located within Multnomah County Drainage District No. 1 and the area managed by the Sandy Drainage Improvement Company, the following will be allowed without obtaining a permit: routine operations, repair, maintenance, reconfiguration, rehabilitation, or replacement of existing drainage and flood control facilities; facilities, and existing related facilities, including any structures, pump stations, water control structures, culverts, irrigation systems, roadways, utilities, accessory uses (such as off-load facilities that facilitate water-based maintenance); erosion control projects, levees, soil and bank stabilization projects; dredging and ditch clearing within the hydraulic cross section in existing stormwater conveyance drainage ways; or other water quality and flood storage projects applicable to existing facilities shall be allowed without obtaining a permit, provided all of the following are met:

1. The project is consistent with all other applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations.

2. The project does not encroach closer to a surface stream or river, wetland or other body of open water than existing operations and development.

3. Disturbed areas are replanted with vegetation and no bare soils remain after project completion; the planting of native vegetation and removal of invasive nonnative or noxious vegetation is encouraged; invasive nonnative vegetation shall not be planted.

4. Each district submits an annual report to all local permitting agencies in which the district operates, describing the projects the district completed in the previous year and how those projects complied with all applicable federal and state laws and requirements. The report also includes a list of proposed projects for the upcoming year for the city of Fairview to review in advance.

B. Activities that are not consistent with the criteria listed above, as determined by the public works director after reviewing the annual proposed project report, shall be subject to applicable procedures for Type I, Type II, Type III, or Type IV permits. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


19.106.130 Penalty.

Property owners are responsible for maintaining natural resource protection areas on their property. Unauthorized removal of native vegetation, or purposeful neglect of native vegetation, is subject to penalty.

Any person, group, corporation or association violating the terms or provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 3-2012 §§ 2, 3 (Att. 2))


Chapter 19.107 SOUTH FAIRVIEW LAKE DESIGN OVERLAY

Sections:

19.107.010    Purpose.

19.107.020    Applicability.

19.107.030    Permitted uses.

19.107.040    Conditional uses.

19.107.050    Development standards – Density.

19.107.060    Design standards.


19.107.010 Purpose.

This design overlay zone is intended to offer design flexibility for properties adjacent to the south side of Fairview Lake which provide a variety of housing opportunities for city residents while maintaining the established single-family residential character of the area and protecting important environmental and scenic values of the lake. If during the administration of this chapter, standards or requirements create uncertainty or ambiguity, the city shall interpret these regulations according to the intent expressed in the record for the adoption and subsequent amendment to the South Fairview Lake design overlay zone. (Ord. 11-2014 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.107.020 Applicability.

The South Fairview Lake design overlay zone designation may be requested at the discretion of the applicant at the time of subdivision, partition, or development permit review. (Ord. 11-2014 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.107.030 Permitted uses.

The permitted uses in the R-7.5 zone shall continue to apply in the South Fairview Lake design overlay zone. In addition to single-family detached residences (Figure 19.107.030), the following single-family residential housing types are also permitted:

A. Charleston Row Houses. These are detached residences on relatively narrow lots. Each residence is typically located with a minimum zero-foot side yard setback on only one side of the lot and a minimum six-foot side yard setback on the opposite side of the lot with a total of at least six feet between the structures. The front and side yards serve as the open space on the lot. Garages are at the rear of the building with access to an alley (Figure 19.107.030.A).

B. Courtyard Cluster Homes. These are detached residences developed in groups of five to seven lots. Each residence is typically located with a minimum zero-foot side yard setback on only one side of the lot, and a minimum five-foot side yard setback on the opposite side, with a total of at least five feet between the structures. The lots are clustered around a common driveway, which provides pedestrian and vehicle access to all or the majority of the homes (Figure 19.107.030.B).

C. Attached Townhomes. These are attached residences which typically have zero-foot side yard setbacks on one or both sides. Each townhome is located on a separate lot and arranged in clusters of three to seven units (Figure 19.107.030.C).

Figure 19.107.030 – Fairview Lake Way Design Overlay Detached Single-Family Home
[IMAGE]


Figure 19.107.030.A – Fairview Lake Way Design Overlay Charleston Row House Home
[IMAGE]


Figure 19.107.030.B – Fairview Lake Way Design Overlay Courtyard Cluster Home
[IMAGE]


Figure 19.107.030.C – Fairview Lake Way Design Overlay Attached Townhomes
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 11-2014 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.107.040 Conditional uses.

All conditional uses in the R-7.5 zone shall continue to be allowed as conditional uses in the South Fairview Lake design overlay zone. (Ord. 11-2014 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.107.050 Development standards – Density.

A. Development Standards. See Table 19.107.050.A – Development Standards – Density.

  

Table 19.107.050.A Development Standards – Density  

	Development Standards	Single-Family Detached (Figure 19.107.030)	Charleston Row House (Figure 19.107.030.A)	Courtyard Cluster Homes (Figure 19.107.030.B)	Attached Townhouses (Figure 19.107.030.C)

	Density

	Minimum lot size	5,000 square feet	3,000 square feet	3,000 square feet	2,500 square feet

	Maximum lot size	25,000 square feet	4,500 square feet	6,500 square feet	4,000 square feet

	Minimum average lot area per unit	6,000 square feet	3,000 square feet	4,000 square feet	3,000 square feet

	Lot Dimensions

	Minimum average lot width	50 feet	30 feet	50 feet	20 feet

	Maximum average lot depth	80 feet	90 feet	80 feet	80 feet

	Lot Coverage

	Maximum lot coverage for all structures	60%	50%	2-story structures: 50%

1-story structures: 60%	50%

	Height

	Maximum building height	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet

	Setbacks

	Front – minimum	15 feet	10 feet	10 feet	5 feet (architectural projections, i.e., front porches, cannot encroach into this setback)

	Front – maximum	20 feet	15 feet	15 feet	20 feet

	Side – minimum	5 feet	Interior – 6 feet one side only/0 feet one side only.

Corner lot – 10 feet on street side, minimum building separation – 6 feet.

Builders will provide a site plan that indicates setbacks on adjoining lots at the time of application.	Interior – 5 feet on one or both sides/0 feet one side only is optional.

Corner and between clusters – 10 feet on street side, minimum building separation – 5 feet.	0 feet

	Rear – minimum	15 feet/adjacent to Fairview Lake conservation easement	8 feet from alley	10 feet	15 feet

	Garage entrance – minimum	18 feet	Alley – 8 feet	Street and common driveway – 18 feet	18 feet public street – 5 feet private street or common driveway

	Parking (off-street)	1 compact, 1 standard	1 compact, 1 standard	1 compact, 1 standard	1 compact, 1 standard

B. Allowed shall be three units per acre. (Ord. 11-2014 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.107.060 Design standards.

The following design standards shall apply to residential developments which are subject to the South Fairview Lake design overlay zone.

A. Street System. The proposed street system shall be designed to create a safe, aesthetically pleasing, and pedestrian-oriented neighborhood. Five of the six street types are narrower than the typical city standard minimizing the physical presence of paved areas, allowing for additional landscaping adjacent to streets and sidewalks, and effectively controlling traffic speeds. Specific applications of these street designs shall be approved by the city in consideration of anticipated traffic volumes, emergency access, and on-street parking demand. All streets are intended for traffic speeds of 25 miles per hour or less. Street design requirements are summarized in Table 19.107.060 and illustrated in cross-section in Figure 19.107.060.A.

1. Standard Local Street. Standard local streets shall constitute public streets with a 58-foot right-of-way consisting of two 11-foot travel lanes, two seven-foot parking lanes, two five-foot planter strips, and two five-foot sidewalks.

2. Narrow Local Street. Narrow local streets shall constitute public streets with a 50-foot right-of-way consisting of two 10.5-foot travel lanes, one seven-foot parking lane, two five-foot planter strips, and two five-foot sidewalks.

3. Local Street with Median. The local street with a median shall constitute a public street with a 58-foot right-of-way consisting of two 11-foot travel lanes, a seven-foot median, two five-foot planter strips, two five-foot sidewalks, and two four-foot landscaped buffers. No on-street parking will be allowed, to minimize the width of the right-of-way.

4. Alley. Alleys shall constitute public streets with a 24-foot public right-of-way consisting of a 16-foot travel lane and two four-foot buffers. The buffer shall be paved along the front of the garages and the remainder shall be landscaped with ground covers, shrubs, or a combination thereof. Alleys shall have rolled curbs with gutters draining to a storm sewer system.

5. Attached Townhomes Street. The attached townhomes street shall constitute a private street with a 35-foot-wide right-of-way consisting of two 10-foot travel lanes, two four-foot sidewalks, and two three-foot landscaped buffers. The buffer shall be landscaped with street trees, ground covers and shrubs. The rolled curbs shall have gutters draining to a storm sewer system.

6. Courtyard Street. Courtyard streets shall constitute private streets with a 28-foot right-of-way consisting of two 10-foot travel lanes, one eight-foot parking lane, and a maximum length of 150 feet. Landscape which extends from the edge of the paved surface to the house facade shall be planted with trees, ground covers and shrubs, or a combination thereof, and shall be maintained by a homeowners association.

 

Table 19.107.060 Street Design Requirements  

	Street Types	Right-of-Way	Travel Lane	Parking	Planter Strip	Median	Sidewalk	Additional Landscaped Buffer

	Standard local street	58′	11′/11′	7′/7′	5′/5′	no	5′/5′	no

	Narrow local street	50′	10.5′/10.5′	7′ one side	5′/5′	no	5′/5′	no

	Local street with median	58′	11′/11′	no	5′/5′	6′	5′/5′	4′/4′

	Alley	private tract 24′	8′/8′	no	no	no	no	4′/4′

	Attached townhouses street (private)	private tract 35′	10′/10′	no	no	no	4′/4′	3′/3′

	Courtyard street (private)	private tract 28′	10′/10′	8′ one side	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A

Figure 19.107.060.A – Fairview Lake Design Overlay Street Sections
[IMAGE]


Figure 19.107.060.A – Fairview Lake Design Overlay Street Sections (continued)
[IMAGE]


B. Fences. The maximum height for front yard and street side yard fences shall be four feet.

C. Intersections.

1. Vision Clearance Areas. Signage, structures and plant material 42 inches above grade shall be prohibited within the vision clearance area located at the intersection of streets and/or alleys. The area is defined by a triangle with two sides of the triangle extending 15 feet from the intersection.

2. Curb Extensions. Curb extensions shall be provided as required by the adopted Fairview Lake Way standards.

3. Paved Surface Details. Paving and curb cuts shall facilitate safe pedestrian crossing and meet all ADA requirements for accessibility. Textured accent paving shall be used at the main entry intersection to clearly define the pedestrian crosswalk. The pavers or pattern shall be of a level material which does not impede wheelchair accessibility or conflict with surfacing for sight-impaired individuals.

D. Landscape.

1. Landscape Plans and Installation.

a. Prior to issuance of building permits, the developer shall submit landscape plans and completion scheduled for:

i. All areas within the public right-of-way or common open spaces; and

ii. All private front yards which include lawn and/or other living ground cover.

b. Landscape materials shown on the approved plans for public right-of-way or common open space areas shall be installed prior to issuance of occupancy permits for more than 80 percent of the homes abutting these public areas.

c. Landscape materials shown on the approved plans for private front yards shall be installed prior to occupancy of the home.

2. Planter Strips.

a. All planter strips shall be a minimum of five feet wide and shall be planted with either lawn, ground cover or a combination of shrubs and ground cover such that the entire surface area is covered with plant material. Placement of plant material shall adhere to clear sight line requirements as provided in FMC 19.140.030(D), Vision Clearance Areas.

b. Planter strips without adjacent parking shall have street trees in conjunction with low ground covers and/or shrubs to enhance visibility while still providing a psychological and physical barrier from passing traffic. Plantings shall be predominantly evergreen year-round, provide seasonal interest with fall color or blooms, and at maturity grow within the confines of the planter strip. Planter strips with adjacent parking shall have only street trees and lawn or low ground cover which adheres to the requirements of this section.

3. Medians.

a. All medians shall be a minimum of seven feet wide and shall be landscaped with a combination of street trees, shrubs, and/or ground covers.

b. Medians shall have low plant masses near intersections for the safety of pedestrians and motorists. The remaining median area shall have taller plant masses to block lights of oncoming traffic, decrease dust and heat, and to improve the aesthetics of the roadway. Plants shall be predominantly evergreen year-round, provide seasonal interest with fall color, blooms or fruits, and at maturity stay within the confines of the median. Placement of plant material shall adhere to clear sight line requirements as provided in FMC 19.140.030(D).

4. Traffic Diverters. Traffic diverters shall be landscaped with a combination of trees, and low shrubs and/or ground covers. Plantings shall be predominantly evergreen year-round, provide seasonal interest with fall color, blooms or fruits, and at maturity stay within the confines of the traffic diverter. Placement of plant material shall adhere to clear sight line requirements as provided in FMC 19.140.030(D), Vision Clearance Areas.

5. Street Trees.

a. Location. Street trees are required along both sides of streets and within medians and the traffic diverters. Street trees along the street edge, excluding the attached townhouse street, shall be planted within the planter strip at a frequency of 30 feet on center unless the community development director approves a different distance due to constraints such as utilities. Street trees in the buffer strip of the attached townhouse street shall be planted an average of 20 feet on center to accommodate curb cuts for driveways unless the community development director approves a different distance due to constraints such as utilities. Trees proposed for medians and the traffic diverters shall be spaced according to the size of tree and design intent.

b. Tree Types. The type of tree to be planted shall be in accordance with the approved street tree list in the city’s sidewalk maintenance program handbook.

E. Erosion Control Standards. Site erosion and pollution and sedimentation of Fairview Lake must be prevented during and after construction activities. Appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed as required by the city of Fairview erosion control standards.

F. Lighting. Street lighting shall be provided for all public streets in the development, excluding private courtyard streets. Ornamental lighting shall be 12-foot to 14-foot tall “acorn” style fixtures consistent in style with the city of Fairview standard (Figure 19.107.060.F). Fixtures shall be sited within the planter strip at 150-foot to 200-foot intervals to provide a traditional image and consistent level of lighting.

Figure 19.107.060.F – Fairview Lake Way Design Overlay Typical Street Lighting Detail
[IMAGE]


G. Irrigation for and maintenance of landscaped areas within the public right-of-way shall be provided as required by the adopted Fairview Lake Way standards.

H. Fairview Lake Conservation Easements.

1. Shoreline Conservation Easements.

a. Shoreline conservation easements shall provide a 50-foot setback from top of bank or annual mean water level, in areas where there is no bank or break in the shoreline along Fairview Lake.

b. Trees and native vegetation shall be maintained or enhanced within the easement area.

c. Structures and landscaping may occur up to the southern edge of easement.

2. Wooded, Wetland, and SEC Area Conservation Easement.

a. Easement location varies according to existing treeline and wetland vegetation and the identified SEC (Chapter 19.106 FMC, Natural Resource Regulations).

b. Structures shall maintain a 15-foot setback from the edge of the easement.

c. Landscaping may occur up to the edge of the easement.

3. Allowed Activities within Conservation Easements. Within the protected area, development and resource alteration, excluding mitigation or enhancement, shall be prohibited. Enhancement shall be required in disturbed riparian and wetland areas providing revegetation with appropriate native species only. Planting non-native, ornamental vegetation in the easement shall be prohibited. Similarly, invasive, non-native ornamental plantings shall be maintained in private landscapes to prevent encroachment.

I. Minimum Common Space Area. All developments shall provide a minimum of five percent of the net development area as common public or private open space, excluding conservation easement areas.

J. Residential Housing Design Standards. In addition to the development standards in FMC 19.107.050, the following design standards shall apply:

1. Charleston Row Houses.

a. Stories: two.

b. Garages: access only to the alley.

c. Main entry: oriented toward the street or front corner of the house with a usable front porch.

d. Minimum building separation: six feet.

2. Courtyard Cluster Homes.

a. Stories: minimum of one one-story home for clusters of up to five homes and two one-story homes for clusters of six or seven homes.

b. Garages: one direct driveway access to the public street for each cluster.

c. Main entry: one main entry oriented to the public street for each cluster.

d. Minimum building separation: six feet.

3. Townhomes.

a. Stories: two.

b. Garages: direct driveway access to a private or public street.

c. Main entry: oriented toward a private or public street with a usable front porch or entry which has an equal or lesser front yard setback than the garage. (Ord. 11-2014 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 3-2012 § 6; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.108 COMMUNITY SERVICE/PARKS OVERLAY

Sections:

19.108.010    Uses.


19.108.010 Uses.

The following community service/parks uses and those of a similar nature may be permitted in any zoning district when approved at a public hearing by the planning commission. The district is to be applied only to public property (lands owned by public agencies) or utilities.

A. Government building or use.

B. Park, playground, athletic or recreational use.

C. Open space and green way.

D. Library.

E. School, private, parochial or public educational institution.

F. Power substation or other public utility building or use.

G. Telecommunications facilities where permitted. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.110 VILLAGE GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

19.110.010    Purpose.

19.110.020    Village concept.

19.110.030    Area of application.

19.110.035    Signs and development standards.

19.110.040    Definitions.

19.110.050    Conflict clause.

19.110.060    Phased subdivision.


19.110.010 Purpose.

This section implements the policies of the Fairview Village community plan by providing a mixture of single-family, townhouse, and multifamily residential uses as well as retail/office, commercial and business park uses. These uses are located in the areas where suitable services and facilities are currently provided or can be provided as development occurs. In addition, this plan area allows for pedestrian-oriented development with good connections via the sidewalks, trails and street system from residential areas to parks, schools, open spaces, retail and office uses. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.110.020 Village concept.

This section describes the desired feel and texture of a mixed use community development. Fairview Village is designed to be a functioning mixed use neighborhood with a range of housing types and commercial stores. Chapters 19.110 through 19.155 FMC are intended to implement this objective and to ensure a successful, livable neighborhood.

The Village will provide a commercial core or downtown area to provide the daily necessities of nearby residents. The Village main street should be architecturally unified with wide, landscaped, pedestrian-friendly sidewalks. Retail and office buildings are brought to or near the sidewalks with parking located to the rear of the site. The design of the streets should slow the flow of automobile traffic and allow pedestrians to easily cross at intersections. Principal retail uses such as grocery anchors and hardware stores will have adequate parking and walkways that encourage pedestrian travel to the branch bank, dry cleaners, video store and other retail stores and residences. This commercial core will be located south of NE Halsey, a major bus route.

The commercial core is immediately surrounded by high density housing. Apartments and townhouses are located to ensure a two- to five-minute walk for basic necessities. This segment of the Village, which will provide the fabric and feel of urban living, is intended to encourage a diminished reliance on the automobile for transport to basic services.

As the streets move away from the grid of the commercial core they begin to meld with the topography of the land and Fairview Creek. The housing becomes less dense with small and larger lot single-family homes, all still within walking distance of the Village center. A network of pedestrian ways and trails will provide easy access for everyone in the community. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.110.030 Area of application.

The Fairview Village community plan is applied to the area located generally east of the NE 207th Connector, south of NE Halsey Street, north of NE Glisan Street, and west of NE 223rd Avenue as illustrated in Figure V-1, following Chapter 19.155 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.110.035 Signs and development standards.

A. Signs.

1. All signs located in Fairview Village shall be in conformance with sign regulations in Chapter 19.170 FMC.

2. Freestanding Monument Entry Signs. These signs are intended to identify the village entrances. The number and location of these signs is shown in Figure V-8, following Chapter 19.155 FMC.

a. Area. Maximum face area of 75 square feet.

b. Height shall be a maximum of 12 feet above grade.

c. Width shall be limited to a maximum of 15 feet.

d. Placement. Sign base shall be set on a foundation at finished grade level, anchored to the ground.

e. Location. Sign locations shall be located at four designated entrances into the village (Figure V-8, following Chapter 19.155 FMC).

f. Base Dimension. The base/foundation dimensions shall not exceed 36 inches in depth or 15 feet in width and shall be no less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches in height.

B. Development Standards. Development standards specific to each zoning district in Fairview Village are located in each of the corresponding sections: Chapter 19.115 FMC, Village Single-Family, Chapter 19.120 FMC, Village Townhouse Residential, Chapter 19.125 FMC, Village Apartment, Chapter 19.130 FMC, Village Office, and Chapter 19.135 FMC, Village Commercial and Mixed Use. Additional development standards are located in Chapters 19.140, 19.145, and 19.150 FMC. (Ord. 2-2010 § 4)


19.110.040 Definitions.

The following definitions shall be utilized in the implementation of this chapter:

A. “Block frontage” means all of the property fronting on one side of a street that is between intersecting or intercepting streets, or that is between a street and a water feature, or end of a dead end street. An intercepting street determines only the boundary of the block frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts.

B. “Common line setback” means the combined setback distance between two structures on abutting lots.

C. “Curb radius” means the curved edge of the street at intersections, measured at the edge of the travel lanes. Curbs at intersections shall not intrude into the intersection beyond the specified maximum curb radius. Where streets of different use categories intersect, the requirements of the higher intensity use shall govern. The curb radius shall be handicapped accessible.

D. “Front porch” means an open roofed structure attached to the front of the dwelling unit. A front porch shall have a minimum depth of six feet and a minimum width of 12 feet and, except for insect screening, shall only have supporting columns visible above 42 inches from the finished porch floor level. Side and rear porches are not subject to these requirements. All or a portion of the front porch may encompass a ramp providing handicap access.

E. “Jurisdictional wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, wet meadows, and similar areas.

F. “Net acre” means all area within a private development zone excluding public rights-of-way.

G. “Pedestrian way” means any off-street public accessway which is dedicated for the primary use of pedestrians and/or bicycles.

H. “Riparian area” means a terrestrial zone influenced by annual and intermittent water, a high water table, or wet soils. The riparian area is found adjacent to a body of water, such as a stream, lake, or estuary. Riparian vegetation includes native herbaceous plants, shrubs, understory trees, and canopy trees. The riparian area contributes shade, leaves, woody debris, and insects to a body of water.

I. “Tower element” means an inhabitable structure typically higher than its diameter and high relative to its surroundings that may be attached to a larger structure, and that may be fully enclosed or of skeleton framework.

J. “Visual clearance zone” means those areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is necessary for traffic safety. See diagram in Figure V-2, following Chapter 19.155 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.110.050 Conflict clause.

Within the Village when there is a conflict between the Village regulations and base zone, overlay zone, or other regulations of this code, the Village regulations control. All regulations of the base zone still apply except where expressly written otherwise. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.110.060 Phased subdivision.

The Village development will be phased. When an applicant desires to record and develop subdivision plats covering portions of an approved tentative plan in phases, the approval authority may authorize a time schedule for platting the various phases. Each phase may be for a period of time in excess of one year, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than seven years without resubmission of the tentative plan. Each phase so platted and developed shall conform to the applicable requirements of this code and the subdivision code. Portions platted after the passage of one year may be required to have modifications to avoid conflicts with a change in the Comprehensive Plan, Village district zoning code, or subdivision code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.115 VILLAGE SINGLE-FAMILY (VSF)

Sections:

19.115.010    Purpose.

19.115.020    Permitted uses.

19.115.030    Conditional uses.

19.115.040    Development standards.


19.115.010 Purpose.

This zone is intended primarily for single-family dwellings in a low and medium-density residential neighborhood environment. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.115.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the VSF zone:

A. Single-family dwellings (detached).

B. Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, studios, private workshops, playhouses, private greenhouses or other similar structures related to the dwelling in design, whether attached or detached.

C. Parks and playgrounds.

D. Family day care providers and residential homes – see Chapter 19.200 FMC.

E. Home occupations – see Chapter 19.450 FMC.

F. Signs – see Chapter 19.170 FMC.

G. Churches.

H. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per single-family residence. Accessory dwelling units shall be constructed only over the garage or internal to the primary dwelling. Accessory dwellings are subject to the special standards for certain uses in FMC 19.30.110(B) unless otherwise regulated by the village single-family standards in Chapter 19.110 FMC. (Ord. 7-2018 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.115.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted as conditional uses in a VSF zone after approval of the planning commission:

A. All conditional uses in the R zone except for golf courses. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.115.040 Development standards.

A. Density. All VSF lots shall be no less than 4,000 square feet and no more than 7,700 square feet in area, except that lots which contain conservation easements, have obvious irregular shapes restricting the developable area or corner lots may exceed the maximum area provided the identified building envelope does not exceed 7,700 square feet in area. In such cases, the maximum building envelope shall be depicted on the preliminary plan approval.

B. Lot Dimensions. All lots in the VSF zone shall have a minimum width of 35 feet and a minimum depth of 70 feet. Pie-shaped lots shall have a minimum midpoint width of 35 feet and a minimum midpoint depth of 70 feet.

C. Lot Coverage. The total of all structures in the VSF zone shall cover no more than 60 percent of any lot.

D. Height. Buildings within this zone may not exceed 35 feet in height.

E. Setbacks.

1. Basic Standards.

a. Front facades shall be set back from the right-of-way for a distance of either 10 or 15 feet.

b. On pie-shaped or irregularly-shaped lots, the front facade may be set back deep enough on the lot to accommodate a maximum 40-foot-wide building envelope between side yard setbacks.

c. Lots that abut Fairview or Clear Creek may have dwelling units with attached, front accessed garages positioned perpendicular to the right-of-way. Such garages shall be set back four feet from the right-of-way. On such dwelling units, the front facade is exempt from the 10-foot or 15-foot setback requirement, but in all cases the facade shall be in back of the garage.

d. Sides of units may have a minimum setback of four feet from the property line on one side of the lot and a minimum of five feet on the opposite side of the lot; provided, that the common line setback (combined distance between two structures on abutting lots) is a minimum of nine feet. On corner lots the side setback for any portion of the structure shall be a minimum of 10 feet on the side abutting the street.

e. The rear facade of the main dwelling unit shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from the rear property line.

2. Lots that Abut Fairview Creek. The front and side setbacks described in subsection (E)(1) of this section apply. The rear property line shall be the centerline of Fairview Creek, and the rear setback shall be 50 feet from creek centerline.

3. Lots that Abut Clear Creek. The front and side setbacks described in subsection (E)(1) of this section apply. The rear property line shall be the centerline of Clear Creek, and the rear setback shall be 37.5 feet from creek centerline.

F. Garages.

1. Four out of five attached garages with front access on any block frontage in the VSF zone shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front facade. Such garages may have a single garage door for up to two vehicle spaces.

2. One out of five attached garages on any block frontage in the VSF zone are not required to be set back from the front facade. Such garages shall not be built on abutting lots, shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way, and shall have a separate garage door for each vehicle space with a maximum of two garage doors, each having a maximum width of 10 feet.

3. Lots that abut Fairview or Clear Creek may have garages with a minimum four-foot setback. Such garages shall orient the garage doors perpendicular to the right-of-way, shall have a separate garage door for each vehicle space with a maximum of two garage doors, each having a maximum width of 10 feet, and shall not be constructed on abutting lots.

4. Detached Garages on Non-Alley Lots.

a. Detached garages on all non-alley lots except those that abut Fairview or Clear Creek or abut other perpendicularly oriented lots shall have a minimum rear property line setback of four feet and a minimum side yard setback equal to the minimum side yard setback of the dwelling unit on that lot.

b. Detached garages on lots abutting Fairview and Clear Creek shall have rear setbacks in compliance with the environmental setbacks of those creeks; 50 feet and 37.5 feet respectively. Minimum side yard setbacks shall be equal to the minimum side yard setbacks of the dwelling unit on that lot.

c. Detached garages on non-alley lots that abut other lots oriented perpendicular to such lots shall have a minimum rear setback of 15 feet and minimum side yard setbacks equal to the minimum side yard setbacks of the dwelling unit on that lot.

5. Garages on Alley Lots.

a. Detached garages on alley lots shall have a minimum rear setback of four feet and a minimum side yard setback of two feet for single level garages only. Side yard setbacks for alley garages with more than one level shall be equal to the minimum side yard setbacks of the dwelling unit on that lot.

b. Attached rear accessed garages on alley lots shall have a minimum rear setback of four feet and a minimum side yard setback of two feet for single level garages only. Side yard setbacks for alley garages with more than one level shall be equal to the minimum side yard setbacks of the dwelling unit on that lot.

G. Special Development Standards. All development in this zone shall comply with applicable development standards in Chapter 19.145 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.120 VILLAGE TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL (VTH)

Sections:

19.120.010    Purpose.

19.120.020    Permitted uses.

19.120.030    Conditional uses.

19.120.040    Development standards.


19.120.010 Purpose.

This zone is intended primarily for attached single-family dwellings in a medium- to high-density residential environment. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.120.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in a VTH zone:

A. Single-family dwellings (detached).

B. Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses, row houses, duplexes).

C. Two-family dwellings.

D. Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, studios, private workshops, playhouses, private greenhouses or other similar structures related to the dwelling in design, whether attached or detached.

E. Parks and playgrounds.

F. Family day care providers and residential homes – see Chapter 19.200 FMC.

G. Home occupations – see Chapter 19.490 FMC.

H. Signs – see Chapter 19.170 FMC.

I. Accessory dwelling units shall be subject to FMC 19.30.110(B). (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.120.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted as conditional uses in a VTH zone after approval of the planning commission:

A. Schools.

B. Churches.

C. Community centers/day care providers.

D. Community services/parks.

E. Similar uses. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.120.040 Development standards.

A. Density. VTH lots shall be no less than 2,000 square feet and no greater than 4,000 square feet in area. Corner lots in the VTH zone may be larger than 4,000 square feet but shall be no more than 5,500 square feet in area.

B. Lot Dimensions. Lots in VTH zone shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and a minimum depth of 70 feet.

C. Lot Coverage. The total of all structures shall cover no more than 70 percent of any lot.

D. Height. Buildings within this zone may not exceed 35 feet in height.

E. Setbacks. Dwelling unit front facades shall be set back from the right-of-way for a distance of either 10 or 15 feet. Sides of units may have a setback of zero feet from property line on both sides of the lot. The rear facade shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the rear property line.

F. Garages.

1. Attached garages with front access are not permitted on lots accessible from an alley or rear parking lot.

2. Attached garages or detached garages may have a minimum setback of zero feet from the rear property line; provided the front facade setback requirement in subsection E of this section is met and provided there is a minimum of eight feet of separation between adjacent garages; provided further, where the garage vehicle entrance is perpendicular to the alley, a four-foot setback shall apply.

3. Attached or detached garages may have a side yard setback of zero feet.

G. Special Development Standards. All development in this zone shall comply with applicable development standards in Chapter 19.145 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.125 VILLAGE APARTMENT (VA)

Sections:

19.125.010    Purpose.

19.125.020    Permitted uses.

19.125.030    Conditional uses.

19.125.040    Development standards.


19.125.010 Purpose.

This zone is intended primarily for multifamily dwellings in a high-density residential environment. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.125.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in a VA zone:

A. Apartment dwellings, condominiums.

B. Two-family dwellings.

C. Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, studios, private workshops, playhouses, private greenhouses or other similar structures related to the dwelling in design, whether attached or detached.

D. Parks and playgrounds.

E. Family day care providers and residential homes – see Chapter 19.200 FMC.

F. Home occupations – see Chapter 19.490 FMC.

G. Signs – see Chapter 19.170 FMC.

H. Residential (care) facility.

I. Public buildings and facilities (such as government offices, post office, parking, etc.). (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.125.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted as conditional uses in a VA zone after approval of the planning commission:

A. All conditional uses in the VTH zone with the addition of single-family attached dwelling units. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.125.040 Development standards.

A. Density. The minimum density shall be no less than 20 units per net acre. The maximum density shall be no more than 30 units per acre.

B. Lot Coverage. The total of all structures shall cover no more than 65 percent of each lot in the zone.

C. Height. Buildings within these zones may not exceed 45 feet in height and tower elements may not exceed 60 feet.

D. Setbacks. Front facades shall be set back from right-of-way a distance of either zero feet or 10 feet or 15 feet. There are no setback requirements for side and rear facades, except for the VA zone adjacent to NE Halsey Street where the setback for the Halsey Street frontage shall be 20 feet.

E. Automobile Access. No direct motor vehicle access to apartment parking lots is permitted off NE Halsey Street.

F. Special Development Standards. All development in this zone shall comply with applicable development standards in Chapter 19.145 FMC. Certain standards and requirements under Chapter 19.140 FMC, Village General Standards, also apply regarding pedestrian ways, off-street parking, bicycle parking, landscaping, etc.

G. Additional Requirements. Design review is required for all uses in the VA zone. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.130 VILLAGE OFFICE (VO)

Sections:

19.130.010    Purpose.

19.130.020    Permitted uses.

19.130.030    Conditional uses.

19.130.040    Development standards.


19.130.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this zone is to provide suitable opportunity for business, government and professional office uses. Generally such uses shall rely upon collector streets for vehicular ingress and egress, thereby ensuring a high level of access with minimum conflicts with adjoining residential zones. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.130.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in a VO zone:

A. Office Uses.

1. Business, government and professional offices, including legal, financial, architectural, engineering, governmental, manufacturer’s representatives, property management, corporate and administrative offices.

2. Medical and dental services, clinics or community health care programs, counseling services, and associated pharmacies.

3. Graphic arts, printing, blueprinting, photo processing or reproduction labs, publishing and bookbinding services, and testing laboratories and facilities; provided no operation shall be conducted or equipment used which would create hazards and/or noxious or offensive conditions.

4. Light manufacturing, assembly, artisan, research and development uses which have physical and operational requirements which are similar to other office uses allowed in this zone.

5. Banks, credit unions, and savings and loan, brokerage, and other financial institutions.

6. Business services such as duplicating, photocopying, mailing and stenographic services, fax and computer facilities, employment agencies, office management services, notary public, business and communications equipment and service, and real estate offices.

7. Personal services, answering service, travel agent.

B. Service Commercial Uses. The following service commercial uses and their accessory uses may be provided within an office development; provided such uses occupy no more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of a building:

1. Coffee shops, cafes and delicatessens which serve at least breakfast and/or lunch, and catering services.

2. Day care facilities shall be permitted; provided they are located within office buildings and do not exceed 1,500 square feet or serve more than 13 children each.

3. Health and recreational facilities, such as exercise spas, gymnasiums, tennis and racquetball courts, swimming pools, saunas.

C. Institutional Uses.

1. Public and private educational facilities and trade schools, art, music, or dance studios, radio and television studios, excluding transmission towers.

2. Galleries and museums, small-scale (seating capacity up to 500) assembly or convention facilities and theaters for performing arts, exhibition halls, administration facilities, libraries, senior centers and fraternal organizations. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.130.030 Conditional uses.

Other uses when found similar to those above by planning commission and when approved at a public hearing. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.130.040 Development standards.

A. Height. Buildings within this zone may not exceed 55 feet in height and tower elements shall not exceed 70 feet.

B. Setbacks. There are no setback requirements in the VO zone.

C. Additional Requirements. The VO zone must meet all development standards in Chapter 19.150 FMC.

D. Design Review. Design review is required for all uses in the VO zone. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.135 VILLAGE COMMERCIAL (VC) AND MIXED USE (VMU)

Sections:

19.135.010    Permitted uses.

19.135.020    Conditional uses.

19.135.030    Development standards.


19.135.010 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the Village commercial and mixed use zones:

1. Retail store or business.

2. Banks and similar financial service uses.

3. Health and recreational facilities.

4. Locksmith.

5. Public offices.

6. Printing and copying services, telecommuting center.

7. Residential dwelling units in conjunction with permitted uses when developed in accordance with the VMU design standards of FMC 19.135.030(A)(2).

8. Tanning salon.

9. Theater (VC only).

10. Travel agent.

11. Video rental.

12. Bakery.

13. Blueprint or photostat shop.

14. Business school or private school operated as a commercial enterprise.

15. Catering establishment.

16. Cleaning establishment, other than commercial dry cleaning.

17. Department or furniture store (VC only).

18. Frozen food locker, excluding wholesale storage.

19. Interior decorating store.

20. Medical or dental clinic or laboratory.

21. Hotel, motel (VC only); bed and breakfast (VMU and VC).

22. Music instruction establishment.

23. Martial arts or dance instruction establishment.

24. Newsstand.

25. Flower or plant store.

26. Pet shop (VC only).

27. Restaurant or tavern.

28. Supermarkets over 5,000 square feet (VC only); food markets less than 5,000 square feet (VMU and VC).

29. Art studio/supply.

30. Hardware store (VC only).

31. Meat market.

32. Pharmacy.

33. Multifamily dwelling units subject to the development standards of FMC 19.135.030(A)(1) (VC zone) and (A)(2) (VMU zone).

34. Day care.

35. Barber/beauty shop.

36. Photography studio/supply store.

37. Sporting goods shop.

38. Shoe repair.

39. Dressmaking or tailoring shop. 

40. Telecommunications facilities: antennas pursuant to Chapter 19.245 FMC. (Ord. 4-2004 § 1; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.135.020 Conditional uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted as conditional uses in the VC and VMU zones:

A. Multifamily dwellings or commercial or office space not more than two stories in height as redevelopment of surface parking.

B. Attached single-family dwelling units.

C. Similar uses to those listed above as determined by the planning director. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.135.030 Development standards.

A. Setbacks and Design Elements.

1. Within the VC zone:

a. This area shall be occupied by no less than one anchor store prior to occupancy of 50 percent of the minimum buildable square footage in the zone.

b. Structure facades shall conform to the blank wall standard described in FMC 19.140.100.

c. All buildings shall be set back at least 15 feet from property lines abutting residential zones.

d. All building facades (front, rear, sides of unit) shall be set back from the NE Halsey Street right-of-way a minimum distance of 20 feet.

e. All buildings shall have their first floors occupied exclusively by commercial/office uses, except for the special “VC flex” area located on the extreme western portion of the VC zone, as depicted in Figure V-1, following Chapter 19.155 FMC, where residential uses are allowed on the first floors.

2. Within the VMU zone:

a. The VMU area shall be occupied by townhomes and commercial uses.

b. Parking lots shall occupy no more than 50 percent of the street frontage. One or more pedestrian accessways connecting parking lots to adjacent streets shall be provided at a minimum frequency of 250 feet along the street frontage.

c. Retail structure facades must extend to the right-of-way along at least 75 percent of the lot line; or

Retail structure facades must extend to within 12 feet of the lot line for 75 percent of the lot line and the space between the building and the lot line must be designed as an extension of the sidewalk and committed to active uses such as sidewalk cafes, vendor’s stands, or developed as “stopping places.”

Such facades shall conform to the blank wall standard described in FMC 19.140.100.

d. All buildings shall be set back at least five feet from property lines abutting residential areas.

e. Awnings may extend up to four feet into a public right-of-way. Awnings shall have a minimum clearance of 7.0 feet and a maximum height of 12.5 feet. Awning covering material shall be metal, glass, canvas or any combination thereof.

f. Buildings in the “four corners area” of the VMU zone (delineated in Figure V-1, following Chapter 19.155 FMC) shall have a minimum front facade height of 18 feet as measured from the finished street grade with residential uses restricted to the second and/or third floor.

B. Density. Residential density shall not exceed 45 units per acre.

C. Maximum Lot Coverage. Buildings shall cover no more than 75 percent of each lot in the zone.

D. Height Restrictions. Buildings within the Village commercial or Village mixed use zone shall not exceed 45 feet in height except that tower elements may be 60 feet in height with a footprint of no more than 400 square feet.

Building front facade height, as measured from the street grade, shall be no less than 18 feet.

E. Special Development Standards. All development in these zones shall comply with applicable development standards in Chapter 19.150 FMC.

F. Design Review. Design review is required for all uses in the VC and VMU zones. (Ord. 4-2004 § 2; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.140 VILLAGE GENERAL STANDARDS

Sections:

19.140.010    Pedestrian ways and trails.

19.140.020    On-site pedestrian ways for commercial, multifamily (four or more units), institutional and office development.

19.140.030    Streets.

19.140.040    Minimum required off-street parking requirements.

19.140.050    Street trees.

19.140.060    Erosion control standards.

19.140.070    Landscape standards.

19.140.080    Repealed.

19.140.090    Bicycle parking.

19.140.100    Blank wall standard.

19.140.110    Repealed.


19.140.010 Pedestrian ways and trails.

A. Pedestrian ways shall be provided from subdivisions and multifamily developments to:

1. Commercial facilities and public amenities such as existing or planned transit stops or facilities, school, park, church, day care center, children’s play area, outdoor activity areas, plazas, library, or similar facility;

2. A dead-end street, loop, or mid-block where the block is longer than 600 feet; and

3. Streets or pedestrian ways which abut the site.

B. Except as provided in FMC 19.140.020(B) and (H), pedestrian ways shall include at least a 10-foot right-of-way with a minimum five-foot wide paved surface and shall have a maximum slope of five percent wherever practical.

C. Pedestrian ways shall be illuminated so that they may be safely used at night and shall be direct with at least one end of the pedestrian way always visible from any point along the pedestrian way.

D. The maximum height of a fence along such a facility shall not exceed four feet.

E. Bollards or other similar treatments may be required in order to prevent cars from entering the pedestrian way.

F. All pedestrian ways shall be landscaped in conformance with FMC 19.140.070.

G. Pedestrian ways depicted on the Fairview Village trail system plan shall be constructed in conjunction with development of the same lot or parcel consistent with the provisions of Chapter 19.155 FMC. (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.020 On-site pedestrian ways for commercial, multifamily (four or more units), institutional and office development.

A. Pedestrian ways shall provide direct connections to other portions of the site such as buildings, parking lots, child play areas and outdoor pedestrian-oriented activity areas such as plazas, resting areas and viewpoints.

B. Pedestrian ways shall be constructed of concrete or paving bricks and be at least five feet in unobstructed width. ADA certified curb ramps shall be provided where pedestrian ways intersect with streets.

C. Pedestrian ways shall be illuminated throughout the length with pedestrian scale lighting not to exceed 20 feet in height having a minimum of 0.5 foot-candle power average illumination and oriented so as not to shine directly upon adjacent residences.

D. Pedestrian ways and pedestrian areas shall be separated from automobile and truck circulation, parking, and loading whenever possible.

E. Where a pedestrian way crosses driveways, parking areas, or similar vehicle maneuvering areas, the pedestrian way shall be readily identifiable through the use of elevation changes, speed bumps, different paving materials, or other similar methods.

F. Where the pedestrian way is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, the safety of the pedestrian shall be assured through a raised path or shall be separated from the auto travel lane by a raised curb, bollards, landscaping or other physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the ends of the raised portions shall be equipped with ADA certified curb ramps.

G. Pedestrian ways shall provide a direct connection between all new development and adjacent streets. Stub connections shall be required between developments and neighboring sites not yet developed or capable of being further subdivided or partitioned.

The connections shall be completed when the neighboring site is developed.

H. Pedestrian ways bordering parking spaces shall be at least seven feet in unobstructed width or a minimum of five feet in unobstructed width when concrete bumpers, bollards, curbing, landscaping, or other similar improvements are provided which prevent parked vehicles from obstructing the pedestrian way.

I. A reduction in the number of pedestrian connections may be granted by the review authority based on a determination that reducing the number of connections would not result in an increase in out of direction pedestrian travel from the street to any main building entrance. (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.030 Streets.

Streets within Fairview Village shall comply with the design standards outlined in Figure V-3, following Chapter 19.155 FMC.

A. Cul-de-sacs are permitted only when topographic conditions or existing or planned street patterns preclude future extension of streets. The maximum cul-de-sac radius shall be 40 feet.

B. All alleys shall constitute public streets with a minimum right-of-way of 16 feet.

C. Intersection dimensions should be minimized to reduce pedestrian crossing distances and to reduce vehicle speeds. At intersections in all Fairview Village zones, curb radii shall be 15 feet with clear zone radii of 25 feet. (Figure V-4, following Chapter 19.155 FMC.)

D. Vision Clearance Areas.

1. Structures or signs may not be located within a vision clearance area as defined in subsection (D)(2) of this section. Support structures for a sign may be located in a vision clearance area only if the combined total width is 12 inches or less and the combined total depth is 12 inches or less.

2. Location of Vision Clearance Areas. Vision clearance areas are triangular-shaped areas located at the intersection of any combination of streets and/or alleys. The sides of the triangle extend 15 feet from the intersection of the vehicle travel areas. The height of the vision clearance area is from 42 inches above grade to 10 feet above grade (see Figure V-2, following Chapter 19.155 FMC). This standard shall not apply to public safety signage and street identification signage. (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.040 Minimum required off-street parking requirements.

All base zone parking standards apply (see Chapter 19.164 FMC) except where expressly written otherwise.

A. Residential.

1. One-, two- and three-unit dwelling structures: two spaces per dwelling unit.

2. Attached dwellings containing four or more dwelling units including dwelling units above retail uses: one and one-half spaces per dwelling unit.

B. Commercial.

1. a. Supermarkets: one space per 250 square feet of floor area.

b. Banks, offices: one space per 330 square feet of floor area.

c. Barber shop/beauty parlor: one space per 250 square feet of floor area. 

d. Eating or drinking establishment: one space per 100 square feet of floor area. 

e. Retail trade: one space per 500 square feet of floor area. 

f. General office: one space per 500 square feet of floor area.

2. Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions.

a. Parking lot aisles shall have a minimum width of 24 feet.

b. Standard parking lot stalls shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum depth of 18 feet.

c. Compact-vehicle parking stalls shall have a minimum width of eight feet and a minimum depth of 16 feet.

C. Joint Use. Off-street parking required by this code for any use shall not be considered as providing parking spaces for any other use except where a joint use facility exists. Such a facility, defined by legal instrument such as an easement, shall contain no less than the total number of spaces as determined individually by user, except that fewer spaces may be permitted where uses on adjoining sites have different hours of operation and the same parking spaces or loading berths can serve both without conflict. A determination of the extent, if any, to which joint use will achieve the purposes of this chapter shall be made by the planning director, who may require submission of a site development plan and a parking demand study or other data necessary to reach a decision.

D. On-Street Parking. In the VC, VMU, and VO zones, on-street parking which borders the property frontage shall apply toward satisfying the parking standards in this section.

E. In the event that a change in commercial use is proposed different than that in place as of March 9, 2004, a Type II modification of conditions permit shall be required. The permit will be granted upon demonstration that the requirements of subsection B of this section are met by the proposed use. (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 4-2004 § 3; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.050 Street trees.

A. Location. Street trees are required along both sides of all collector streets and local streets within the Village adjacent to new development and on at least one side of streets with a higher classification. The spacing requirement shall be on average one tree per 30 linear feet unless the community development director approves a different distance due to constraints such as utilities, rights-of-way, etc. Along collector streets or streets with a higher classification, metal grating, nonmortared brick, grasscrete, or similar material shall be installed at grade over the planting area around street trees, or raised planters shall be constructed to prevent soil compaction and damage to the trunk. Planting strips or tree wells are required along all remaining streets.

B. Tree Types. The type of tree to be planted shall be in accordance with the approved street tree list in the city’s sidewalk maintenance program handbook. (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.060 Erosion control standards.

The site must be contoured, planted, or developed to prevent erosion, pollution, and sedimentation into adjacent natural resource areas within six weeks of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Erosion control techniques must meet city of Fairview erosion control handbook standards. (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.070 Landscape standards.

Where the area to be landscaped is less than 30 feet deep, the requirement shall be on average one tree per 30 linear feet. Where the area is 30 feet deep or greater, the requirement is one tree per 800 square feet and either two high shrubs or three low shrubs per 400 square feet of landscaped area. The shrubs and trees may be grouped; provided, that ground cover plants must fully cover the remainder of landscaped area. The landscaping details for the various, respective sectors of Fairview Village shall be presented in a landscape plan in design review or in a development permit application.

A. Trees may be deciduous or evergreen. Deciduous trees at the time of planting must be fully branched, have a minimum diameter of two inches, measured five feet above the ground, and have a minimum height of 10 feet. Evergreen trees at the time of planting must be fully branched and a minimum of six feet in height.

B. Low shrubs must form a continuous screen three feet high and 95 percent opaque year-round. High shrubs must form a screen six feet high and 95 percent opaque year-round.

C. Groundcover plants shall be installed on all areas where slopes are five to one or steeper and must be installed at a minimum of 18 inches on center and four-inch pots at time of planting.

D. All required groundcover plants and shrubs must be of sufficient size and quantity to meet the required standards within three years of planting. The use of mulch must be confined to areas underneath plants and shall not be considered a substitute for groundcover plants.

E. The required materials are shown in Figure V-6, following Chapter 19.155 FMC. (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.080 Fairview Creek and Clear Creek conservation easements.

Repealed by Ord. 3-2012. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.090 Bicycle parking.

A. Number Required.

1. Multifamily dwelling: one space per unit (.25 per unit if occupancy restricted to 55 years or older).

2. Commercial use classifications: five percent of the requirement for automobile parking spaces, except for the following classifications, which are exempt:

a. Animal sales and service.

b. Auto-related uses.

c. Warehousing – Wholesale and distribution.

B. Bicycle Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions.

1. Uncovered spaces shall be at least six feet long and two feet wide.

2. Covered spaces shall be at least seven feet long and two feet wide.

3. A five-foot-wide aisle is required adjacent to each row of bicycle parking.

C. Required bicycle parking racks shall be located no further than the closest automobile parking space from the major building entrance.

D. When more than seven bicycle parking spaces are required, 50 percent of the spaces shall be covered.

E. When more than 15 covered bicycle parking spaces are required, 50 percent of the covered spaces shall be enclosed and offer a high level of security (i.e., bicycle lockers or a locked cage or room with locking facilities inside, to provide safe long-term parking). (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.100 Blank wall standard.

Windows must occupy at least 50 percent of the length and 25 percent of the ground level wall area. Ground level wall areas include all exterior wall areas up to nine feet above the finished grade. The window requirement applies to the ground level of exterior building walls which abut sidewalks, plazas, or other public open spaces. Walls may be recessed three feet in maximum increments of 15 feet with landscaping in lieu of windows. Recess landscaping shall obscure the wall year-round. (Ord. 11-2014 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.140.110 Signs.

Repealed by 2-2010. (Ord. 8-2009 § 2; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.145 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – VSF, VTH AND VA ZONES

Sections:

19.145.010    Applicability.

19.145.020    Entries and front porches.

19.145.030    Window trim.

19.145.040    Roofs.

19.145.050    Fences, screening, and buffering.

19.145.060    Public recreational uses.

19.145.070    Landscaping.

19.145.080    Materials.

19.145.090    Automobile access.


19.145.010 Applicability.

The special standards provided in this chapter apply in the Village single-family (VSF), Village town house (VTH) and Village agricultural (VA) zones unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.145.020 Entries and front porches.

A. Primary entries shall be accessed directly from a public street and must be visible from the street.

B. A minimum of every other residential unit within a block frontage shall have a front porch. Residential units without front porches shall not be constructed on adjacent lots.

C. Front porches may encroach into front setback and are not subject to lot coverage limitations. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.145.030 Window trim.

Window trim in the VSF, VTH, and VA zones shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb, head and sill. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.145.040 Roofs.

Hipped gambrel or gabled roofs are required. The pitch of the roof shall be no less than 4:12. Flat roofs are not permitted except for mechanical equipment areas in VA zones. Thirty-inch-high parapets are required along street facades where flat roofs are used. Flat roofs are not permitted in VSF and VTH zones. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.145.050 Fences, screening, and buffering.

Fences, screens, and sight-obscuring plantings shall meet the intersection sight distance requirements as established by city engineering department.

The maximum height of a fence, screen, or sight-obscuring plantings shall be six feet along the side and rear yards back from the front building line and four feet forward of the front building line. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.145.060 Public recreational uses.

Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreational and community buildings and related improvements such as tennis courts, and similar recreational uses; provided, that any principal building, swimming pool, or use shall be located not less than 45 feet (VSF) or 30 feet (VTH and VA) from any other lot in the same zone. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.145.070 Landscaping.

In all VTH and VA zones, a minimum of 25 percent of site area shall be landscaped in conformance with FMC 19.140.070. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.145.080 Materials.

Exterior finishes and fences shall be wood and/or masonry. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.145.090 Automobile access.

On lots that abut alleys, automobile access to garages shall be exclusively from the alley. No driveway access onto the street will be allowed. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.150 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – VO, VC AND VMU ZONES

Sections:

19.150.010    Applicability.

19.150.020    Access and on-site circulation.

19.150.030    Entries.

19.150.040    VO, VC and VCM facade design.

19.150.050    Roofs in the mixed use zone (VMU).

19.150.060    Materials.

19.150.070    VO and VC landscaping and street furniture.

19.150.080    Screening.

19.150.090    Trails.

19.150.100    Loading areas.


19.150.010 Applicability.

The special standards provided in this chapter apply in the Village office (VO), Village commercial (VC) and Village mixed use (VMU) zones unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.150.020 Access and on-site circulation.

A. Pedestrians. Pedestrian ways shall connect the Village commercial zone with transit facilities and with NE Halsey Street.

B. Motor Vehicles. The location, design and development of access and on-site circulation shall comply with the following:

1. Shared driveway entrances, rear yard parking, shared parking and maneuvering areas, and interior driveways between parking lots shall be required for all nonresidential uses.

2. The maximum width for a driveway shall be 35 feet.

3. Within the Village commercial, mixed use, and Village office, a minimum of five percent, but not fewer than one space, of the employee parking spaces shall be marked and signed for exclusive use as carpool/vanpool spaces. Required carpool/vanpool spaces shall be located closer to the major building entrance than all other spaces except handicapped spaces.

4. Village office parking lots shall be placed behind buildings or behind a five-foot landscaped buffer; provided, that such parking lots shall not front more than 50 percent of the block frontage of any public street. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.150.030 Entries.

A. Primary entries shall face a public street or designated pedestrian way and shall be accessed from a public sidewalk. The entries shall be open to the public during all business hours. Secondary entries may face parking lots or loading areas.

B. VCM upper story residential uses shall have shared or individual entries every 70 feet on the first level only; no outside staircases are allowed. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.150.040 VO, VC and VCM facade design.

All VO and VC building facades shall conform to FMC 19.140.100, Blank wall standard. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.150.050 Roofs in the mixed use zone (VMU).

Hipped, gambrel or gabled roofs are required. Flat roofs are not permitted except for mechanical equipment areas in VMU zones. Thirty-inch high parapets are required along all street facades where flat roofs are used. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.150.060 Materials.

Exterior finishes of buildings shall be primarily of materials such as masonry, wood siding, shingles or stucco (or similar material). Sheet metal, cinder block, and T1-11 are prohibited as exterior wall material. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1) 


19.150.070 VO and VC landscaping and street furniture.

A minimum of 15 percent of the developed VO and VC site areas must be used for landscaping.

A. Parking and service areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zones. This requirement may be modified during development design review to accommodate required pedestrian access to the site, but in no case shall pedestrian access be eliminated.

B. Parking lots shall have at least one tree on average for every six parking spaces, distributed throughout the interior of the parking area to provide maximum shading.

C. Parking lots shall be placed behind buildings or a 10-foot buffer landscaped in conformance with FMC 19.140.070. (See also Setbacks and Configuration.) (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.150.080 Screening.

A. All primary and accessory uses associated with Village office and Village commercial uses, including storage of materials, products, or waste, shall be wholly contained within an approved structure.

B. Parking and service areas shall be screened from pedestrian ways or public right-of-way by a three-foot-high hedge or sight-obscuring wall.

C. Loading areas and dumpsters shall be screened from public rights-of-way and pedestrian ways by walls, trellises, fences, or landscaping.

D. Mechanical equipment and satellite dishes over one meter in size shall be screened from view from any pedestrian way or public right-of-way. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.150.090 Trails.

All trails will be built according to the Fairview Village trail master plan. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.150.100 Loading areas.

A. Loading areas within a street right-of-way in the Fairview Village may be approved when all of the following conditions are met:

1. Area is signed for short duration only (i.e., less than one hour);

2. Expected visits are infrequent (less than three operations occur daily between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or all operations occur between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. at a location that is not adjacent to a residential zone);

3. Area does not unreasonably obstruct traffic;

4. Area does not obstruct a primary emergency response route; and

5. Designation is acceptable to the applicable roadway authority. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 19.155 VILLAGE TRAIL SYSTEM PLAN

Sections:

19.155.010    Purpose.

19.155.020    Location – Generally.

19.155.030    Design.

19.155.040    Construction prior to occupancy.

19.155.050    Dedication.

19.155.060    Operation – Maintenance.

19.155.070    Location – Specifically.


19.155.010 Purpose.

The public recreational trail requirements are intended to increase recreational opportunities within the city of Fairview, help create a pleasant, aesthetically pleasing urban environment, and provide consistent standards for trail development. (Ord. 11-2014 § 3 (Exh. 3); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.155.020 Location – Generally.

The trail system will generally occur within the wetland and upland park/open space areas, and other selected alignments within the developed portions of the Village. The pedestrian ways and/or trail system will provide internal and external connections between the wetland and upland park/open space areas, other Village open spaces, and to adjacent commercial and residential development. (Ord. 11-2014 § 3 (Exh. 3); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.155.030 Design.

The trail system shall be designed to provide multiple access points for the public. The trail surface itself and the associated access points shall satisfy ADA requirements and be suitable for walking, running, and bicycling. (Ord. 11-2014 § 3 (Exh. 3); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.155.040 Construction prior to occupancy.

The portion of the trail system located on the site for new development shall be constructed by the developer prior to occupancy. The city of Fairview shall extend system development charge credit to the developer equal to the land costs and actual costs for trail and park development as referenced in the city parks recreation/open space master plan. (Ord. 11-2014 § 3 (Exh. 3); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.155.050 Dedication.

The trail system and associated pedestrian ways and access points within the wetland and upland park/open space areas shall either be dedicated to the city, an easement granted to the city, or funds provided to the city in lieu of dedication. A legal instrument or mechanism shall be developed that will allow the city to acquire park/open space sites through dedications or to receive funds in lieu of dedications that will allow the city to acquire park/open space sites in adjacent areas, in accordance with the city’s parks and recreation/open spaces master plan. (Ord. 11-2014 § 3 (Exh. 3); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.155.060 Operation – Maintenance.

Trails, pedestrian ways and access points within Fairview Village shall be operated and maintained by the city. (Ord. 11-2014 § 3 (Exh. 3); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.155.070 Location – Specifically.

The location and distribution of planned parks and open spaces are shown on Figure V-10, following this chapter. (Ord. 11-2014 § 3 (Exh. 3); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)

Figure V-1 – Fairview Village Proposed Land Use Plan
[IMAGE]


Figure V-2 – Fairview Village Vision Clearance
[IMAGE]


Figure V-3 – Fairview Village Street Plan and Section
[IMAGE]


Figure V-4 – Fairview Village Intersection Dimensions
[IMAGE]


Figure V-6 – Fairview Village Plant List
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]
 

Figure V-8 – Fairview Village Monument Entry Signage
[IMAGE]


Figure V-9 – Fairview Village VA and Institutional Signage
[IMAGE]


Figure V-10 – Fairview Village Parks, Open Spaces and Circulation
[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.160 DESIGN STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

19.160.001    Design standards administration.

19.160.010    Purpose.

19.160.015    Applicability.

19.160.020    Types of design standards.


19.160.001 Design standards administration.

These guidelines provide sufficient guidance relating to new developments to enhance an area and provide sufficient services. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.160.010 Purpose.

The design guidelines provided in this article protect the city by requiring sufficient access, circulation, landscaping, parking, etc., that not only provides sufficient services, but also buffers uses and creates livable and accessible neighborhoods. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.160.015 Applicability.

All developments within the city must comply with the provisions of Chapters 19.160 through 19.169 FMC. Some developments, such as major projects requiring land division and/or site design review approval, may require detailed findings demonstrating compliance with each chapter of the code. For smaller, less complex projects, fewer code provisions may apply. Though some projects will not require land use or development permit approval, they are still required to comply with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.160.020 Types of design standards.

The city’s development design standards are contained in both Article II (Land Use Districts) and Article III (Design Standards). It is important to review both articles, and all relevant code sections within the articles, to determine which standards apply. The city may prepare checklists to assist property owners and applicants in determining which sections apply.

A. Article II. Each land use district provides design standards that are specifically tailored to the district. For example, the residential district contains building design guidelines that are different than those provided in the town center commercial district, due to differences in land use, building types, and compatibility issues. In addition, each district provides special standards that are meant to address the impacts or characteristics of certain land uses.

B. Article III. The design standards contained within the following chapters apply throughout the city, for all land use types:

19.162 – Access and Circulation.

19.163 – Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

19.164 – Vehicle and Bicycle Parking.

19.165 – Public Facilities Standards.

19.170 – Sign Regulations. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.162 ACCESS AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

19.162.010    Purpose.

19.162.020    Vehicular access and circulation.

19.162.030    Pedestrian access and circulation.


19.162.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that developments provide safe and efficient access and circulation, for pedestrians and vehicles. FMC 19.162.020 provides standards for vehicular access and circulation. FMC 19.162.030 provides standards for pedestrian access and circulation. Standards for transportation improvements are provided in Chapter 19.165 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.162.020 Vehicular access and circulation.

A. Intent and Purpose. The intent of this section is to manage vehicle access to development through a connected street system, while preserving the flow of traffic in terms of safety, roadway capacity, and efficiency. Access shall be managed to maintain an adequate “level of service” and to maintain the “functional classification” of roadways as required by the city’s transportation system plan. Major roadways, including highways, arterials, and collectors, serve as the primary system for moving people and goods. “Access management” is a primary concern on these roads. Local streets and alleys provide access to individual properties. If vehicular access and circulation are not properly designed, these roadways will be unable to accommodate the needs of development and serve their transportation function. This section attempts to balance the right of reasonable access to private property with the right of the citizens of the city and the state of Oregon to safe and efficient travel. It also requires all developments to construct planned streets (arterials and collectors) and to extend local streets.

To achieve this policy intent, state and local roadways have been categorized in the transportation system plan by function and classified for access purposes based upon their level of importance and function (see Chapter 19.165 FMC). Regulations have been applied to these roadways for the purpose of reducing traffic accidents, personal injury, and property damage attributable to access systems, and to thereby improve the safety and operation of the roadway network. This will protect the substantial public investment in the existing transportation system and reduce the need for expensive remedial measures. These regulations also further the orderly layout and use of land, protect community character, and conserve natural resources by promoting well-designed road and access systems and discouraging the unplanned subdivision of land.

B. Applicability. This section shall apply to all public streets within the city and to all properties that abut these streets.

C. Access Permit Required. Access to a public street requires an access permit in accordance with the following procedures:

1. Permits for access to city streets shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer based on the standards contained in this chapter, and the provisions of the transportation standards. An access permit may be in the form of a letter to the applicant, or it may be attached to a land use decision notice as a condition of approval. In either case, an access permit will be reviewed consistent with the procedures required for the complementary development permit. If no development permit is requested, the access permit shall be reviewed consistent with a Type III process.

2. Permits for access to state highways shall be subject to review and approval by the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), except when ODOT has delegated this responsibility to the city or Multnomah County. In that case, the city or county shall determine whether access is granted based on its adopted standards.

3. Permits for access to county highways shall be subject to review and approval by Multnomah County, except where the county has delegated this responsibility to the city, in which case the city shall determine whether access is granted based on adopted county standards.

D. Traffic Study Requirements. The city may require a traffic study prepared by a qualified professional to determine access, circulation and other transportation requirements.

A traffic study must be provided for any proposed development that includes more than 10 dwellings or generates at least 100 vehicle trips per day. The traffic study shall include those adjacent intersections that will receive more than 50 vehicle trips per day.

A freight network impact statement is to be included in all traffic studies for proposed developments on properties identified as industrial lands in Title 4 of the Metro Urban Growth Management Functional Plan. The purpose of this statement is to analyze potential adverse effects of the proposed development on the regional freight system as identified in the regional transportation plan (RTP) and the Fairview transportation system plan. Freight routes located in Fairview include Interstate 84, Marine Drive, 223rd Avenue, Fairview Parkway, Sandy Boulevard, and Glisan Street.

E. Conditions of Approval. The city may require the closing or consolidation of existing curb cuts or other vehicle access points, recording of reciprocal access easements (i.e., for shared driveways), development of a frontage street, installation of traffic control devices, and/or other mitigation as a condition of granting an access permit, to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street. When obtaining access to off-street parking areas (both to and from), backing onto a public street shall not be permitted, except for single-family dwellings.

F. Access Options. When vehicle access is required for development (i.e., for off-street parking, delivery, service, drive-through facilities, etc.), access shall be provided by one of the following methods. These methods are “options” to the developer/subdivider, unless one method is specifically required by “Special Standards for Certain Uses.” A minimum of 10 feet per lane is required.

1. Option 1. Access is from an existing or proposed alley or mid-block lane. If a property has access to an alley or lane, direct access to a public street is not permitted.

2. Option 2. Access is from a private street or driveway connected to an adjoining property that has direct access to a public street (i.e., “shared driveway”). A public access easement covering the driveway shall be recorded in this case to assure access to the closest public street for all users of the private street/drive.

3. Option 3. Access is from a public street adjacent to the development parcel. If practicable, the owner/developer may be required to close or consolidate an existing access point as a condition of approving a new access. Street accesses shall comply with the access spacing.

4. Subdivisions Fronting onto an Arterial Street. New residential subdivisions fronting onto an arterial street shall be required to provide alleys or secondary (local or collector) streets for access to individual lots. When alleys or secondary streets cannot be constructed due to topographic or other physical constraints, access may be provided by consolidating driveways for clusters of two or more lots (e.g., includes flag lots and mid-block lanes).

5. Double-Frontage Lots. When a lot has frontage onto two or more streets, access shall be provided first from the street with the lowest classification. For example, access shall be provided from a local street before a collector or arterial street. Except for corner lots, the creation of new double-frontage lots shall be prohibited in the residential district, unless topographic or physical constraints require the formation of such lots. When double-frontage lots are permitted in the residential district, a landscape buffer with trees and/or shrubs and ground cover not less than 20 feet wide shall be provided between the back yard fence/wall and the sidewalk or street; maintenance shall be assured by the owner (i.e., through homeowners association, etc.).

Important cross-references to other code sections: Provisions in Articles II and III of this title may require buildings placed at or near the front property line and driveways and parking areas oriented to the side or rear yard. The city may require the dedication of public right-of-way and construction of a street (e.g., frontage road, alley or other street) when the development impact is proportionate to the need for such a street, and the street is identified by the Comprehensive Plan or an adopted local streets plan. (Please refer to the transportation standards in Chapter 19.165 FMC.)

G. Access Spacing. Access spacing ensures safe connections to local and arterial streets. Driveway accesses shall be separated from other driveways and street intersections in accordance with the following standards and procedures:

1. Local Streets. A minimum of 50 feet separation (as measured from the sides of the driveway/street) shall be required on local streets (i.e., streets not designated as collectors or arterials), except as provided in subsection (G)(3) of this section.

2. Arterial and Collector Streets. Access spacing on collector and arterial streets, and at controlled intersections (i.e., with four-way stop sign or traffic signal) shall be determined based on the policies and standards contained in the city’s transportation system plan. Access to Interstate 84 is subject to the jurisdiction of ODOT.

3. Special Provisions for All Streets. Direct street access may be restricted for some land uses, in conformance with the provisions of Chapters 19.20 through 19.155 – Land Use Districts. For example, access consolidation, shared access, and/or access separation greater than that specified by subsections (G)(1) and (G)(2) of this section may be required by the city, county or ODOT for the purpose of protecting the function, safety and operation of the street for all users. (See subsection I of this section.) Where no other alternatives exist, the permitting agency may allow construction of an access connection along the property line farthest from an intersection. In such cases, directional connections (i.e., right in/out, right in only, or right out only) may be required.

H. Number of Access Points. Reducing the number of access points on a street provides pedestrians fewer obstructions, fewer points at which automobile traffic crosses the sidewalk, and fewer opportunities for conflicts between through traffic and vehicles using access points.

For single-family (detached and attached), two-family, and three-family housing types, one street access point is permitted per lot, when alley access cannot otherwise be provided; except that two access points may be permitted for two-family and three-family housing on corner lots (i.e., no more than one access per street), subject to the access spacing standards in subsection G of this section. The number of street access points for multiple-family, commercial, industrial, and public/institutional developments shall be minimized to protect the function, safety and operation of the street(s) and sidewalk(s) for all users. Shared access may be required, in conformance with subsection I of this section in order to maintain the required access spacing, and minimize the number of access points.

I. Shared Driveways. Shared driveways serve to reduce impermeable surfaces, reduce visual blight associated with large expanses of pavement, and provide more linear curb space for on-street parking.

The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets shall be minimized by the use of shared driveways with adjoining lots where feasible. The city shall require shared driveways as a condition of land division or site design review, as applicable, for traffic safety and access management purposes in accordance with the following standards:

1. Shared driveways and frontage streets may be required to consolidate access onto a collector or arterial street. When shared driveways or frontage streets are required, they shall be stubbed to adjacent developable parcels to indicate future extension. “Stub” means that a driveway or street temporarily ends at the property line, but may be extended in the future as the adjacent parcel develops. “Developable” means that a parcel is either vacant or it is likely to receive additional development (i.e., due to infill or redevelopment potential).

2. Access easements (i.e., for the benefit of affected properties) shall be recorded for all shared driveways, including pathways, at the time of final plat approval or as a condition of site development approval.

3. Exception. Shared driveways are not required when existing development patterns or physical constraints (e.g., topography, parcel configuration, and similar conditions) prevent extending the street/driveway in the future.

J. Figure 19.162.020.J provides examples of street layout and connectivity.

Figure 19.162.020.J – Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks
[IMAGE]


K. Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks Required. In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the city, land divisions and large site developments shall produce complete blocks bounded by a connecting network of public and/or private streets, in accordance with the following standards:

1. Mixed-use and residential development proposed on sites five acres or greater must submit a site plan that identifies conceptual street connections that are consistent with the transportation system plan.

2. Block Length and Perimeter. The maximum block length and perimeter shall not exceed:

a. Five hundred thirty feet length and 1,600 feet perimeter in the residential district;

b. Two hundred feet length and 1,200 feet perimeter in the town center commercial district, except as provided by FMC 19.65.050, Block layout and building orientation;

c. Three hundred feet length and 1,200 feet perimeter in the corridor commercial district and neighborhood commercial;

d. Not applicable to the general industrial district; and

e. Seven hundred feet length and 1,700 feet perimeter in the light industrial district, except as required for commercial developments subject to FMC 19.80.060(F).

3. Street Standards. Public and private streets shall also conform to FMC 19.165.020, Transportation standards, FMC 19.162.030, Pedestrian access and circulation, and applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) design standards.

4. A variance to street spacing standards may be granted pursuant to FMC 19.520.030 (Class B variances) when resources are present that are mapped on the Natural Resources Map, where street spacing can be achieved at a minimum of 800 feet and no greater than 1,200 feet.

5. Exception. Exceptions to the above standards may be granted when blocks are divided by one or more pathway(s), where spacing is no more than 330 feet as measured from the right-of-way or easement line and in conformance with the provisions of FMC 19.162.030(A). Pathways shall be located to minimize out-of-direction travel by pedestrians and may be designed to accommodate bicycles.

L. Driveway Openings. All driveway openings must comply with the “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction,” pages 53 – 55. Driveway openings or curb cuts shall be within the minimum width necessary to provide the required number of vehicle travel lanes (10 feet for each travel lane). The following standards (i.e., as measured where the front property line meets the sidewalk or right-of-way) are required to provide adequate site access, minimize surface water runoff, and avoid conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians:

1. Single-family, two-family, and three-family uses shall have a minimum driveway width of 10 feet, and a maximum width of 24 feet, except that one recreational vehicle pad driveway may be provided in addition to the standard driveway for lots containing more than 10,000 square feet of area.

2. Multiple-family uses with between four and seven dwelling units shall have a minimum driveway width of 20 feet, and a maximum width of 24 feet.

3. Multiple-family uses with more than eight dwelling units, and off-street parking areas with 16 or more parking spaces, shall have a minimum driveway width of 24 feet, and a maximum width of 30 feet. These dimensions may be increased if the city engineer determines that more than two lanes are required based on the number of trips generated or the need for turning lanes.

4. Access widths for all other uses shall be based on 10 feet of width for every travel lane, except that driveways providing direct access to parking spaces shall conform to the parking area standards in Chapter 19.164 FMC, Vehicle and Bicycle Parking.

5. Driveway Aprons. Driveway aprons (when required) shall be constructed of concrete and shall be installed between the street right-of-way and the private drive, as shown above. Driveway aprons shall conform to ADA standards for sidewalks and pathways, which require a continuous route of travel that is a minimum of three feet in width, with a cross slope not exceeding two percent.

Figure 19.162.020.L – Examples of Acceptable Driveway Openings Next to Sidewalks/Pathways
[IMAGE]


M. Fire Access and Parking Area Turnarounds. A fire equipment access drive shall be provided for any portion of an exterior wall of the first story of a building that is located more than 150 feet from an existing public street or approved fire equipment access drive. Parking areas shall provide adequate aisles or turnaround areas for service and delivery vehicles so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner. For requirements related to cul-de-sacs, please refer to Chapter 19.165 FMC.

N. Vertical Clearances. Driveways, private streets, aisles, turnaround areas and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet 6 inches for their entire length and width.

O. Vision Clearance. No signs, structures or vegetation in excess of three feet in height shall be placed in “vision clearance areas,” as shown above. The city engineer upon finding that more sight distance is required may increase the minimum vision clearance area (i.e., due to traffic speeds, roadway alignment, etc.).

Figure 19.162.020.O – Vision Clearance Areas
[IMAGE]


P. Construction. The following development and maintenance standards shall apply to all driveways and private streets, except that the standards do not apply to driveways serving one single-family detached dwelling:

1. Surface Options. Driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds may be paved with asphalt, concrete or comparable surfacing, or a durable nonpaving material may be used to reduce surface water runoff and protect water quality. Paving surfaces shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer.

2. Surface Water Management. When a paved surface is used, all driveways, parking areas, aisles and turnarounds shall have on-site collection or infiltration of surface waters to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto public rights-of-way and abutting property. Surface water facilities shall be constructed in conformance with city standards.

3. Driveway Aprons. When driveway approaches or “aprons” are required to connect driveways to the public right-of-way, they shall be paved with concrete surfacing (see also subsection L of this section). (Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 5-2009 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.162.030 Pedestrian access and circulation.

The standards presented in this code provide standards for safe, connected and user-friendly pedestrian connections and pathways that join neighborhoods and buildings within a development.

A. Pedestrian Access and Circulation. To ensure safe, direct and convenient pedestrian circulation, all developments, except single-family detached housing (i.e., on individual lots), shall provide a continuous pedestrian and/or multi-use pathway system. (Pathways only provide for pedestrian circulation. Multi-use pathways accommodate pedestrians and bicycles.) The system of pathways shall be designed based on the standards in subsections (A)(1) through (5) of this section:

1. Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the development site, and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent trails, public parks and open space areas whenever possible. The developer may also be required to connect or stub pathway(s) to adjacent streets and private property, in accordance with the provisions of FMC 19.162.020, Vehicular access and circulation, and the transportation standards in Chapter 19.165 FMC.

2. Safe, Direct, and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within developments shall provide safe, reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all adjacent streets, based on the following definitions:

a. “Reasonably direct” means a route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for likely users.

b. “Safe and convenient” means bicycle and pedestrian routes that are reasonably free from hazards and provide a reasonably direct route of travel between destinations.

c. For commercial, industrial, mixed use, public, and institutional buildings, the “primary entrance” is the main public entrance to the building. In the case where no public entrance exists, street connections shall be provided to the main employee entrance.

d. For residential buildings the “primary entrance” is the front door (i.e., facing the street). For multifamily buildings in which each unit does not have its own exterior entrance, the “primary entrance” may be a lobby, courtyard or breezeway, which serves as a common entrance for more than one dwelling.

3. Connections within Development. For all developments subject to site design review, pathways shall connect all building entrances to one another. In addition, pathways shall connect all parking areas, storage areas, recreational facilities and common areas (as applicable), and adjacent developments to the site, as applicable.

4. Street Connectivity. Pathways (for pedestrians and bicycles) shall be provided at or near midblock where the block length exceeds the length required by FMC 19.162.020. Pathways shall also be provided where cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets are planned, to connect the ends of the streets together, to other streets, and/or to other developments, as applicable. Pathways used to comply with these standards shall conform to all of the following criteria:

a. Multi-use pathways (i.e., for pedestrians and bicyclists) are no less than 10 feet wide and located within a 20-foot-wide right-of-way or easement that allows access for emergency vehicles.

b. If the streets within the subdivision or neighborhood are lighted, the pathways shall also be lighted.

c. Stairs or switchback paths using a narrower right-of-way/easement may be required in lieu of a multi-use pathway where grades are steep.

d. The city may require landscaping within the pathway easement/right-of-way for screening and the privacy of adjoining properties.

e. The hearings body or planning director may determine, based upon facts in the record, that a pathway is impracticable due to: physical or topographic conditions (e.g., freeways, railroads, extremely steep slopes, sensitive lands, and similar physical constraints); buildings or other existing development on adjacent properties that physically prevent a connection now or in the future, considering the potential for redevelopment; and sites where the provisions of recorded leases, easements, covenants, restrictions, or other agreements recorded as of the effective date of this code prohibit the pathway connection.

5. Connections to Other Facilities. Proposed pathways shall be located to provide access to existing or planned commercial services and other neighborhood facilities, such as schools, shopping areas and park and transit facilities. To the greatest extent possible, access shall be reasonably direct, providing a route or routes that do not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or that do not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel.

Figure 19.162.030.A – Pedestrian Pathway System for Multifamily Development (Typical)
[IMAGE]


B. Design and Construction. Pathways shall conform to all of the standards in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(5) of this section:

1. Vehicle/Pathway Separation. Where pathways are parallel and adjacent to a driveway or street (public or private), they shall be raised six inches and curbed, or separated from the driveway/street by a five-foot minimum strip with bollards, a landscape buffer, or other physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the ends of the raised portions must be equipped with curb ramps.

2. Housing/Pathway Separation. Pedestrian pathways shall be separated a minimum of five feet from all residential living areas on the ground floor, except at building entrances. Separation is measured as measured from the pathway edge to the closest dwelling unit. The separation area shall be landscaped in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 19.163 FMC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. No pathway/building separation is required for commercial, industrial, public, or institutional uses.

3. Crosswalks. Where pathways cross a parking area, driveway, or street (“crosswalk”), they shall be clearly marked with contrasting paving materials, humps/raised crossings.

4. Pathway Surface. Pathway surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, brick/masonry pavers, or other durable surface, at least six feet wide, and shall conform to ADA requirements. Multi-use paths (i.e., for bicycles and pedestrians) shall be the same materials, at least 10 feet wide. (See also Chapter 19.165 FMC, Transportation Standards for public, multi-use pathway standard.)

5. Accessible Routes. Pathways shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, which requires accessible routes of travel.

Figure 19.162.030.B – Pathway Standards (Typical)
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.163 LANDSCAPING, STREET TREES, FENCES AND WALLS

Sections:

19.163.010    Purpose.

19.163.020    Landscape conservation.

19.163.025    Existing landscaping.

19.163.030    New landscaping.

19.163.040    Street trees.

19.163.050    Fences and walls.


19.163.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote community health, safety and welfare by protecting natural vegetation, and setting development standards for landscaping, street trees, fences and walls. Together, these elements of the natural and built environment contribute to the visual quality, environmental health and character of the community. Trees provide climate control through shading during summer months and wind screening during winter. Trees and other plants can also buffer pedestrians from traffic. Walls, fences, trees and other landscape materials also provide vital screening and buffering between land uses. Landscaped areas help to control surface water drainage and can improve water quality, as compared to paved or built surfaces.

The chapter is organized into the following sections: 

19.163.020, Landscape Conservation. This section prevents the indiscriminate removal of significant trees and other vegetation, including vegetation associated with streams, wetlands and other protected natural resource areas. This section cross-references Chapter 19.106 FMC, which regulates development of sensitive lands.

19.163.030, New Landscaping. This section sets standards for and requires landscaping of all development sites that require site design review. This section also requires buffering for parking and maneuvering areas, and between different land use districts. Note that other landscaping standards are provided in Article II of this title, Land Use Districts, for specific types of development.

19.163.040, Street Trees. This section sets standards for and requires planting of trees along all streets for shading, comfort and aesthetic purposes.

19.163.050, Fences and Walls. This section sets standards for new fences and walls, including maximum allowable height and materials, to promote security, personal safety, privacy, and aesthetics. (Ord. 3-2012 § 6; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.163.020 Landscape conservation.

A. Applicability. All development sites containing significant vegetation, as defined below, shall comply with the standards of this section. The purpose of this section is to incorporate significant native vegetation into the landscapes of development and protect vegetation that is subject to requirements of the significant environmental concern and riparian buffer overlay zones, Chapter 19.106 FMC. The use of mature, native vegetation within developments is a preferred alternative to removal of vegetation and re-planting. Mature landscaping provides summer shade and wind breaks, and allows for water conservation due to larger plants having established root systems.

B. Significant Vegetation. “Significant vegetation” means:

1. Significant Trees and Shrubs. Individual trees and shrubs with a trunk diameter of six inches or greater, as measured four feet above the ground (DBH), and all plants within the drip line of such trees and shrubs, shall be protected.

2. Sensitive Lands. Trees and shrubs on sites that have been designated as “sensitive lands,” in accordance with Chapter 19.106 FMC, Natural Resource Regulations, and Chapter 19.105 FMC, Floodplain Overlay (e.g., due to slope, natural resource areas, wildlife habitat, etc.) shall be protected.

3. Exception. Protection shall not be required for plants listed as non-native, invasive plants by the Oregon State University Extension Service in the applicable OSU bulletins for Multnomah County.

C. Mapping and Protection Required. Significant vegetation shall be mapped as required by this code. Significant trees shall be mapped individually and identified by species and size (diameter at four feet above grade, or “DBH”). A “protection” area shall be defined around the edge of all branches (drip-line) of each tree (drip lines may overlap between trees). The city also may require an inventory, survey, or assessment prepared by a qualified professional when necessary to determine vegetation boundaries, building setbacks, and other protection or mitigation requirements.

D. Protection Standards. All of the following protection standards shall apply to significant vegetation areas:

1. Protection of Significant Trees. Significant trees identified as meeting the criteria in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be retained whenever practicable. Preservation may become impracticable when it would prevent reasonable development of public streets, utilities, or land uses permitted by the applicable land use district.

2. Sensitive Lands. Sensitive lands shall be protected in conformance with the provisions of Chapters 19.105 and 19.106 FMC.

3. Conservation Easements and Dedications. When necessary to implement the Comprehensive Plan, the city may require dedication of land or recordation of a conservation easement to protect sensitive lands, including groves of significant trees. This will be addressed on a case by case basis. (Ord. 3-2012 § 6; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.163.025 Existing landscaping.

A. Applicability. This section shall apply to all developments.

B. Construction. All areas of significant vegetation shall be protected prior to, during, and after construction. Grading and operation of vehicles and heavy equipment is prohibited within significant vegetation areas, except as approved by the city for installation of utilities or streets. Such approval shall only be granted after finding that there is no other reasonable alternative to avoid the protected area, and any required mitigation is provided in conformance with Chapter 19.105 FMC, Floodplain Overlay and Chapter 19.106 FMC, Natural Resource Regulations.

C. Exemptions. The protection standards in FMC 19.163.020(D) shall not apply in the following situations:

1. Dead, Diseased, and/or Hazardous Vegetation. Vegetation that is dead or diseased, or poses a hazard to personal safety, property or the health of other trees, may be removed. Prior to tree removal, the applicant shall provide a report from a certified arborist or other qualified professional to determine whether the subject tree is diseased or poses a hazard, and any possible treatment to avoid removal, except as provided by subsection (C)(2) of this section.

2. Emergencies. Significant vegetation may be removed in the event of an emergency without land use approval when the vegetation poses an immediate threat to life or safety, as determined by the planning director. The planning director shall prepare a notice or letter of decision within 10 days of the tree(s) being removed. The decision letter or notice shall explain the nature of the emergency and be on file and available for public review at City Hall. (Ord. 3-2012 § 6; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.163.030 New landscaping.

A. Applicability. This section shall apply to all developments requiring site design review, and other developments with required landscaping.

B. Landscaping Plan Required. A landscape plan is required at the time of design review or other pertinent applications. All landscape plans shall conform to the requirements in FMC 19.420.020 (E), Landscape plans.

C. Landscape Area Standards. The minimum percentage of required landscaping equals:

1. Residential districts: 20 percent of the site.

2. Town center commercial district: five percent of the site.

3. General industrial district: 10 percent of the site.

4. Light industrial district: 10 percent of the site.

5. Corridor commercial district: five percent of the site.

6. Neighborhood commercial district: 10 percent of the site.

D. Landscape Materials. This section provides guidelines that ensure significant vegetation growth and establishment using a variety of size specifications and coverage recommendations.

Landscape materials include trees, shrubs, ground cover plants, nonplant ground covers, and outdoor hardscape features, as described below:

1. Native Vegetation. Native vegetation shall be preserved or planted where practicable.

2. Plant Selection. A combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs and ground covers shall be used for all planted areas, the selection of which shall be based on local climate, exposure, water availability, and drainage conditions. As necessary, soils shall be amended to allow for healthy plant growth.

3. Non-native, invasive plants, as per FMC 19.164.020(B), shall be prohibited.

4. Hardscape features (i.e., patios, decks, plazas, etc.) may cover up to 15 percent of the required landscape area. Swimming pools, sports courts and similar active recreation facilities may not be counted toward fulfilling the landscape requirement.

5. Nonplant Ground Covers. Bark dust, chips, aggregate or other nonplant ground covers may be used, but shall cover no more than five percent of the area to be landscaped. “Coverage” is measured based on the size of plants at maturity or after five years of growth, whichever comes sooner.

6. Tree Size. Trees shall have a minimum caliper size of 1.5 inches or greater, or be six feet or taller, at time of planting.

7. Shrub Size. Shrubs shall be planted from one-gallon containers or larger.

8. Ground Cover Size. Ground cover plants shall be sized and spaced so that they grow together to cover a minimum of 80 percent of the underlying soil within three years.

9. Significant Vegetation. Significant vegetation preserved in accordance with FMC 19.163.020 may be credited toward meeting the minimum landscape area standards. Credit shall be granted on a per square foot basis. The street tree standards of FMC 19.163.040 may be waived when trees preserved within the front yard provide the same or better shading and visual quality as would otherwise be provided by street trees.

10. Stormwater Facilities. Stormwater facilities (e.g., detention/retention ponds and swales) shall be landscaped with water tolerant, native plants.

Figure 19.163.030 – Landscape Areas in a Multiple-Family Development (Typical)
[IMAGE]


E. Landscape Design Standards. The landscape design standards provide guidelines within setback areas, parking areas, etc.

All yards, parking lots and required street tree planter strips shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Landscaping shall be installed with development to provide erosion control, visual interest, buffering, privacy, open space and pathway identification, shading and wind buffering, based on the following standards:

1. Yard Setback Landscaping. Landscaping shall satisfy the following criteria:

a. Provide visual screening and privacy within side and rear yards; while leaving front yards and building entrances mostly visible for security purposes;

b. Use shrubs and trees as windbreaks, as appropriate;

c. Retain natural vegetation, as practicable;

d. Define pedestrian pathways and open space areas with landscape materials;

e. Provide focal points within a development, such as signature trees (i.e., large or unique trees), hedges and flowering plants;

f. Use trees to provide summer shading within common open space areas, and within front yards when street trees cannot be provided;

g. Use a combination of plants for year-long color and interest;

h. Use landscaping to screen outdoor storage and mechanical equipment areas, and to enhance graded areas such as berms, swales and detention/retention ponds.

2. Parking Areas. A minimum of five percent of the combined area of all parking areas, as measured around the perimeter of all parking spaces and maneuvering areas, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of an evenly distributed mix of shade trees with shrubs and/or ground cover plants. “Evenly distributed” means that the trees and other plants are distributed around the parking lot perimeter and between parking bays to provide a partial canopy. At a minimum, one tree per five parking spaces total shall be planted to create a partial tree canopy over and around the parking area. All parking areas with more than 20 spaces shall include landscape islands with trees to break up the parking area into rows of not more than 12 contiguous parking spaces. All landscaped areas shall have minimum dimensions of four feet by four feet to ensure adequate soil, water, and space for healthy plant growth.

3. Buffering and Screening Required. Buffering and screening are required under the following conditions:

a. Parking/Maneuvering Area Adjacent to Streets and Drives. Where a parking or maneuvering area is adjacent and parallel to a street or driveway, a decorative wall (masonry or similar quality material), arcade, trellis, evergreen hedge, or similar screen shall be established parallel to the street or driveway. The required wall or screening shall provide breaks, as necessary, to allow for access to the site and sidewalk by pedestrians via pathways. The design of the wall or screening shall also allow for visual surveillance of the site for security. Evergreen hedges used to comply with this standard shall be a minimum of 36 inches in height at maturity, and shall be of such species, number and spacing to provide the required screening within one year after planting. Any areas between the wall/hedge and the street/driveway line shall be landscaped with plants or other ground cover. All walls shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the owner.

b. Parking/Maneuvering Area Adjacent to Building. Where a parking or maneuvering area, or driveway, is adjacent to a building, the area shall be separated from the building by a raised pathway, plaza, or landscaped buffer no less than four feet in width. Raised curbs, bollards, wheel stops, or other design features shall be used to protect buildings from being damaged by vehicles. When parking areas are located adjacent to residential ground-floor living space, a landscape buffer is required to fulfill this requirement.

c. Screening of Mechanical Equipment, Outdoor Storage, Service and Delivery Areas, and Automobile-Oriented Uses. All mechanical equipment, outdoor storage and manufacturing, and service and delivery areas, shall be screened from view from all public streets and residential districts. Screening shall be provided by one or more of the following: decorative wall (i.e., masonry or similar quality material), evergreen hedge, non-see-through fence, or a similar feature that provides a non-see-through barrier. Walls, fences, and hedges shall comply with the vision clearance requirements and provide for pedestrian circulation, in accordance with Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.163.040 Street trees.

The guidelines provided in this section promote healthy street trees and adequate canopy cover to provide shade, reduce stormwater runoff, and improve the appearance of a development.

Street trees shall be planted for all developments that are subject to land division or site design review. Requirements for street tree planting strips are provided in Chapter 19.165 FMC, Public Facility Standards. Planting of unimproved streets shall be deferred until the construction of curbs and sidewalks. Street trees shall conform to the following standards and guidelines:

A. Soil Preparation, Planting and Care. The developer shall be responsible for planting street trees, including soil preparation, ground cover material, staking, and temporary irrigation for two years after planting. The developer shall also be responsible for tree care (pruning, watering, fertilization, and replacement as necessary) during the first two years after planting.

B. Assurances. The city shall require the developer to provide a performance and maintenance bond in an amount determined by the city engineer, to ensure the planting of the tree(s) and care during the first two years after planting.

C. Growth Characteristics. Trees shall be selected based on growth characteristics and site conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions, exposure, and desired color and appearance. The following should guide tree selection:

1. Provide a broad canopy where shade is desired.

2. Use low-growing trees for spaces under utility wires.

3. Select trees which can be “limbed-up” where vision clearance is a concern.

4. Use narrow or “columnar” trees where awnings or other building features limit growth, or where greater visibility is desired between buildings and the street.

5. Use species with similar growth characteristics on the same block for design continuity.

6. Avoid using trees that are susceptible to insect damage, and avoid using trees that produce excessive seeds or fruit.

7. Select trees that are well adapted to the environment, including soil, wind, sun exposure, and exhaust. Drought-resistant trees should be used in areas with sandy or rocky soil.

8. Select trees for their seasonal color, as desired.

9. Use deciduous trees for summer shade and winter sun.

D. Caliper Size. The minimum caliper size at planting shall be 1.5 inches, based on the American Association of Nurserymen Standards.

E. Spacing and Location. Street trees shall be planted within existing and proposed planting strips, and in sidewalk tree wells on streets without planting strips. Street tree spacing shall be based upon the type of tree(s) selected and the canopy size at maturity. In general, trees shall be spaced no more than 30 feet apart, except where planting a tree would conflict with existing trees, retaining walls, utilities and similar physical barriers.

F. Maintenance and Irrigation. The use of drought-tolerant plant species is encouraged, and may be required when irrigation is not available. Irrigation shall be provided for plants that are not drought-tolerant. If the plantings fail to survive, the property owner shall replace them with an equivalent specimen (i.e., evergreen shrub replaces evergreen shrub, deciduous tree replaces deciduous tree, etc.). All other landscape features required by this code shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the owner.

G. Additional Requirements. Additional buffering and screening may be required for specific land uses, as identified by Article II of this title, and the city may require additional landscaping through the conditional use permit process. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.163.050 Fences and walls.

The fences and walls section provides height limits for construction of new walls. The guidelines prevent walls that reduce pedestrian connectivity and sight clearance. The standards also provide guidelines relating to maintenance.

The following standards shall apply to all fences and walls:

A. General Requirements. All fences and walls shall comply with the standards of this section. The city may require installation of walls and/or fences as a condition of development approval, in accordance with conditional use permits or site design review. Walls built for required landscape buffers shall comply with FMC 19.163.030.

B. Dimensions.

1. The maximum allowable height of fences and walls is six feet, as measured from the lowest grade at the base of the wall or fence, except that retaining walls and terraced walls may exceed six feet when permitted as part of a site development approval, or as necessary to construct streets and sidewalks. A building permit is required for walls exceeding six feet in height, in conformance with the Uniform Building Code.

2. The height of fences and walls within a front yard setback shall not exceed four feet (except decorative arbors, gates, etc.), as measured from the grade closest to the street right-of-way.

3. Walls and fences to be built for required buffers shall comply with FMC 19.163.030.

4. Fences and walls shall comply with the vision clearance standards of FMC 19.162.020.

C. Maintenance. For safety and for compliance with the purpose of this chapter, walls and fences required as a condition of development approval shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the owner.

D. Fences – Recreational Courts. Any recreational court, with the consent of the planning commission, may be enclosed by a wire fence not to exceed 12 feet in height; provided, that no part of the court fence is within 20 feet of any street.

E. Swimming Pool Fences. A swimming pool, or other manmade outside body of water, which has a minimum depth of three and one-half feet shall be enclosed with a fence not less than four feet and not more than six feet in height. The fence shall not have any opening, holes or gaps therein larger than six inches square, except for doors or gates. The fence gates shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-catching device. The dwelling unit and/or accessory building can be used as part of the enclosure.

F. Barbed Wire Fencing. Barbed wire fencing may be permitted for property zoned commercial or industrial when the wire is employed on the top of any other type of fencing, and when the barbed wire is a minimum of six feet above the finished ground surface. Standard barbed wire fencing may be used to enclose property which is zoned agricultural.

G. Electrically Charged or Sharp Pointed Fencing. No electrically charged or sharp pointed fencing (other than barbed wire fencing) shall be constructed or maintained within the city limits except that electrically charged fencing may be permitted when the following standards are met:

1. Allowed only in general industrial, light industrial and agricultural holding zoning districts.

2. The electric fence shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall be completely surrounded by a nonelectric fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height.

3. A minimum one-foot separation shall be maintained between the electric fence and surrounding nonelectric fence or wall, except at gates/entrances.

4. The fence shall be clearly posted with warning signs that include the statement, “Danger – Electric Fence,” or an equivalent, together with a pictorial warning, at an interval of not more than 30 feet.

5. An approved method to manually disconnect electrical power to all portions of the fence and/or gates shall be provided and approved by the fire chief.

6. All necessary permits shall be obtained prior to installation from the city of Fairview.

H. Critical Facility Security Fences. Notwithstanding subsections (B)(2), (F), and (G) of this section, a facility that is located in any zoning district which is deemed a critical facility for the public health and safety, emergency management or homeland security purposes may include installation of fencing as follows:

1. A facility subject to this provision includes but is not limited to water or sewer pump station, well, public works yard, emergency management and other communications facilities, public safety facilities, flood control structures, public and private utility installations, or water tower or other facility deemed to be a similar use under Chapter 19.480 FMC.

2. Security fencing may not exceed six feet in height surrounding all or a portion of the facility, except that barbed wire, razor wire or other similar measure designed to impede access may be added to the top of a fence not less than six feet in height.

3. The vertical dimension of security measures such as barbed wire located along the top of a fence shall not exceed 18 inches.

4. The combined height of a fence and additional security measures may not exceed seven and one-half feet in height. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 5-2011 § 1; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.164 VEHICLE AND BICYCLE PARKING

Sections:

19.164.010    Purpose.

19.164.020    Applicability.

19.164.030    Vehicle parking standards.

19.164.040    Bicycle parking standards.


19.164.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and flexible standards for development of vehicle and bicycle parking. The design of parking areas is critically important to the viability of some commercial areas, pedestrian and driver safety, the efficient and safe operation of adjoining streets, and community image and livability. Historically, some communities have required more parking than is necessary for some land uses, paving extensive areas of land that could be put to better use. Because vehicle parking facilities can occupy large amounts of land, they must be planned and designed carefully to use the land efficiently while maintaining the visual character of the community. This chapter recognizes that each development has unique parking needs by providing a flexible approach for determining parking space requirements (i.e., “minimum” and “performance-based” standards). This chapter also provides standards for bicycle parking because many people use bicycles for recreation, commuting, and general transportation. Children as well as adults need safe and adequate spaces to park their bicycles throughout the community. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.164.020 Applicability.

All developments subject to site design review Chapter 19.420 FMC, including development of parking facilities, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.164.030 Vehicle parking standards.

A. The minimum number of required off-street vehicle parking spaces (i.e., parking that is located in parking lots and garages and not in the street right-of-way) shall be determined based on the standards in Table 19.164.030.A.

There is no minimum number of off-street parking spaces required in the town center commercial district; however, the “maximum parking” standards of this chapter apply.



Table 19.164.030.A 

Vehicle Parking – Minimum Standards Option  

	The number of required off-street vehicle parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the following standards. Off-street parking spaces may include spaces in garages, carports, parking lots, and/or driveways so long as vehicles are not parked in a vehicle travel lane (including emergency or fire access lanes), public right-of-way, pathway or landscape area. Credit shall be allowed for “on-street parking,” as provided in FMC 19.164.030(B). Parking ratios are based on spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area unless otherwise stated.

	Residential Uses

	Single-Family Detached Housing. One parking space shall be provided for each detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home on an individual lot.

	Two- and Three-Family Housing. 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.

	Multifamily and Single-Family Attached Housing.

	a. Studio units or 1-bedroom units less than 500 sq. ft. – 1 space.

	b. 1-bedroom units 500 sq. ft. or larger – 1.25 spaces.

	c. 2-bedroom units – 1.50 spaces.

	d. 3-bedroom or greater units – 1.75 spaces.

	e. Retirement complexes for seniors 55 years or greater – 1 space per unit, plus one per three employees.

	Rooming and Boarding Houses, Dormitories. Two spaces for each three guest rooms, or one per three beds, whichever is more.

	Senior Housing. Same as for retirement complexes.

	Manufactured Home Parks. Same as for single-family detached housing.

	Accessory Dwelling. One space.

	Commercial Uses

	Auto, Boat or Trailer Sales, Retail Nurseries and Similar Bulk Retail Uses. One space per 1,000 square feet of the first 10,000 square feet of gross land area; plus one space per 5,000 square feet for the excess over 10,000 square feet of gross land area; and one space per two employees.

	Bank with Drive-In. 4.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.

	Business, General Retail, Personal Services. General – 4.1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Furniture and appliances – 0.5 space per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.

	Chapels and Mortuaries. Two spaces per four fixed seats in the main chapel.

	Fast Food with Drive-Through. 9.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.

	Hotels and Motels. One space per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.

	Offices. Medical and dental offices – 3.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area; general offices – 2.7 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.

	Restaurants, Bars, Ice Cream Parlors and Similar Uses. 15.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area.

	Theaters, Auditoriums, Stadiums, Gymnasiums, Similar Uses. 0.3 spaces per each seat.

	Industrial Uses

	Industrial Uses, Except Warehousing. 1.6 spaces per 1,000 square feet of leasable floor area.

	Warehousing. 0.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Parking ratios apply to warehouses 150,000 gross square feet or greater.

	Public Utilities (Gas, Water, Telephone, Etc.), Not Including Business Offices. One space per each employee on the largest shift, plus one space per company vehicle.

	Public and Institutional Uses

	Childcare Centers Having 13 or More Children. One space per two employees; a minimum of two spaces is required.

	Churches and Similar Places of Worship. The same as other similar uses.

	Golf Courses, Except Miniature. Eight spaces per hole, plus additional spaces for auxiliary uses set forth in this section. Miniature golf courses – four spaces per hole.

	Hospitals. Two spaces per patient bed based on maximum capacity.

	Nursing and Convalescent Homes. One space per two patient beds based on maximum capacity.

	Rest Homes, Homes for the Aged, or Assisted Living. One space for each per dwelling plus one per three employees.

	Schools, Elementary and Junior High. One space per employee.

	Sports Club/Recreational Facilities. 4.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.

	High Schools. 0.2 spaces per each student and staff member.

	Colleges, Universities and Trade Schools. 0.2 spaces per each student and staff member.

	Unspecified Uses

	Where a use is not specifically listed in this table, parking requirements shall be determined by finding that a use is similar to those listed in terms of parking needs.

B. Credit for On-Street Parking.

1. The credit for on-street parking allows a reduction of one off-street parking space for every one on-street parking space adjacent to the development if deemed appropriate by the city.

2. On-Street Parking Credit. The amount of off-street parking required shall be reduced by one off-street parking space for every uncommitted on-street parking space adjacent to the development. On-street parking shall follow the established configuration of existing on-street parking, except that angled parking may be allowed for some streets, where permitted by city standards. The following constitutes an on-street parking space:

a. Parallel parking, each 24 feet of uninterrupted curb;

b. Fifty-degree diagonal, each with 12 feet of curb;

c. Ninety-degree (perpendicular) parking, each with 10 feet of curb;

d. Curb space must be connected to the lot which contains the use;

e. Parking spaces that would not obstruct a required clear vision area, nor any other parking that violates any law or street standard; and

f. On-street parking spaces credited for a specific use may not be used exclusively by that use, but shall be available for general public use at all times. No signs or actions limiting general public use of on-street spaces is permitted.

C. Parking Location and Shared Parking.

1. Location. Vehicle parking is allowed only on approved parking shoulders (streets), within garages, carports and other structures, or on driveways or parking lots that have been developed in conformance with this code. Specific locations for parking are indicated in Article II of this title for some land uses (e.g., the requirement that parking be located to side or rear of buildings, with access from alleys, for some uses). (See also Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.)

2. Off-Site Parking. Except for single-family dwellings, the vehicle parking spaces required by this chapter may be located on another parcel of land, provided the parcel is within 500 feet walking distance of the use it serves. The distance from the parking area to the use shall be measured from the nearest parking space to a building entrance, following a sidewalk or other pedestrian route. The right to use the off-site parking must be evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, easement, or similar written instrument.

3. Mixed Uses. If more than one type of land use occupies a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street vehicle parking shall be the sum of the requirements for all uses, unless it can be shown that the peak parking demands are actually less (i.e., the uses operate on different days or at different times of the day). In that case, the total requirements shall be reduced accordingly.

4. Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g., uses primarily of a daytime versus nighttime nature), and provided that the right of joint use is evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, contract, or similar written instrument establishing the joint use.

5. Availability of Facilities. Owners of off-street parking facilities may post a sign indicating that all parking on the site is available only for residents, customers and/or employees, as applicable. Signs shall conform to the standards of Chapter 19.170 FMC, Sign Regulations.

D. Maximum Number of Parking Spaces. The number of parking spaces provided shall not exceed the standards in the following table:

	Use	Maximum in Transit/Ped. Areas	Maximum in All Other Areas

	General Office	3.4/1,000 s.f.	4.1

	Light Industrial	none	none

	Warehouse (150,000 s.f. or larger)	0.4	0.5

	Schools, Colleges, etc.	0.3	0.3

	Tennis, Racquetball Courts	1.3	1.5

	Sports Club/Recreation Facilities	5.4	6.5

	Retail/Commercial, Including Shop Centers	5.1	6.2

	Bank with Drive-In	5.4	6.5

	Movie Theater (spaces/seats)	0.4	0.5

	Fast Food with Drive-In	12.4	14.9

	Other Restaurants	19.1	23

	Worship Places (spaces/seats)	0.6	0.8

	Medical/Dental Clinic	4.9	5.9

	Residential Uses	none	none

	Hotel/Motel	none	none

	Single-Family Detached	none	none

	Residential, less than 500 s.f. per unit, one bedroom	none	none

	Multifamily/Townhouse/1 bedroom 	none	none

	Multifamily/Townhouse/2 bedroom	none	none

	Multifamily/Townhouse/3 bedroom	none	none

E. Parking Management. The planning director may require a parking management plan for development of any use that requires more than 10 parking spaces based on the minimum parking spaces provided in Table 19.164.030.A. The parking management plan shall be prepared by a qualified parking or traffic consultant or certified engineer and should include the following:

1. Defining a study area and time period necessary to evaluate parking supply and demand in the area consistent with the planning period for the city’s transportation system plan.

2. Surveying the capacity of the parking supply options in the study area such as shared parking, transit stations or other high-efficiency parking management alternatives.

3. Defining a study area and time period necessary to evaluate parking supply and demand in the area consistent with the planning period for the city’s transportation system plan.

4. Surveying the capacity of the parking supply options in the study area such as shared parking, transit stations or other high-efficiency parking management alternatives.

F. Parking Stall Standard Dimensions and Compact Parking Spaces. All off-street parking stalls shall be improved to conform to city standards for surfacing, stormwater management and striping, and provide dimensions in accordance with the following table. Disabled person parking shall conform to the standards and dimensions of this chapter. The number of compact parking spaces shall not exceed 40 percent of all parking spaces provided on site.

Figure 19.164.030.F – Parking Stall Standard Dimensions and Compact Car Parking
[IMAGE]


  

Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions 

	Angle (A)	Type	Width (B)	Curb Length (C)	1-Way Aisle Width (D)	2-Way Aisle Width (D)	Stall Depth

	0°

(Parallel)	Standard

Compact

Disabled	8 ft.

7 ft. 6 in.	22 ft. 6 in.

19 ft. 6 in.	12 ft.

12 ft.	24 ft.

24 ft.	8 ft.

7 ft. 6 in.

	30°	Standard

Compact

Disabled	9 ft.

7 ft. 6 in.	18 ft.

15 ft.	12 ft.

12 ft.	24 ft.

24 ft.	17 ft.

14 ft.

	45°	Standard

Compact

Disabled	9 ft.

7 ft. 6 in.	12 ft. 6 in.

10 ft. 6 in.	12 ft.

12 ft.	24 ft.

24 ft.	19 ft.

16 ft.

	60°	Standard

Compact

Disabled	9 ft.

7 ft. 6 in.	10 ft. 6 in.

8 ft. 6 in.	18 ft.

15 ft.	24 ft.

24 ft.	20 ft.

16 ft. 6 in.

	90°	Standard

Compact

Disabled	9 ft.

7 ft. 6 in.	9 ft.

7 ft. 6 in.	24 ft.

22 ft.	24 ft.

24 ft.	19 ft.

15 ft.

G. Variances. Developments may request exceptions to the parking standards; see FMC 19.520.030(A)(4).

Important cross-references: See also Article II of this title, land use district standards; Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation; Chapter 19.163 FMC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls; and FMC 19.165.050, Storm drainage.

H. Disabled Person Parking Spaces. The following parking shall be provided for disabled persons, in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (Figure 19.164.030.H):

Figure 19.164.030.H – Disabled Person Parking Spaces
[IMAGE]


The following graphics and text further illustrate Americans with Disability Act requirements.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


I. In parking lots three acres and larger intended for use by the general public, pedestrian pathways shall be raised or separated from parking, parking aisles and travel lanes by a raised curb, concrete bumpers, bollards, landscaping or other physical barrier. If a raised pathway is used, curb ramps shall be provided in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-2010 § 5; Ord. 8-2002 §§ 1 – 3; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.164.040 Bicycle parking standards.

All uses which are subject to site design review shall provide bicycle parking, in conformance with the following standards, which are evaluated during site design review:

A. Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces. A minimum of two bicycle parking spaces per use is required for all uses with greater than 10 vehicle parking spaces. The following additional standards apply to specific types of development:

1. Multifamily Residences. Every residential use of four or more dwelling units shall provide bicycle parking spaces according to the following standards:

a. Short-term bicycle parking shall be provided at a ratio of one bicycle space for every 10 vehicle parking spaces and shall be located within 30 feet of the main entrance to the building, in a location that is easily accessible for bicycles.

b. Long-term bicycle parking shall be provided at a ratio of one bicycle space per dwelling unit. Sheltered bicycle parking spaces may be located within a garage, storage shed, basement, utility room or similar area. In those instances in which the residential complex has no garage or other easily accessible storage unit, the bicycle parking spaces may be sheltered from sun and precipitation under an eave, overhang, an independent structure, or similar cover.

2. Commercial Retail, Office, and Institutional Developments. Commercial retail, office, and institutional developments shall provide bicycle parking spaces according to the following standards:

a. Short-term bicycle parking shall be provided at a ratio of one bicycle space for every 10 vehicle parking spaces and shall be located within 50 feet of the main entrance to the building, in a location that is easily accessible for bicycles.

b. Long-term bicycle parking shall be provided at a ratio of one bicycle space per employee.

3. Schools. Elementary and middle schools, both private and public, shall provide one bicycle parking space for every eight students and employees. High schools shall provide one bicycle parking space for every five students and employees. All spaces shall be long-term spaces sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.

4. Colleges and Trade Schools. Colleges and trade schools shall provide one bicycle parking space for every eight motor vehicle spaces plus one space for every dormitory unit. Fifty percent of the bicycle parking spaces shall be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.

5. Town Center Commercial District. Within the town center commercial district, bicycle parking for customers shall be provided along the street at a rate of at least one space per use. Individual uses shall provide their own parking, or spaces may be clustered to serve up to six bicycles. Bicycle parking spaces shall be located in front of the stores along the street, either on the sidewalks or in specially constructed areas such as pedestrian curb extensions. Inverted “U” style racks are recommended. Bicycle parking shall not interfere with pedestrian passage, leaving a clear area of at least 36 inches between bicycles and other existing and potential obstructions. Customer spaces may or may not be sheltered. When provided, sheltered parking (within a building, or under an eave, overhang, or similar structure) shall be provided at a rate of one space per 10 employees, with a minimum of one space per store.

6. Multiple Uses. For buildings with multiple uses (such as a commercial or mixed use center), bicycle parking standards shall be calculated by using the total number of motor vehicle parking spaces required for the entire development. A minimum of one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking spaces is required.

B. Exemptions. This section does not apply to single-family, two-family, and three-family housing (attached, detached or manufactured housing), home occupations, agriculture and livestock uses, or other developments with fewer than eight vehicle parking spaces.

C. Location and Design. Bicycle parking shall be conveniently located with respect to both the street right-of-way and at least one building entrance (e.g., no farther away than the closest parking space). It should be incorporated whenever possible into building design and coordinated with the design of street furniture when it is provided. Street furniture includes benches, streetlights, planters and other pedestrian amenities.

D. Visibility and Security. Bicycle parking should be visible to cyclists from street sidewalks or building entrances, so that it provides sufficient security from theft and damage.

E. Options for Storage. Bicycle parking requirements for long-term and employee parking can be met by providing a bicycle storage room, bicycle lockers, racks, or other secure storage space inside or outside of the building.

F. Lighting. Bicycle parking shall be at least as well lit as vehicle parking for security.

G. Reserved Areas. Areas set aside for bicycle parking shall be clearly marked and reserved for bicycle parking only.

H. Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians. Parking areas shall be located so as to not conflict with vision clearance standards (Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation). (Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.165 PUBLIC FACILITIES STANDARDS

Sections:

19.165.010    Purpose and applicability.

19.165.020    Transportation standards.

19.165.025    Transportation improvements.

19.165.030    Public use areas.

19.165.040    Sanitary sewer and water service improvements.

19.165.050    Storm drainage.

19.165.060    Utilities.

19.165.070    Easements.

19.165.080    Construction plan approval and assurances.

19.165.090    Installation.


19.165.010 Purpose and applicability.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide planning and design standards for public and private transportation facilities and utilities. Streets are the most common public spaces, touching virtually every parcel of land. Therefore, one of the primary purposes of this chapter is to provide standards for attractive and safe streets that can accommodate vehicle traffic from planned growth, and provide a range of transportation options, including options for driving, walking, bus transit and bicycling. This chapter is also intended to implement the city’s transportation system plan.

B. When Standards Apply. Unless otherwise provided, the standard specifications for construction, reconstruction or repair of transportation facilities, utilities and other public improvements within the city shall occur in accordance with the standards of this chapter. No development may occur unless the public facilities related to development comply with the public facility requirements established in this chapter. The street cross sections found in the Fairview transportation system plan may be modified to accommodate alternative stormwater management methods in accordance with the adopted stormwater design manual subject to the approval of the public works director. The public works director may require modification of the typical cross section to accommodate alternative stormwater management methods when associated with development proposals. Such modifications may be applied as conditions of development approval.

C. Standard Specifications. The city engineer shall establish standard construction specifications consistent with the design standards of this chapter and application of engineering principles. They are incorporated in this code by reference.

D. Conditions of Development Approval. No development may occur unless required public facilities are in place or guaranteed, in conformance with the provisions of this code. Improvements required as a condition of development approval that require a dedication of property for a public use, when not voluntarily accepted by the applicant, shall be roughly proportional to the impact of development. Findings in the development approval shall indicate how the required improvements are roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed development on public facilities.

E. Rough Proportionality Report. Where the applicant objects to the imposition of any applicable development standard under this chapter that required a dedication of property for a public use, the applicant must provide a rough proportionality report justifying an alternative level of improvements including:

1. The estimated extent, on a quantitative basis, to which the improvements will be used by persons served by the building or development, whether the use is for safety or convenience;

2. The estimated level, on a quantitative basis, of improvements needed to meet the estimated extent of use by persons served by the building or development;

3. The estimated impact, on a quantitative basis, of the building or development on the public infrastructure system of which the improvements will be a part; and

4. The estimated level, on a quantitative basis, of improvements needed to mitigate the estimated impact on the public infrastructure system. (Ord. 2-2007 § 1(Exh. 1 § 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.020 Transportation standards.

Transportation standards are necessary so that the Fairview street system remains intact and well connected. Streets are critical to the connection of neighborhoods, businesses, schools, etc. It is important to regulate roadway sizes, locations and right-of-way dimensions.

The street standards are based directly on the Fairview transportation system plan. Traffic calming measures are addressed in the adopted transportation system plan. The city of Fairview has no formalized traffic-calming plan, but has recently adopted a speed hump management program. The street alignment illustrations used in the proposed code are taken directly from the transportation system plan. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.025 Transportation improvements.

A. Development Standards. No development shall occur unless the development has frontage or approved access to a public street, in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation, and the following standards are met:

1. Streets within or adjacent to a development shall be improved in accordance with the transportation system plan and the provisions of this chapter;

2. Development of new streets, and additional street width or improvements planned as a portion of an existing street, shall be improved in accordance with this section, and public streets shall be dedicated to the applicable city, county or state jurisdiction;

3. New streets and drives connected to a collector or arterial street shall be paved; and

4. The city may accept a future improvement guarantee (e.g., owner agrees not to remonstrate (object) against the formation of a local improvement district in the future) in lieu of street improvements if one or more of the following conditions exist:

a. A partial improvement may create a potential safety hazard to motorists or pedestrians;

b. Due to the developed condition of adjacent properties it is unlikely that street improvements would be extended in the foreseeable future and the improvement associated with the project under review does not, by itself, provide increased street safety or capacity, or improved pedestrian circulation;

c. The improvement would be in conflict with an adopted capital improvement plan; or

d. The improvement is associated with an approved land partition on property zoned residential and the proposed land partition does not create any new streets.

B. Variances. Variances to the transportation design standards in this section may be granted by means of a Class B variance, as governed by Article V of this title, Exceptions to Code Standards. A variance may be granted under this provision only if a required improvement is not feasible due to topographic constraints or constraints posed by sensitive lands Chapter 19.106 FMC.

C. Creation of Rights-of-Way for Streets and Related Purposes. Streets shall be created through the approval and recording of a final subdivision or partition plat; except the city may approve the creation of a street by acceptance of a deed; provided, that the street is deemed essential by the city council for the purpose of implementing the transportation system plan, and the deeded right-of-way conforms to the standards of this code. All deeds of dedication shall be in a form prescribed by the city engineer and shall name “the public” as grantee.

D. Creation of Access Easements. The city may approve an access easement established by deed when the easement is necessary to provide for access and circulation in conformance with Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation. Setback standards do not permit conflicting structures to be built in public easements.

E. Street Location, Width and Grade. Except as noted below, the location, width and grade of all streets shall conform to the transportation system plan, and an approved street plan or subdivision plat. Street location, width and grade shall be determined in relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets:

1. Street grades shall be approved by the city engineer in accordance with the design standards in subsection O of this section; and

2. Where the location of a street is not shown in an existing street plan (see subsection H of this section), the location of streets in a development shall either:

a. Provide for the continuation and connection of existing streets in the surrounding areas, conforming to the street standards of this chapter, or

b. Conform to a street plan adopted by the planning commission, if it is impractical to connect with existing street patterns because of particular topographical or other existing conditions of the land. Such a plan shall be based on the type of land use to be served, the volume of traffic, the capacity of adjoining streets and the need for public convenience and safety.

F. Minimum Rights-of-Way and Street Sections. Street rights-of-way and improvements shall be the widths as required in the “Standards” section of the Fairview transportation system plan. A variance shall be required to vary the standards found in the Fairview transportation system plan. Where a range of width is indicated, the width shall be determined by the decision-making authority based upon the following factors:

1. Street classification in the transportation system plan;

2. Anticipated traffic generation;

3. On-street parking needs;

4. Sidewalk and bikeway requirements based on anticipated level of use;

5. Requirements for placement of utilities;

6. Street lighting;

7. Minimize drainage, slope, and sensitive lands impacts, as identified by Chapter 19.106 FMC;

8. Street tree location, as provided for in Chapter 19.163 FMC;

9. Protection of significant vegetation, as provided for in Chapter 19.163 FMC;

10. Safety and comfort for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians;

11. Street furnishings (e.g., benches, lighting, bus shelters, etc.), when provided;

12. Access needs for emergency vehicles; and

13. Transition between different street widths (i.e., existing streets and new streets), as applicable.

G. Traffic Signals and Neighborhood Traffic Management.

1. Traffic management features, such as traffic circles, curb extensions, narrow residential streets, and special paving, may be used to slow traffic in neighborhoods and areas with high pedestrian traffic.

2. Traffic signals shall be required with development when traffic signal warrants are met, in conformance with the Highway Capacity Manual and Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The location of traffic signals shall be noted on approved street plans. Where a proposed street intersection will result in an immediate need for a traffic signal, a signal meeting approved specifications shall be installed. The developer’s cost and the timing of improvements shall be included as a condition of development approval.

3. Preferred neighborhood traffic management tools are detailed in the Fairview transportation system plan.

H. Future Street Plan and Extension of Streets.

1. A future street plan shall be filed by the applicant in conjunction with an application for a subdivision in order to facilitate orderly development of the street system. The plan shall show the pattern of existing and proposed future streets from the boundaries of the proposed land division and shall include other parcels within 500 feet surrounding and adjacent to the proposed land division. The street plan is not binding; rather it is intended to show potential future street extensions with future development.

2. Streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the parcel or tract to be developed, when the city council determines that the extension is necessary to give street access to, or permit a satisfactory future division of, adjoining land. The point where the streets temporarily end shall conform to subsections (H)(2)(a) through (d) of this section:

a. These extended streets or street stubs to adjoining properties are not considered to be cul-de-sacs since they are intended to continue as through streets when the adjoining property is developed.

b. A barricade (e.g., fence, bollards, boulders or similar vehicle barrier) shall be constructed at the end of the street by the subdivider and shall not be removed until authorized by the city or other applicable agency with jurisdiction over the street. The cost of the barricade shall be included in the street construction cost.

c. Temporary turnarounds (e.g., hammerhead or bulb-shaped configuration) shall be constructed for stub streets over 150 feet in length.

d. In the case of dead-end stub streets that will connect to streets on adjacent sites in the future, notification that the street is planned for future extension shall be posted on the stub street until the street is extended and shall inform the public that the dead-end street may be extended in the future.

I. Street Alignment and Connections.

1. Mixed-use and residential development proposed on sites five acres or greater must submit a site plan that identifies conceptual street connections that are consistent with the transportation system plan.

2. Staggering of streets making “T” intersections at collectors and arterials shall not be designed so that jogs of less than 300 feet on such streets are created, as measured from the centerline of the street.

3. Spacing between local street intersections shall have a minimum separation of 125 feet, except where more closely spaced intersections are designed to provide an open space, pocket park, common area or similar neighborhood amenity. This standard applies to four-way and three-way (offset) intersections.

4. All local and collector streets which abut a development site shall be extended within the site to provide through circulation unless the applicant demonstrates that extension is prevented by environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns or compliance with other standards in this code. This exception applies when it is not possible to redesign or reconfigure the street pattern to provide required extensions. Land is considered topographically constrained if the slope is greater than 15 percent for a distance of 250 feet or more. In the case of environmental or topographical constraints, the mere presence of a constraint is not sufficient to show that a street connection is not possible. The applicant must show why the environmental or topographic constraint precludes some reasonable street connection.

5. Proposed streets or street extensions shall be located to provide direct access to existing or planned commercial services and other neighborhood facilities, such as schools, shopping areas and parks and transit facilities.

6. In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the city, the design of subdivisions and alignment of new streets shall conform to the following standards in Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation. The maximum block length shall not exceed:

a. Five hundred thirty feet in the residential district;

b. Two hundred feet in the town center commercial district, except as provided by FMC 19.65.050, Block layout and building orientation;

c. Not applicable to the general industrial district;

d. Seven hundred feet in the light industrial district, except as required for commercial developments subject to Chapter 19.80 FMC;

e. Three hundred feet in the corridor commercial district;

f. Three hundred feet in the neighborhood commercial district.

7. A variance to street spacing standards may be granted pursuant to FMC 19.520.030 (Class B variances) when resources are present that are mapped on the Natural Resources Map, where street spacing can be achieved at a minimum of 800 feet and no greater than 1,200 feet.

8. Exceptions to the standards in this subsection may be granted when:

a. Habitat quality or the length of the crossing required prevents a full street connection, pursuant to Chapter 19.106 FMC;

b. An access way is provided at or near midblock, in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 19.162 FMC.

J. Sidewalks, Planter Strips, Bicycle Lanes. Sidewalks, planter strips, and bicycle lanes shall be installed in conformance with applicable provisions of the transportation system plan, the Comprehensive Plan, and adopted street plans. Maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, and planter strips is the continuing obligation of the adjacent property owner. All work must comply with the city of Fairview public works construction standards.

K. Internal Pathways. Pathways shall be at least five feet in unobstructed width and shall be constructed to sidewalk standards found in Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, or according to Multnomah County or ODOT standards as applicable. The property owner shall keep a minimum of five feet of the pathway width clear of both permanent and temporary obstructions (e.g., utility poles, sandwich signs). Maintenance of internal pathways is the continuing obligation of the property owner or adjacent property owner. All work must comply with the city of Fairview public works construction standards.

L. Intersection Angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at an angle as near to a right angle as practicable, except where topography requires a lesser angle or where a reduced angle is necessary to provide an open space, pocket park, common area or similar neighborhood amenity. In addition, the following standards shall apply:

1. Streets shall have at least 25 feet of tangent adjacent to the right-of-way intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance;

2. Intersections which are not at right angles shall have a minimum corner radius of 20 feet along the right-of-way lines of the acute angle; and

3. Right-of-way lines at intersection with arterial streets shall have a corner radius of not less than 20 feet.

M. Existing Rights-of-Way. Whenever existing rights-of-way adjacent to or within a tract are of less than standard width, additional rights-of-way shall be provided at the time of subdivision or development, subject to the provision of FMC 19.165.025 (C).

N. Cul-de-Sacs. A dead-end street shall be no more than 200 feet long, shall not provide access to greater than eight dwelling units, and shall only be used when environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other standards in this code preclude street extension and through circulation:

1. All cul-de-sacs shall terminate with a circular turnaround. Circular turnarounds shall have a radius of no less than 25 feet, and not more than a radius of 40 feet (i.e., from center to edge of pavement); except that turnarounds may be larger when they contain a landscaped island or parking bay in their center. When an island or parking bay is provided, there shall be a fire apparatus lane of 20 feet in width; and

2. The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline of the roadway from the near side of the intersecting street to the farthest point of the cul-de-sac.

O. Grades and Curves. Grades shall not exceed 10 percent on arterials, 12 percent on collector streets, or 12 percent on any other street (except that local or residential access streets may have segments with grades up to 15 percent for distances of no greater than 250 feet), and:

1. Centerline curve radii shall not be less than 700 feet on arterials, 500 feet on major collectors, 350 feet on minor collectors, or 100 feet on other streets; and

2. Streets intersecting with a minor collector or greater functional classification street, or streets intended to be posted with a stop sign or signalization, shall provide a landing averaging five percent or less. Landings are that portion of the street within 20 feet of the edge of the intersecting street at full improvement.

P. Curbs, Curb Cuts, Ramps, and Driveway Approaches. Concrete curbs, curb cuts, wheelchair, bicycle ramps and driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with standards specified in Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation.

Q. Streets Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way. Wherever the proposed development contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land shall be created. New railroad crossings and modifications to existing crossings are subject to review and approval by Oregon Department of Transportation.

R. Development Adjoining Arterial Streets. Where a development adjoins or is crossed by an existing or proposed arterial street, the development design shall separate residential access and through traffic, and shall minimize traffic conflicts. The design shall include one or more of the following:

1. A parallel access street along the arterial with a landscape buffer separating the two streets;

2. Deep lots abutting the arterial or major collector to provide adequate buffering with frontage along another street. Double-frontage lots shall conform to the buffering standards in FMC 19.163.030;

3. Screen planting at the rear or side property line to be contained in a non-access reservation (e.g., public easement or tract) along the arterial;

4. Other treatment suitable to meet the objectives of this subsection; or

5. If a lot has access to two streets with different classifications, primary access shall be from the lower classification street, in conformance with Chapter 19.162 FMC.

S. Alleys, Public or Private. Alleys shall conform to the standards in the Fairview transportation system plan. While alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, the corners of necessary alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than 12 feet.

T. Private Streets. Private streets shall not be used to avoid connections with public streets. Gated communities (i.e., where a gate limits access to a development from a public street) are prohibited. Design standards for private streets shall conform to the provisions of the Fairview transportation system plan.

U. Street Names. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets in Multnomah County, except for extensions of existing streets. Street names, signs and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the surrounding area, except as requested by emergency service providers.

V. Survey Monuments. Upon completion of a street improvement and prior to acceptance by the city, it shall be the responsibility of the developer’s registered professional land surveyor to provide certification to the city that all boundary and interior monuments shall be reestablished and protected.

W. Street Signs. The city, county or state with jurisdiction shall install all signs for traffic control and street names. The cost of signs required for new development shall be the responsibility of the developer. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections. Stop signs and other signs may be required.

X. Mail Boxes. Plans for mail boxes to be used shall be approved by the United States Postal Service.

Y. Streetlight Standards. Streetlights shall be installed in accordance with city standards.

Z. Street Cross-Sections. All street cross-sections must comply with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction pages 40-51. The final lift of asphalt or concrete pavement shall be placed on all new constructed public roadways prior to final city acceptance of the roadway and within one year of the conditional acceptance of the roadway unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. The final lift shall also be placed no later than when 90 percent of the structures in the new development are completed or one year from the commencement of initial construction of the development, whichever is less. All work must comply with public works construction standards.

1. Sub-base and leveling course shall be of select crushed rock;

2. Surface material shall be of Class C or B asphaltic concrete;

3. The final lift shall be Class C asphaltic concrete as defined by APWA standard specifications; and

4. No lift shall be less than one and one-half inches in thickness. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 3-2012 § 6; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.030 Public use areas.

Public use areas implement Comprehensive Plan policies that may require a developer to reserve a piece of land for future park and open space to serve the residents of the new development. Specific issues to consider include the amount of time the city has to purchase parkland and whether dedication of park land should count as a credit towards SDCs.

A. Dedication Requirements.

1. Where a proposed park, playground or other public use shown in a plan adopted by the city is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the city may require the dedication or reservation of this area on the final plat for the subdivision.

2. If determined by the planning commission to be in the public interest in accordance with adopted Comprehensive Plan policies, and where an adopted plan of the city does not indicate proposed public use areas, the city may require the dedication or reservation of areas within the subdivision of a character, extent and location suitable for the development of parks and other public uses.

3. All required dedications of public use areas shall conform to FMC 19.430.150(D), Conditions of approval.

B. Acquisition by Public Agency. If the developer is required to reserve land area for a park or playground, the land shall be acquired by the appropriate public agency within 12 months following final plat approval, at a price agreed upon prior to approval of the plat, or the reservation shall be released to the property owner.

C. System Development Charge Credit. Dedication of land to the city for public use areas shall be eligible as a credit toward any required system development charge for parks. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.040 Sanitary sewer and water service improvements.

The sanitary sewer and water service improvements ensure adequate sanitary sewer services to new developments.

A. Sewers and Water Mains Required. Sanitary sewers and water mains shall be installed to serve each new development and to connect developments to existing mains in accordance with the city’s construction specifications and the applicable Comprehensive Plan policies.

B. Sewer and Water Plan Approval. Development permits for sewer and water improvements shall not be issued until the city engineer has approved all sanitary sewer and water plans in conformance with city standards.

C. Oversizing. Proposed sewer and water systems shall be sized to accommodate additional development within the area as projected by the Comprehensive Plan. The developer shall be entitled to system development charge credits for the oversizing.

D. Permits Denied. Development permits may be restricted by the city where a deficiency exists in the existing water or sewer system which cannot be rectified by the development and which if not rectified will result in a threat to public health or safety, surcharging of existing mains, or violations of state or federal standards pertaining to operation of domestic water and sewerage treatment systems. Building moratoriums shall conform to the criteria and procedures contained in ORS 197.505 to 197.520. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.050 Storm drainage.

The storm drainage section requires developers to accommodate and treat stormwater runoff from buildings and parking lots.

A. General Provisions. The city shall issue a development permit only where adequate provisions for stormwater and flood water runoff have been made.

B. Accommodation of Upstream Drainage. Culverts and other drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer.

C. Effect on Downstream Drainage. Where it is anticipated by the city engineer that the additional runoff resulting from the development will overload an existing drainage facility, the city may deny approval of the development permit unless provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the development in accordance with city standards.

D. Easements. Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width as will be adequate for conveyance and maintenance. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.060 Utilities.

The utilities section provides standards regarding electric lines and cable. Many types of utilities now must be installed underground for safety and aesthetic purposes.

A. Underground Utilities. All utility lines including, but not limited to, those required for electric, communication, lighting and cable television services and related facilities shall be placed underground, except for surface-mounted transformers, surface-mounted connection boxes and meter cabinets which may be placed above ground, temporary utility service facilities during construction, and high capacity electric lines operating at 50,000 volts or above. The following additional standards apply to all new subdivisions, in order to facilitate underground placement of utilities:

1. The developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving utility to provide the underground services. Care shall be taken to ensure that all above ground equipment does not obstruct vision clearance areas for vehicular traffic;

2. The city reserves the right to approve the location of all surface-mounted facilities;

3. All underground utilities, including sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets by the developer, shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets; and

4. Stubs for service connections shall be long enough to avoid disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

B. Easements. Easements shall be provided for all underground utility facilities.

C. Exception to Undergrounding Requirement. The standard applies only to proposed subdivisions. An exception to the undergrounding requirement may be granted due to physical constraints, such as steep topography, sensitive lands, Chapter 19.106 FMC, or existing development conditions. (Ord. 3-2012 § 6; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.070 Easements.

The easements section provisions reserve adequate space for utilities.

Easements for sewers, storm drainage and water quality facilities, water mains, electric lines or other public utilities shall be dedicated on a final plat, or provided for in the deed restrictions. See also, Chapter 19.420 FMC, Development Review and Site Design Review and Chapter 19.430, Land Divisions and Lot Line Adjustments. The developer or applicant shall make arrangements with the city, the applicable district and each utility franchise for the provision and dedication of utility easements necessary to provide full services to the development. The city’s standard width for public main line utility easements shall be 20 feet unless otherwise specified by the utility company, applicable district, or city engineer. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.080 Construction plan approval and assurances.

The construction plan approval portion ensures the completion of a development by a builder.

No public improvements, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, streets, sidewalks, curbs, lighting, parks, or other requirements, shall be undertaken except after the plans have been approved by the city, permit fee paid, and permit issued. The permit fee is required to defray the cost and expenses incurred by the city for construction and other services in connection with the improvement. The permit fee shall be set by the city council. The city may require the developer or subdivider to provide bonding or other performance guarantees to ensure completion of required public improvements. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.165.090 Installation.

A. Conformance Required. Improvements installed by the developer either as a requirement of these regulations or at his/her own option, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, approved construction plans, and to improvement standards and specifications adopted by the city.

B. Adopted Installation Standards. The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, Oregon Chapter APWA shall be a part of the city’s adopted installation standard(s); other standards may also be required upon recommendation of the city engineer.

C. Commencement. Work shall not begin until the city has been notified in advance.

D. Resumption. If work is discontinued for more than one month, it shall not be resumed until the city is notified.

E. City Inspection. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the city. The city may require minor changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arising during construction warrant such changes in the public interest. Modifications requested by the developer shall be subject to land use review under Chapter 19.415 FMC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. Any monuments that are disturbed before all improvements are completed by the subdivider shall be replaced prior to final acceptance of the improvements.

F. Engineer’s Certification and As-Built Plans. A registered civil engineer shall provide written certification in a form required by the city that all improvements, workmanship and materials are in accord with current and standard engineering and construction practices, conform to approved plans and conditions of approval, and are of high grade, prior to city acceptance of the public improvements, or any portion thereof, for operation and maintenance. The developer’s engineer shall also provide three sets (one mylar, one electronic, one paper copy) of “as-built” plans, in conformance with the city engineer’s specifications, for permanent filing with the city. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.170 SIGN REGULATIONS

Sections:

19.170.010    Purpose/application.

19.170.020    Definitions.

19.170.030    Sign permit required.

19.170.040    Design standards.

19.170.050    Signing of nonconforming uses.

19.170.060    Nonconforming signs.

19.170.070    Hardship relief.

19.170.080    Exemptions.

19.170.090    Temporary signs.

19.170.100    Prohibited signs.

19.170.110    Allowed signs within residential zones.

19.170.120    Permitted signs within community service parks (CSP) zone.

19.170.130    Permitted signs within commercial and light industrial zones (CC, TCC, NC, LI, VO, and VC).

19.170.140    Permitted signs within village mixed use (VMU) zone.

19.170.150    Permitted signs within industrial zones (GI).

19.170.160    Sidewalk A-board signs.

19.170.170    Abatement of prohibited, substandard and dangerous signs.

19.170.180    Maintenance.


19.170.010 Purpose/application.

It is the city’s policy to protect the public interest by promoting signs through regulations that:

A. Protect the public health and safety.

B. Maintain a balance between the need to identify sites and activities, and the negative impact on community image created by visual clutter.

C. Are content-neutral, acknowledging that signs are a protected form of speech under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.

D. Provide residents and business owners with ample opportunities and alternatives to communicate messages through signage. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.170.020 Definitions.

“A-board sign” means a double-faced portable sign constructed with an A-shaped frame, composed of two sign boards attached at the top and separate at the bottom, and not supported by a structure in the ground.

“Abandoned sign” means a sign structure not containing a sign for 120 continuous days or a sign not in use for 120 continuous days.

“Accessory sign” means a sign which is an integral part of outdoor accessory or display structures.

“Athletic field sign” means a sign placed on the interior of an athletic field fence or wall so as to be viewed from within the athletic facility.

“Awning sign” means a sign incorporated into or attached to an awning.

“Balloon sign” means any three-dimensional ambient air-filled object, or to which a temporary sign has been attached, or to which a sign has been incorporated.

“Banner sign” means a temporary sign made of fabric or other nonrigid material with or without an enclosing framework.

“Bench sign” means a sign that is displayed on a structure designed for sitting and displayed out of doors in view of the general public.

“Billboard sign” means a freestanding sign over 200 square feet and with display surface or surfaces primarily designed for the purpose of painting or posting a message thereon at periodic intervals.

“Canopy” means a permanent decorative porch or walkway cover other than an awning which is attached to a building.

“Direct illumination” means exposed lighting or neon tube on the sign face.

“Directional sign” means a permanent sign which is designed and installed solely for the purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction and placed on the property to which the persons are directed.

“Directory sign” means a sign listing the names, and/or use, and/or location of the various businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings.

“Door sign” means any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof that is placed on, painted, or affixed to a door.

“Electronic message center” means signs whose message or display is presented with patterns of lights that may be changed at intermittent intervals by an electronic process.

“Facade” means the building elevation that faces the street upon which the building is addressed, or is otherwise understood to be the front of the building through common usage of the term “front.” Buildings located at the corner of intersecting streets have two facades with one facade on each street frontage.

“Fascia sign” means a single-faced sign attached flush to a building.

“Fin sign” means a sign which is supported by a pole or poles and partly by a building.

“Flag” means a rectangular piece of fabric or other material of distinctive design, used as a symbol.

“Flashing” means an intermittent or sequential light source used primarily to attract attention.

“Flashing sign” means lights which blink on and off randomly or in sequence.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign on a frame, pole or other support structure which is not attached to any building. Includes monument, pole, and directory signs.
[IMAGE]


“Ground story” means the vertical space between the ground elevation around the building and the elevation of the second floor deck.

“Hazardous sign” means a sign that is hazardous either directly through its structural design or indirectly through distracting or confusing features or functions that are visible from a right-of-way, private roadway, or other property.

“Illuminated awning sign” means a sign made of a translucent, flexible covering designed in awning form. Such signs are internally illuminated.

“Indirect illumination” means the light source is separate from the sign face or cabinet and is directed so as to shine on the sign.

“Internal illumination” means the light source is concealed within the sign.

“Lawn sign” means a temporary freestanding sign that is supported by a frame, pole or other structure placed directly in or upon the ground, wall or window.

“Mansard wall sign” means any sign placed on a building with an actual or false roof which does not vary more than 30 degrees from the vertical. Such mansard wall shall extend along the full width of the building.

“Moving parts” means features or parts of a sign structure which through mechanical means are intended to move, swing or have some action.

“Municipal sign” means a sign placed by a municipality.

“Nonconforming sign” means a sign or sign structure lawfully installed and properly maintained that would not be allowed under the sign regulations presently applicable to the site.

“Outdoor advertising sign” means a sign supported by a substantial permanent sign structure with a display surface or display surfaces.

“Painted highlights” means painted areas which highlight a building’s architectural or structural features.

“Painted wall decoration” means displays painted directly on a wall and are designed and intended as decorative or ornamental.

“Painted wall sign” means a sign applied to a building wall with paint and which has no sign structure.

“Pennant sign” means a triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other material, commonly attached in strings or strands, or supported on small poles.

“Permanent sign” means a sign attached to a building, structure or the ground in some manner requiring a permit and made of materials intended for more than short-term use.

“Portable sign” means a sign designed to be transported which can be freestanding and unattached or temporarily or permanently attached to the ground, structures or other signs.

“Projecting sign” means a sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or wall and generally at right angles to the building. Projecting signs include signs projecting totally in the right-of-way, partially in the right-of-way and fully on private property.

“Readerboard sign” means a sign on which message copy can be changed manually, in the field, through the utilization of attachable letters, numbers, symbols and other similar characters or changeable pictorial panels.

“Roof line” means the lower edge of the roof or top of the parapet, whichever forms the top lines of the building wall.

“Roof sign” means a sign installed upon, against or directly above a roof, or roof eave, or on top of or above the parapet, or on a nonfunctional architectural appendage above the roof or roof eave.

“Rotating sign” means sign faces or portions of a sign face which revolve around a central axis.

“Scroll” means the continuous movement of a message on an electronic message center in a horizontal, vertical or diagonal direction.

“Sign” means materials placed or constructed primarily to convey a message or other display to identify sites and activities and which can be viewed from right-of-way, private roadway or another property.

“Sign face” means the display portion of a sign.

“Sign installation” means erecting, constructing, reconstructing, placing, altering, changing the sign face, relocating, suspending, attaching and the installation of electrical parts, wiring or illumination of any sign. However, installation shall not include changes in copy of a readerboard or outdoor advertising sign or of the removable panels of on-site directory signs.

“Sign maintenance” means normal care needed to keep a sign functional such as cleaning, oiling and changing of light bulbs.

“Sign repair” means fixing or replacement of broken or worn parts. Replacement is of comparable materials only. Repairs may be made with the sign in position or with the sign removed.

“Sign structure” means a structure specifically intended for supporting or containing a sign.

“Site” means the area, tract, parcel or lot of land.

“Special event banner sign” means a banner sign that is temporarily displayed over a right-of-way for a limited period of time.

“Structural alteration” means modification of the size, shape or height of a sign structure. Also includes replacement of sign structure materials with other comparable materials, for example, metal parts replacing wood parts.

“Suspended sign” means a sign which is attached to the underside of a canopy or awning and is supported by the canopy or awning.
[IMAGE]


“Temporary sign” means any sign, regardless of construction material, that is not permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground.

“Unsafe sign” means any sign determined to be a hazard to the public by the building official or authorized representative.

“Upper story” means the vertical space between the floor and ceiling elevation of any story located above the ground story.

“Wall sign” means any sign painted on or attached to a building wall.
[IMAGE]


“Wind sign” means any attention-getting device or series of devices such as streamers, banners and pennants designed and fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subject to pressure by the atmosphere.

“Window sign” means any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, that is placed, painted, or affixed to a window, upon the interior or exterior face of window panes, or mounted to the interior window frame, or otherwise located within 24 inches of the window interior.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.170.030)


19.170.030 Sign permit required.

Sign permits are subject to a Type I review process. Building and electrical permits and corresponding inspections may be required based on size and weight requirements.

A. Permanent Sign Permit Application.

1. Sign Permit Form. Application for a sign permit shall be made on the sign permit application form provided by the city.

2. Administrative Approval. Completed sign permit applications must be approved by the community development director or designee. Incomplete sign permit applications are subject to denial.

3. Plans. The applicant shall submit two copies of plans. These plans must be detailed enough to show compliance with all applicable sign regulations. The plan is to include:

a. A drawing to scale showing the design of the sign, including dimension, sign size, method of attachment, source of illumination and showing the relationship to any building or structure to which it is, or is proposed to be, installed or affixed, or to which it relates, to include elevations.

b. A fully dimensioned plot plan, drawn to scale, indicating the location of the sign relative to property line, rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, vehicle area and other buildings or structures on the premises.

c. The maximum and minimum heights and clearances of the sign.

d. Number, size and location of all existing signs on the same building, lot or premises.

e. For signs requiring a building/electrical permit. Provide structural and mechanical design and engineering data sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable Oregon Specialty Codes.

B. Temporary Sign Permit Application. All temporary signs larger than eight square feet in area require a temporary sign permit.

1. Application. Applicants shall submit an application form, to be provided by the city, for all temporary signs greater than eight square feet. The applicant shall indicate the size and proposed location of the temporary sign.

2. Permit Sticker Required. Upon approval, a city-issued sticker, indicating the date of placement and the date the sign is to be removed, shall be placed on the sign face of the approved temporary sign. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.170.040)


19.170.040 Design standards.

A. Measurements.

1. Sign Area.

a. The area of sign faces enclosed in frames or cabinets is determined based on display area of the sign (see Figure 1). Sign area does not include masonry walls, rocks, foundations, supports or other essential structures which are not serving as a backdrop or border to the sign. Only one face of a double-faced sign is counted. If a sign has more than two faces, the total area may not exceed twice the area permitted.

Figure 1
[IMAGE]


b. When a sign is on a base material and attached without a frame, such as wood board or Plexiglas panel, the dimensions of the base material are to be used unless it is clear that part of the base contains no sign, related display or decoration.

c. When signs are constructed of individual pieces attached to a building wall, sign area is determined by a perimeter drawn (the greater height multiplied by the greater width) around all the pieces.

d. For sign structures containing multiple modules oriented in the same direction, the modules together are counted as one sign face (see Figure 2).

Figure 2
[IMAGE]


e. The maximum surface area visible at one time of a round or three-dimensional sign is counted to determine sign area.

f. When signs are incorporated into awnings, the entire panel containing the sign is counted as the sign face unless it is clear that part of the panel contains no sign, related display or decoration.

g. The area of an illuminated awning sign shall be calculated as a sign incorporated into an awning except that an illuminated face of the awning shall not exceed three times the sign area allowed.

h. The area of a window sign is measured along the outer frame of the window where it meets the wall. Window signs are to be measured by the outermost dimensions of text and graphics.

2. Sign Height. The overall height of a sign or sign structure is measured from the average grade directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign or sign structure.

3. Sign Clearance. Clearances are measured from the average grade directly below the sign to the bottom of the sign structure enclosing the sign face.

4. Building Height Method of Measurement. Building height is measured as the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

a. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade.

b. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (A)(4)(a) of this section is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.

B. Placement.

1. Placement. All signs and sign structures shall be erected and attached totally within the site except when allowed to extend into or over the right-of-way pursuant to Chapter 12.45 FMC.

a. Signs Permitted within the Right-of-Way. Signs located within city of Fairview right-of-way require a right-of-way permit unless otherwise stated in this chapter. Signs placed in Multnomah County right-of-way may require a permit from the county.

i. Municipal signs.

ii. A-board signs in accordance with FMC 19.170.090(B)(5) and 19.170.160.

iii. A right-of-way permit may be granted for the placement of a temporary sign in accordance with Chapter 12.45 FMC when there is no required front yard on a property.

iv. Signs associated with a public works project placed by a utility company or a licensed contractor.

2. Frontages. Signs allowed based on the length of one site frontage may not be placed on another site frontage. Signs allowed based on a building frontage may not be placed on another building frontage.

3. Clear Vision Area. No sign shall be located in the clear vision area as defined in FMC 19.162.020(O). No support structure(s) shall be located in the clear vision area unless the combined total width is 12 inches or less and the combined total depth is 12 inches or less.

4. Vehicle Area Clearances. When a sign extends over an area where vehicles travel or are parked, there shall be a minimum 14-foot clearance. Exception: The bottom of an electric sign or an outline lighting enclosure shall have not less than a 16-foot clearance unless such enclosures are protected from physical damage. In no cases shall the vehicle area clearance be less than 14 feet. Vehicle areas include driveways, alleys, parking lots and loading and maneuvering areas.

5. Pedestrian Area Clearances. When a sign extends over private sidewalk, walkways or other spaces accessible to pedestrians, there shall be a minimum of seven feet clearance.

6. Required Yards. Signs may be erected in required yards.

C. Sign Types. All permanent signs require a sign permit in accordance with FMC 19.170.030 and shall be in compliance with FMC 19.170.110 through 19.170.140.

1. Fascia Sign. No point of a fascia sign may extend more than 18 inches from the wall to which it is attached, except for permitted electronic message signs, which may be up to 24 inches in thickness. Fascia signs may not extend beyond the corners of buildings.

2. Projecting Sign. The support structure for a projecting sign shall be designed so that there is the minimum visible support structure above the sign face. There shall be no more than one foot of support structure between the building wall and the sign. Projecting signs may extend into the right-of-way two feet except no portion of the sign shall be closer than 30 feet from the centerline of an existing right-of-way.

3. Freestanding Sign.

a. Freestanding signs shall not extend into the right-of-way.

b. Signs shall comply with clear vision requirements per FMC 19.162.020(O).

c. Signs shall meet vehicle area and pedestrian area clearance requirements per subsection B of this section.

4. Suspended Signs and Awnings.

a. Signs may be placed on or incorporated into canopies and awnings; provided they do not extend above the upper surfaces of the structure.

b. Canopies and awnings containing signs may extend into the right-of-way two feet except no portion of the sign shall be closer than 30 feet from the centerline of an existing right-of-way.

5. Illuminated Awning Sign.

a. Illuminated awning signs may extend into the right-of-way the same distance as is allowed for awnings.

b. The projection of an illuminated awning sign shall not be less than three feet.

c. An illuminated awning sign may only be placed on a wall facing a street or adjacent to a pedestrian walkway. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.170.050)


19.170.050 Signing of nonconforming uses.

The following provisions for signs apply when a use has been found to lawfully exist within the provisions of Chapter 19.530 FMC; however, no sign is allowed to exceed the requirements set forth in the zoning district where the subject nonconforming use would be a permitted use:

A. Freestanding Sign. Any existing freestanding sign on the premises of a nonconforming use can be maintained, improved or relocated on the premises provided the change does not increase the total sign area or the height of the existing sign.

B. Wall Sign. Any existing wall sign on the premises of a nonconforming use can be maintained, improved or relocated on the premises provided the maximum area does not exceed five percent of the wall area the sign is located on. Only one wall sign shall be permitted.

C. Projecting Sign. Any existing projecting sign on the premises of a nonconforming use can be maintained, improved, or relocated on the premises provided the change does not increase the total sign area or the height of the existing sign.

D. Readerboard. A permanent readerboard may be incorporated into any one, but no more, of the above permitted signs provided the readerboard assembly is integral to the sign, does not exceed 40 inches in height and constitutes no more than 60 percent of the face of the sign.

E. Replacement. Existing signs for nonconforming uses found in commercial and industrial zones may be replaced by signs as allowed in that section. Existing signs for nonconforming uses found in the residential zones may be replaced with signs as allowed in that section.

F. Billboard Signs. Billboard signs existing at the effective date of the ordinance adopted July 10, 2010, shall be permitted to remain and be maintained in reasonable repair, but may not be replaced, relocated, enlarged, or otherwise structurally modified. Changes in message shall not affect nonconforming status. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.170.060)


19.170.060 Nonconforming signs.

A. Nonconforming signs are signs installed prior to July 7, 2010, which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter.

B. Permanent signs made nonconforming by changes to this chapter will be permitted to remain subject to sign maintenance standards in FMC 19.170.180.

C. Any nonconforming temporary sign installed prior to July 7, 2010, which does not comply with this chapter shall be made to comply, or be removed by January 7, 2011.

D. Changes in copy on readerboards or outdoor advertising signs are permitted without loss of nonconforming status. On-site or off-site repairing or restoring of any part of a sign or sign structure to a safe condition, including normal maintenance, is permitted without loss of nonconforming status. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.170.110)


19.170.070 Hardship relief.

A. Hardship relief may be requested from the planning commission for all sign regulations except for prohibited signs.

B. Requests for hardship relief shall be reviewed in accordance with variance procedures in Chapter 19.520 FMC.

C. Applicants may request a “street closure” sign variance from the city administrator or designee where the visibility of an existing sign is obstructed as a result of a public works project.

1. A variance from sign regulations for the underlying zone may be requested from the city administrator or designee for temporary alternatives to the location, size or form of sign if it meets the following standards:

a. The proposed sign may not exceed 50 percent of the maximum allowed size requirements for signs in the underlying zone.

b. The sign may not be hazardous to surrounding properties, motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians.

c. The sign may only be displayed for the duration of the hardship or until the public works project is complete.

d. A right-of-way permit shall be required in accordance with Chapter 12.45 FMC if the proposed sign is to be located within the city right-of-way.

e. The sign shall be subject to all other applicable regulations in this chapter unless otherwise specified.

2. The “street closure” sign variance process shall follow a Type I review process.

a. The applicant shall submit a written request to the city administrator or designee requesting a street closure sign variance demonstrating compliance with the approval criteria in subsection (C)(1) of this section and a site map showing the location of the proposed sign.

D. Hardship relief for billboards displaced by public improvement projects may be requested from the planning commission and shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 19.520 FMC. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.170.080 Exemptions.

A. Exempt Signs. Except for signs prohibited by FMC 19.170.100, the following signs are exempt from the provisions of the Fairview sign code:

1. Signs placed in the right-of-way authorized by the city or other jurisdiction responsible for the right-of-way.

2. Signs provided to give notice in accordance with FMC 8.30.110(B), private property impounds.

3. Signs required by law, administrative order, or judicial order.

B. Signs Exempt from Permitting Requirements in FMC 19.170.030. The following signs do not require a permit but must conform to all other applicable provisions of this chapter:

1. Permanent signs not exceeding three square feet in area in all zones except single-family residential.

2. Nonilluminated signs not exceeding two square feet in area in single-family residential zones.

3. Temporary signs not exceeding eight square feet in area.

4. Signs cut into any masonry surface, or constructed of bronze or other noncombustible surface not to exceed eight square feet in area.

5. Flags displayed from permanently located freestanding or wall-mounted flagpoles designed to allow raising and lowering of flags. Flags shall be limited to one per 100 feet of linear frontage, with a maximum of six per premises. Such displays shall be kept neat, clean and in good repair.

6. Painted wall decorations and painted wall highlights. 

7. One time clock and/or scoreboard sign shall be permitted at each athletic field. Such signs shall have a maximum height of 15 feet above grade. 

8. Athletic Field Signs. Banner signs located on athletic field fences may be installed so as to be oriented towards the interior of the athletic field. Each individual sign shall be no more than 32 square feet in area. There shall be no more than 32 square feet of area for any eight linear feet of fence. The maximum height shall not exceed eight feet above grade. The sign shall not project above the fence.

9. Accessory signs within a commercial or industrial zone which are permanent and an internal part of permitted outdoor accessory or display structures (i.e., soft drink machines, fuel pumps and newspaper dispensers, etc.).

10. Signs placed by a utility company or licensed contractor or placed on private property.

11. Pennants.

a. May not obstruct sidewalks or driveways.

b. May not be placed in the right-of-way.

c. Pole on which pennant is attached may not exceed 15 feet in height.

d. Area of pennant may not exceed 24 square feet.

e. One pennant allowed per 100 feet of site frontage with a maximum of six pennants per frontage.

f. Pennant and structure to which pennant is attached must be properly secured to prevent property damage or personal injury due to movement by wind or other physical force.

g. Pennants must be properly maintained; any torn or tattered pennants must be removed or replaced immediately.

h. Prohibited in single-family residential zones (R, R-7.5, R-10, R/SFLD, VSF, VTH). (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.170.090 Temporary signs.

Temporary signs are prohibited signs except as provided in this section.

A. General Requirements.

1. Illumination. No temporary sign shall be internally or externally illuminated.

2. Location. No temporary sign shall extend into or over a public right-of-way or into a clear vision area except as otherwise allowed in this chapter.

3. Maintenance. Temporary signs shall be kept neat, clean and in good repair. Materials used should not fade, tear, rip or otherwise become unsightly during the period of installation.

4. Placement. Temporary signs may not be attached to trees, shrubbery, utility poles, or like items. They shall not obstruct or obscure primary signs on adjacent premises. They shall not create a traffic hazard. Temporary signs are subject to clear vision requirements per FMC 19.162.020(O).

5. Duration. Temporary signs may be displayed for no more than 180 days within any 365-day period.

6. Permit Required. Temporary signs greater than eight square feet in area require a temporary sign permit in accordance with FMC 19.170.030(B).

B. Sign Types.

1. Lawn Signs. Lawn signs shall be pole-mounted lawn signs and must be removed within 180 days of the date of installation. Pole-mounted and wall-mounted lawn signs shall not exceed 60 inches in height in residential zones and eight feet in height in commercial and industrial zones.

2. Balloon Signs. One balloon sign per site is permitted provided the balloon is ground-mounted or roof-mounted and air-filled. A ground-mounted balloon sign shall be no more than 25 feet above grade with a roof-mounted balloon sign being no more than 25 feet above the roof top. The display period is limited to a total of 30 days per year.

3. Banner Signs. One banner sign attached to a building wall per building frontage per street frontage may be permitted. Such banner sign(s) is limited to 32 square feet in area. Banner signs larger than eight square feet in area shall require a temporary sign permit and be removed within six months of placement.

4. Special Event Banner Signs. Permitted in all land use zones consistent with the following criteria:

a. Written consent from any property owner(s) where the banner will be attached. The consent shall identify any restrictions that the property owner may require.

b. Plans showing the location of the banner, height above the right-of-way, support devices for the banner, and proposed dates.

c. Not exceeding 25 consecutive days in duration and for no more than once in any 12-month period.

d. A copy of any liability and/or property damage insurance required by the property owner where the banner will be located.

5. Limited Duration A-Board Signs. Permitted only in residential and village mixed use zones when in conformance with the following criteria:

a. Placement of a sign is limited to 7:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m.

b. Signs are subject to size and clearance standards for sidewalk A-board signs in FMC 19.170.160. 

c. Limited duration A-board signs may be placed no closer than 40 feet to another limited duration A-board sign. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.170.100 Prohibited signs.

It shall be unlawful for any person to install, display or maintain any sign falling within any of the following descriptions:

A. Hazardous Signs. The following signs are identified as hazardous either as a result of, either directly through their structural design or indirectly through distracting or confusing features or functions visible from a right-of-way, private roadway, or other property:

1. Moving signs, including rotating signs and wind signs, or any sign which has any visible moving part or visible mechanical movement of any description, including movement created by normal wind currents. Clocks and barber poles are exceptions.

2. Flashing signs, or any signs which achieve apparent movement through electrical pulsations, including strobe lights and bead lighting.

3. Signs obstructing free and clear vision of the traveling public at the intersection of any street or driveway.

4. Signs that interfere with the traveling public’s perception of official traffic controls which are otherwise designed or are used in a manner reasonably likely to distract or confuse vehicle operators.

5. Exception electronic message center signs, any sign(s) incorporating reflective-type bulbs, or par spot bulbs, or directly visible bulbs of greater than 25 watts capacity. Electronic message center signs are exceptions.

6. Signs incorporating white or blue neon tubing that exceeds 300 milliamperes rating, or other neon tubing that exceeds 120 milliamperes rating.

7. Signs incorporating fluorescent tubing that exceeds an illumination equivalent of 800 milliamperes rating, or a spacing of less than nine inches, center to center.

8. Signs obstructing in any way a fire escape, stairway or standpipe, or that interfere with human exit through a window or any room located above the first floor of any building, or any door required exit from a building, or required light or ventilation source.

9. Signs in the public right-of-way, other than government owned or managed signs, unless otherwise specifically allowed herein.

B. Other Prohibited Signs. The following signs are identified as having unnecessary and adverse visual impact on the community:

1. Roof signs, fin signs, or any sign structure attached to a building not conforming to the standards contained in this section.

2. Temporary signs, bench signs, banners, pennants, wind signs, balloon signs, flags not conforming to the sign standards contained in this section.

3. Nonconforming signs that have been modified in a manner which is not consistent with this section.

4. Billboard signs except as provided by FMC 19.170.050 and 19.170.070. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-2009 § 3 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.170.110 Allowed signs within residential zones.

All signs shall comply with permitting requirements in FMC 19.170.030 and design standards in FMC 19.170.040.

A. Permitted Signs within Single-Family Residential Zones (R, R-7.5, R-10, R/SFLD, VTH and VSF).

	Type	Area	Height	Number	Illumination

	Freestanding (sign(s) may only be placed at entrance(s) to subdivision)	32 square feet	4 feet	1 if subdivision < 40 units.	External only. 7:00 a.m. – 12:00 midnight.

	2 if subdivision > 40 units.

	Temporary Signs	See FMC 19.170.110(C)

B. Permitted Signs within Multifamily Zones (R/MF, R/MH, R/MF/TOZ, and VA).

	Type	Area	Height	Number	Illumination

	Multi-Dwelling Signs	 	 	 	 

	Freestanding	32 square feet total permitted area per site frontage.	8 feet	No limit if within the maximum total allowed area.	External or internal if illumination confined to the lettering and logo.

	Wall (fascia, awning and painted wall signs are permitted)	Sign area may not exceed 10% of the wall area on which the sign is placed.	May not extend above the roofline.	No limit if within the maximum total allowed area.	None.

	Commercial Use Permitted in the R/MF Zone	 	 	 	 

	Wall (fascia, awning and painted wall signs permitted).	10% of wall area.	25 feet	1 per site frontage.	Internal if illumination is confined to the lettering and logo.

	** A readerboard may be incorporated into the sign and may be 40 inches in height and no more than 60% of the sign face.	Duration of illumination limited to 7:00 a.m. – 12:00 midnight unless commercial use is operated on a 24-hour basis.

	Window/Door Sign	Window signs may not exceed 25% of the total window area.	None	No limit on number if within the total permitted area limit.	N/A

	Projecting	18 square feet per sign face.	Shall not extend above the roof line.	1 per site frontage.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Max of 25 feet above grade.

	Minimum clearance of 7 feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground.

	May extend into the right-of-way 2 feet. No portion of the sign shall be closer than 30 feet from the centerline of adjacent right-of-way.

	Suspended	6 square feet	Clearance – 7 feet	1 sign per business	None

	Temporary Signs	See FMC 19.170.110(C) 

C. Temporary Signs Allowed in All Residential Zones. Pursuant to FMC 19.170.030(B) and 19.170.090, the following temporary signs shall be permitted:

	Type	Area	Height	Number	Duration

	Lawn Sign (single-family residential)	12 square feet total permitted area. No sign face may be greater than 3 square feet.	60 inches	No number limit if within the maximum area limit.	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.*, **

	Lawn Sign (multifamily residential, commercial use in R/MF zone)	64 square feet total permitted area. No sign face may be greater than 32 square feet.	8 feet	No number restriction if within the total allowed area limit.	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Banner Sign (multifamily zones and commercial use in R/MF only)	64 square feet. No sign face may be greater than 32 square feet.	N/A	No number limit if within the maximum area limit.	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Limited Duration Event A-Board Sign	24 inches wide.	42 inches standing height	2 per major intersection within one-half mile of event. 1 on sidewalk within one block of event.	7:00 a.m. – 9:00 p.m. on the day of the event. Signs must be removed promptly after the event.

	* Temporary signs posted on a property for sale/lease shall be removed within 15 days of the sale/lease of the property.

	** Temporary signs posted on a property where a garage sale is occurring shall be permitted in accordance with FMC 5.60.030.

(Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.170.130)


19.170.120 Permitted signs within community service parks (CSP) zone.

All signs shall comply with permitting requirements in FMC 19.170.030 and design standards in FMC 19.170.040.

A. Permitted Signs within the Community Service Parks (CSP) Zone.

	Type	Area	Height	Number	Illumination

	Freestanding	0.4 square feet of sign face area per linear foot of site frontage.	25 feet above grade	No limit on number if within the total maximum area.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	1 sign: Maximum sign face area of 100 square feet.	 

	More than one sign: Maximum sign face area of 80 square feet.	Minimum 200-foot separation between signs.

	Sites with less than 100 feet frontage: 40 square feet.	 

	Freestanding directional sign	8 square feet	4 feet above grade	1 per driveway.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Wall Sign (fascia and painted wall signs permitted)	Sign area may not exceed 10% of the wall area on which the sign is placed.	May not extend above the roof line.	No number restriction if within the maximum area limit.	External or internal if illumination is confined to the lettering and logo.

	Window/Door Sign	Window signs may not exceed 25% of the total window area.	None	No limit on number if within the total permitted area limit.	N/A

	Projecting	18 square feet per sign face.	Shall not extend above the roof line.	1 per site frontage.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Max. of 25 feet above grade.

	Minimum clearance of 7 feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground.

	May extend into the right-of-way 2 feet. No portion of the sign shall be closer than 30 feet from the centerline of adjacent right-of-way.

	Suspended	6 square feet	Clearance – 7 feet	1 sign per business.	None

B. Temporary Signs. Pursuant to FMC 19.170.030(B) and 19.170.090 the following temporary signs shall be permitted.

	Type	Area	Height	Number	Duration*

	Lawn Sign	64 square feet total permitted area. No sign face may be greater than 32 square feet.	8 feet	No number restriction if within the total allowed area limit.	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Banner Sign	64 square feet total permitted area.	N/A	No number restriction if within the total allowed area limit.	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	No sign face may exceed 32 square feet.

	Limited Duration Event A-Board Sign	24 inches wide	42 inches standing height	2 per major intersection within one-half mile of event. 1 on sidewalk within one block of event.	7:00 a.m. – 9:00 p.m. on the day of the event. Signs must be removed promptly after the event.

	* Temporary signs posted on a property for sale/lease shall be removed within 15 days of the sale/lease of the property.

C. Sign Features.

1. Illumination. Signs may be indirectly or internally illuminated.

2. Readerboard. A permanent readerboard may be incorporated either in a freestanding sign or wall sign, but not both. The readerboard shall be an integral part of the sign design and shall not exceed 40 inches in height. Not permitted in the single-family residential zone.

3. Electronic Message Center. An electronic message center may be incorporated into either a freestanding sign or wall sign, but not both. The electronic message center shall be an integral part of the sign design.

a. The display of messages shall conform to the following standards:

i. Messages may scroll across the electronic message center.

ii. Flashing messages are prohibited.

b. For school sites located on arterial streets:

i. The maximum allowed area of an electronic message center incorporated into a wall sign is 18 square feet.

ii. The maximum allowed area of an electronic message center incorporated into a freestanding sign is limited to no more than 25 percent of the total allowed area per sign face with a minimum entitlement of eight square feet.

iii. Electronic message centers greater than eight square feet shall be located no less than 150 feet from an adjacent residential use and shall be oriented towards the street.

c. For all other sites in the community service parks (CSP) zone:

i. The maximum allowed area of an electronic message center incorporated into either a freestanding sign or a wall sign is eight square feet. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1))


19.170.130 Permitted signs within commercial and light industrial zones (CC, TCC, NC, LI, VO, and VC).

All signs shall comply with permitting requirements in FMC 19.170.030 and design standards in FMC 19.170.040.

A. Permitted Signs within Commercial and Light Industrial Zones.

	Type	Area	Height/Clearance	Number	Illumination

	Freestanding (CC, NC, TCC and LI only)	0.4 square feet of sign face area per linear foot of site frontage up to a maximum sign face area of 100 square feet.	25 feet above grade or the height of the building, whichever is greater, up to a maximum of 45 feet.	No limit on number if within the total maximum area.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Sites are entitled to a minimum of 40 square feet regardless of site frontage.

	Freestanding directional sign	8 square feet	4 feet above grade	1 per driveway.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Wall (fascia, mansard wall, awning, illuminated awning, marquee and painted wall signs)	Maximum permitted area shall be 10% of the wall area on which the sign is placed.	Shall not extend above the roof line.	No limit on number if within the total permitted area limit.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Window/Door Sign	Window signs may not exceed 25% of the total window area.	None	No limit on number if within the total permitted area limit.	Internal illumination only.

	Projecting	18 square feet per sign face.	Shall not extend above the roof line.	1 per business frontage.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Max. of 25 feet above grade.

	Minimum clearance of 7 feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground.

	May extend into the right-of-way 2 feet. No portion of the sign shall be closer than 30 feet from the centerline of adjacent right-of-way.

	Suspended	6 square feet	Clearance – 7 feet	1 per business frontage.	None

B. Temporary Signs. Pursuant to FMC 19.170.030(B) and 19.170.090, the following temporary signs shall be permitted.

	Type	Area	Height	Number	Duration*

	Lawn Sign	64 square feet total permitted area. No sign face may be greater than 32 square feet.	8 feet	No number restriction if within the total allowed area limit.**	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Banner Sign	32 square feet total permitted area.	N/A	No number restriction if within the total allowed area limit.	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Balloon Sign	N/A	25 feet	1	Display limited to 30 days in a year.

	* Temporary signs posted on a property for sale/lease shall be removed within 15 days of the sale/lease of the property.

	** Lawn signs on the same frontage shall be spaced at least 50 feet apart.

C. Sign Features.

1. Illumination. Signs may be indirectly or internally illuminated.

2. Readerboard. A permanent readerboard may be incorporated either in a freestanding sign or wall sign but not both. The readerboard shall be an integral part of the sign design and shall not exceed 40 inches in height.

3. Electronic Message Center. An electronic message center may be incorporated into either a freestanding sign or wall sign, but not both. The electronic message center shall be an integral part of the sign design.

a. The display of messages shall conform to the following standards:

i. Messages may scroll across the electronic message center.

ii. Flashing messages are prohibited.

b. The maximum allowed area of an electronic message center incorporated into a freestanding sign or wall sign is limited to no more than 25 percent of the total allowed area per sign face with a minimum entitlement of eight square feet.

c. Electronic message centers greater than eight square feet shall be located no less than 150 feet from an adjacent residential use and shall be oriented towards the street. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.170.140)


19.170.140 Permitted signs within village mixed use (VMU) zone.

All permanent signs are subject to permitting requirements in FMC 19.170.030.

A. Ground story and upper story signs may only be placed on the front elevation except for mixed use townhouses that have ground story doors or windows along driveways, walkways, or parking areas. In such cases window signs up to 25 percent of the total window area are allowed.

 

	Type	Area	Height/Clearance	Number	Illumination

	Fascia	Total area of all signs may not exceed 10% of the area of the ground story.*

Window and door signs may not exceed 25% of the total window/door area.

Maximum 4 square feet for signs located on side or rear elevations.	3-foot max. height.	No number restriction if within the maximum area allowed.	Internal only if confined to lettering and/or logo.

Duration of illumination limited to 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.

No illumination on signs located on side or rear elevations.

	Window	None.

	Door	None.

	Awning (materials limited to metal, glass, and/or fabric)	Maximum 4-foot projection from the wall to which the awning is attached.	1 per business frontage.

	Minimum clearance of 7 feet above finished grade.

	Projecting	7.5 square feet.	Maximum 4-foot vertical dimension.	1 per business frontage.	None permitted.

	Front elevation only.	Maximum 4-foot projection from the wall to which it is attached.

	Minimum clearance of 7 feet above finished grade.

	* Excludes projecting and A-board signs. 

Upper Story 

	Type	Area	Height/Clearance	Number	Illumination

	Fascia	The total area of all signs may not exceed 10% of the area of the upper story.	Sign(s) may not extend beyond the corners of the top of the building.	No number restriction if within the maximum area allowed.	None permitted.

	Maximum 4 square feet for signs located on side or rear elevations.

	Window Sign	Window signs may not exceed 25% of the total window area.	None	No limit on number if within the total permitted area limit.	N/A

	Maximum 4 square feet for signs located on side or rear elevations.

B. Temporary Signs. Pursuant to FMC 19.170.030(B) and 19.170.090 the following temporary signs shall be permitted:

	Type	Area	Height	Number	Duration*, **

	Lawn Sign	12 square feet total permitted area. No sign face may be greater than 3 square feet.	60 inches	No number restriction if within the total allowed area limit.	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Banner Sign	16 square feet	N/A	1	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Limited Duration Event A-Board Sign	24 inches wide	42 inches standing height	2 per major intersection within one-half mile of event. 1 on sidewalk within one block of event.	7:00 a.m. – 9:00 p.m. on the day of the event. Signs must be removed promptly after the event.

	* Temporary signs posted on a property for sale/lease shall be removed within 15 days of the sale/lease of the property.

	** Temporary signs posted on a property where a garage sale is occurring shall be permitted in accordance with FMC 5.60.030. 

C. Prohibited Signs.

1. Painted wall signs (without sign structure).

2. Roof signs.

3. Painted wall decorations.

4. Readerboards.

5. Flashing signs.

6. Bench signs. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1))


19.170.150 Permitted signs within industrial zones (GI).

All signs shall comply with permitting requirements in FMC 19.170.030 and design standards in FMC 19.170.040.

A. Permitted Signs in the General Industrial (GI) Zone.

	Type	Area	Height/Clearance	Number	Illumination

	Freestanding	0.4 square feet of sign face area per linear foot of site frontage up to a maximum sign face area of 100 square feet.	25 feet above grade or the height of the building, or whichever is greater, up to a maximum of 45 feet.	No limit on number if within the total maximum area.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Sites are entitled to a minimum of 40 square feet regardless of site frontage.

	Freestanding directional sign	8 square feet	4 feet above grade	1 per driveway.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Wall (fascia and painted wall signs)	Maximum permitted area shall be 10% of the wall area on which the sign is placed.	Shall not extend above the roof line.	No limit on number if within the total permitted area limit.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Window/Door Sign	Window signs may not exceed 25% of the total window area.	None	No limit on number if within the total permitted area limit.	N/A

	Projecting	18 square feet per sign face.	Shall not extend above the roof line.	1 per business frontage.	Internal or indirect external illumination.

	Max. of 25 feet above grade.

	Minimum clearance of 7 feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground.

	May extend into the right-of-way 2 feet. No portion of the sign shall be closer than 30 feet from the centerline of adjacent right-of-way.

	Suspended	6 square feet	Clearance – 7 feet	1 sign per business.	None

B. Temporary Signs Permitted in Industrial Zones. Pursuant to FMC 19.170.030(B) and 19.170.090 the following temporary signs shall be permitted:

	Type	Area	Height	Number	Duration*

	Lawn Sign	64 square feet total permitted area. No sign face may be greater than 32 square feet.	8 feet	No limit on number if within the permitted area limit.**	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Banner Sign	32 square feet total permitted area.	N/A	No limit on number if within the total permitted area limit.	Signs must be removed within 6 months of placement.

	Balloon Sign	N/A	25 feet	1	Display limited to 30 days in a year.

	* Temporary signs posted on a property for sale/lease shall be removed within 15 days of the sale/lease of the property.

	** Lawn signs on the same frontage shall be spaced at least 50 feet apart.

C. Sign Features.

1. Illumination. Signs may be indirectly or internally illuminated.

2. Readerboard. A permanent readerboard may be incorporated either in a freestanding sign or wall sign but not both. The readerboard shall be an integral part of the sign design and shall not exceed 40 inches in height.

3. Electronic Message Center. An electronic message center may be incorporated into either a freestanding sign or wall sign, but not both. The electronic message center shall be an integral part of the sign design.

a. The display of messages shall conform to the following standards:

i. Messages may scroll across the electronic message center.

ii. Flashing messages are prohibited.

b. The maximum allowed area of an electronic message center incorporated into a freestanding sign or wall sign is limited to no more than 25 percent of the total allowed area per sign face with a minimum entitlement of eight square feet.

c. Electronic message centers greater than eight square feet shall be located no less than 150 feet from an adjacent residential use and shall be oriented towards the street. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2011 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1))


19.170.160 Sidewalk A-board signs.

A. Intent. The intent of these regulations is to allow A-board signs in mixed use, commercial, and multifamily districts under certain conditions, maintaining an attractive commercial streetscape, providing adequate pedestrian access, ensuring that curbside parking is usable, and providing public safety.

B. Permit Required. A permit is required prior to placing an A-board sign on private property or within the public right-of-way. In the event a business closes or is sold, a new operation in the business space or the new business operator must apply for a new A-board sign permit.

C. A-Board Sign Permit Requirements. A-board sign applications will be processed within 10 business days of receipt. An A-board sign may not be placed until all of the following requirements have been met:

1. Submission of a complete application form, supporting materials, and application fee.

2. For signs to be located in the public right-of-way, a signed indemnification form as provided by the city and an approved right-of-way permit.

3. A permit authorizing placement of the sign has been issued by the community development director or designee.

D. Enforcement. Use of an A-board sign without an approved permit or in a manner that is inconsistent with these regulations is a violation of the Fairview Municipal Code. Repeat violations of these regulations may result in a six-month revocation of the permit. No permit shall be revoked without the community development director or designee first providing the permit holder a fair opportunity to correct the violation and providing a written warning that a repeat violation can result in revocation of the permit. This section does not limit enforcement through standard enforcement provisions of the Fairview Municipal Code.

E. Prohibitions.

1. A-board signs may not be used in residential districts excluding limited duration event signs in accordance with FMC 19.170.090(B)(5) and except when in association with legal nonconforming businesses.

2. A-board signs may not be used in association with home occupations.

3. Lights and attraction getting devices such as balloons, streamers, and flags may not be attached to an A-board sign.

4. A-board signs shall not be placed in a location that interferes with parking or vehicle circulation.

F. A-Board Sign Standards.

1. One A-board sign per storefront is allowed whether located on private property or within the public right-of-way.

2. The size of the A-board sign shall not exceed 24 inches wide by 42 inches standing height when the sign boards are in the open-standing position.

3. A-board signs must be located or otherwise secured to prevent property damage or personal injury due to movement of the sign by wind or other physical force.

4. A-board sign placement must meet clear vision requirements of FMC 19.162.020(O) for clear vision areas.

5. The area of the A-board is exempt from the total allowed sign area for the site.

G. Placement in Public Right-of-Way.

1. One A-board sign may be placed within a public right-of-way adjacent to premises by the person in control of those premises. A-board signs may only be placed outdoors between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.

2. A minimum five feet of unobstructed sidewalk clearance must be maintained. A-frame signs may be not placed on a sidewalk that is too narrow to maintain the required five-foot minimum clearance. A-board signs may not be placed on the paved portion of a public street. A-board signs shall not be placed in a location that interferes with parking.

H. Placement on Private Property.

1. A-board signs may be placed on private property located in mixed-use, commercial, and multifamily zoning districts. A-board signs may be used in residential districts in association with legal nonconforming businesses only.

2. A-board signs may only be displayed in front of premises at which a business is being conducted. A-board signs may be placed outdoors only during business hours of the business for which the sign was approved.

3. A minimum five feet of unobstructed sidewalk clearance must be maintained. A-frame signs may not be placed on a sidewalk that is too narrow to maintain the required five-foot minimum clearance. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-2009 § 5 (Att. 2))


19.170.170 Abatement of prohibited, substandard and dangerous signs.

Every prohibited sign as set forth under FMC 19.170.100 and those found to be unsafe are subject to immediate abatement by the city. Every sign identified by the city as being an abandoned and/or nonconforming sign is substandard and subject to abatement proceedings as set forth under Chapter 2.27 FMC. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 8-2009 § 4 (Att. 1))


19.170.180 Maintenance.

All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and maintained so as to be safe, free from rust, corrosion, or other surface deterioration or be subject to abatement procedures. (Ord. 2-2013 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 4-2012 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 2-2010 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.200 FAMILY DAY CARE PROVIDERS IN A RESIDENTIAL ZONE

Sections:

19.200.010    Purpose.

19.200.020    Operational standards.

19.200.030    Establishing and maintaining a family day care provider.

19.200.040    Appeal process.


19.200.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to provide for family day care providers in residential zones in a manner that will ensure that they are utilized only as accessory uses incidental to the primary residential use of the premises upon which they are located. A home occupation permit may be granted; provided the use is not inconsistent with or disruptive to the normal residential usage of the premises or causes external effects which are detrimental to neighboring properties or are incompatible with the characteristics of the residential zone. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.200.020 Operational standards.

Family day care providers shall be limited to those activities which are customarily carried on within a dwelling, and which are operated entirely within the principal dwelling by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit as a clearly secondary and incidental use of such a dwelling. The use must not change the residential character of the dwelling and shall meet all of the following conditions:

A. Fulfill all requirements for a day care facility as defined in ORS 418.805 and the state of Oregon Children’s Services Division (CSD) Rules for Certification.

B. Have no more children than allowed by state and county regulations for the size of facility in question.

C. Be permitted to operate at any time during a 24-hour period.

D. Be permitted to have children dropped off and picked up at any time during this 24-hour period, with due consideration to neighboring residents in regards to noise and traffic congestion. Children are to be escorted to (and from) the day care residence and the vehicle.

E. Be permitted to utilize more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit for day care as long as the dwelling remains consistent with the residential nature of the premises.

F. Need not be confined, contained and conducted within the dwelling in so far as outdoor play areas may be provided, which meet all standards of the CSD, and with due consideration to neighboring residents in regards to noise and activity. Field trips off the premises are to meet all requirements set by CSD.

G. No significant enlargement or alteration to a dwelling for the sole purpose of conducting a family day care provider facility shall be permitted that is inconsistent with the residential nature of the premises.

H. The premises shall at all times be maintained as residential in appearance, cleanliness and quietness.

I. Dimensions, power rating or weight of such equipment and tools used in the conduct of a family day care facility shall not exceed that of normal household equipment and tools.

J. There shall be no exterior indication of the family day care provider facility; no exterior signs shall be used; no other on-site advertising visible from the exterior shall be used which informs the public of the address of the home occupation. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.200.030 Establishing and maintaining a family day care provider.

A. Within 10 days after a permit is issued, notices of issuance of a home occupation permit shall be sent to all property owners and residents in the area bounded by lines 150 feet, excluding street widths, from and parallel to the boundary lines of the lot proposed to contain the family day care provider facility.

B. The city shall not issue a business license until a home occupation permit is issued. Copies of all certification from the Children’s Services Division are to be attached to the application form. Home occupation permits are valid until the end of the calendar year and are to be renewed by reapplication at the same time as the business license.

C. Permits for home occupations may be revoked at any time for failure to adhere to standards and conditions of approval for home occupation. If the business license of a home occupation permit holder is revoked, the home occupation permit may be reviewed for possible revocation, and vice versa.

D. A change in the characteristics of the use will require a new permit. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.200.040 Appeal process.

A. A decision of the staff to issue or revoke a home occupation permit may be appealed to the city council by an affected party by filing an appeal within 15 days of notice of this decision. The notice of appeal shall indicate the decision that is being appealed.

B. Any person may request staff to review a home occupation permit if evidence of noncompliance to this code is evident. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.205 AMENDMENTS

Sections:

19.205.010    Procedure.

19.205.020    Criteria.

19.205.030    Limitation on reapplication.

19.205.040    Effective dates.

19.205.050    Notice of ordinance or plan amendments.


19.205.010 Procedure.

A proposal to amend the zoning ordinance text or map may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission or a property owner who files an application with the city.

Amending the zoning ordinance text or map shall require a public hearing before both the planning commission and the city council. Mailed notice of hearing shall include the owners of the property within 250 feet of the subject parcel or parcels when the proposed amendment is site specific. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.205.020 Criteria.

Approval of an ordinance text or map amendment shall be based on finding that it complies with the following criteria:

A. The amendment will not interfere with the livability, development or value of other land in the vicinity of site-specific proposals when weighed against the public interest in granting the proposed amendment.

B. The amendment will not be detrimental to the general interests of the community.

C. The amendment will not violate the land use designations established by the comprehensive land use plan and map or related text.

D. The amendment will place all property similarly situated in the area in the same zoning designation or in appropriate complementary designations without creating inappropriate “spot zoning.” (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.205.030 Limitation on reapplication.

No application of a property owner for an ordinance text or map amendment shall be considered within the one-year period immediately following a denial of a request for the same property, except the hearing body may permit a new application upon making a determination that it is warranted because of new evidence or a change in circumstances. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.205.040 Effective dates.

An ordinance text or map amendment shall take effect 30 days after the date of approval, unless appealed or immediately where an emergency is declared to exist consistent with Section 33 of the City Charter. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.205.050 Notice of ordinance or plan amendments.

Type III decisions shall comply with the notice provisions of FMC 19.413.030. Type IV decisions shall comply with the provisions of FMC 19.413.040. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.230 MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARKS

Sections:

19.230.010    Purpose.

19.230.020    Manufactured/mobile home park standards.

19.230.030    Manufactured homes on individual building lots.

19.230.040    Nonconforming mobile homes.


19.230.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria for the placement of manufactured/mobile homes in mobile home parks and manufactured homes on individual building lots within the city of Fairview. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.230.020 Manufactured/mobile home park standards.

The design for the manufactured/mobile home park shall conform to all applicable state standards established by the state of Oregon. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.230.030 Manufactured homes on individual building lots.

The establishment, location, and use of manufactured homes as scattered site residences shall be permitted subject to pertinent covenants, conditions and restrictions in any zone permitting such use subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to such residential uses in the zone, and provided such homes shall meet the following requirements and limitations:

A. The manufactured home shall meet all requirements applicable to single-family dwellings and possess all necessary improvement, location, building, and occupancy permits and other certifications required by the title.

B. The manufactured home shall be larger than 1,000 square feet of occupied space or meet the minimum square footage requirements for the appropriate zone, whichever be the lesser.

C. All manufactured homes placed or located in a housing zone shall be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the regulations adopted by the Oregon Department of Commerce and with the manufacturer’s installation specifications.

D. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material, and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the city of Fairview planning commission.

E. The manufactured homes shall have a roof composed of a material customarily used on site-built residential dwellings such as asbestos, fiberglass, shake, asphalt, or tile, which shall be installed onto a surface appropriately pitched for the materials used. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.230.040 Nonconforming mobile homes.

A. Mobile home parks existing at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter not meeting the standards set forth in this title shall be considered nonconforming.

B. Mobile homes in such a park may be replaced but only with units that meet city standards existing at the time they are replaced. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.245 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:

19.245.010    Purpose.

19.245.020    Definitions.

19.245.030    Administration and enforcement.

19.245.040    Applicability.

19.245.050    Application procedure.

19.245.060    Design criteria.

19.245.070    Uses.


19.245.010 Purpose.

It is the city’s policy to protect the public interest by promoting telecommunications facilities in a way which:

A. Protects public health and safety.

B. Minimizes disruption of residential, natural, historical and environmentally sensitive areas.

C. Aesthetically complements the surrounding environment whenever possible.

D. Limits regulation of telecommunications providers and services, consistent with federal and state law.

E. Assures that all telecommunication providers’ facilities or services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

F. Assures that the city can continue to responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare.

G. Enables the city to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.245.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meaning.

A. “Amateur or ‘ham’ radio” means radio facilities operated for noncommercial purposes by individuals licensed by the Federal Communications Commission with an interest in construction and operation of radio equipment, usually as a hobby or vocation.

B. “Ancillary facilities” means structures and equipment required for the operation of telecommunications equipment, including, without limitation, antennas, repeaters, equipment housing structure, ventilation and other mechanical equipment.

C. “Antenna” means an electrical conductor or group of electrical conductors, commonly in the form of a metal rod, panel or dish, that transmit or receive radio waves, excluding amateur radio and television antennas, and is typically mounted on a tower, pole, mast or building.

D. “Applicant” means any person awaiting approval for a telecommunications facility and/or lease or other appropriate agreement.

E. “Building” means any structure capable of being used to support or shelter any use or occupancy.

F. “City” means the city of Fairview, Oregon.

G. “City property” means all real property owned or otherwise utilized by the city and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city and shall include all public ways and public facilities as defined herein.

H. “Co-location” means the placement of two or more antennas and/or telecommunications systems, platforms or facilities owned by FCC license holders on structures such as a support structure, building, water tank or utility pole.

I. “Direct-to-home satellite service” means the distribution or broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber’s premises without use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber’s premises or in the uplink process to the satellite.

J. “Emergency” means a condition of imminent danger to the health, safety and welfare of property or persons located within the city including, without limitation, possible damage to persons or property from human or naturally caused consequences.

K. “Overhead facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

L. “Person” includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and other entities or individuals authorized to do business in the state of Oregon.

M. “Planning commission” means the city of Fairview, Oregon, planning commission.

N. “Provider” shall have the same meaning as “telecommunications provider” as defined below.

O. “Public facilities” means all city owned properties including but not limited to buildings, water towers, poles, public streets, thoroughfares and utility easements and all other properties granted to the city, as those terms are defined herein, but only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or lease to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities.

P. “State” means the state of Oregon.

Q. “Telecommunications facilities” means commercial facilities designed and used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, and relaying voice and data signals from various wireless communication devices. For the purpose of this chapter, amateur radio transmission facilities and facilities used exclusively for the transmission or reception of television and radio signals are not telecommunications facilities.

R. “Telecommunications provider” means any person, association or organization which directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages equipment inside the city used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service.

S. “Telecommunications services” means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

T. “Telecommunications support structure” means a structure, tower, pole or mast erected to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances. Support structure types include, but are not limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, wood poles and guyed towers.

U. “Telecommunications system” shall have the same meaning as “telecommunications facilities” as defined above.

V. “Tower footprint” means the area described at the base of a transmission tower as the perimeter of the transmission tower including the transmission tower foundation and any attached or over-hanging equipment, attachments or structural members, excluding ancillary facilities, guy wires and anchors.

W. “Tower height” means the vertical distance measured from the highest point on the transmission tower or other structure, including any antenna, to the original grade of the ground directly below this point.

X. “Tower pad” means the area that encompasses the tower footprint, ancillary facilities, fencing and screening.

Y. “Transmission tower” means the monopole or lattice framework designed to support transmitting and receiving antennas. For the purpose of this chapter, amateur radio transmission facilities and facilities used exclusively for the transmission of television and radio signals are not transmission towers. Transmission towers include:

1. “Guyed tower” means a tower which is supported by the use of cables which are permanently anchored.

2. “Lattice tower” means a tower characterized by an open framework of lateral cross members which stabilize the tower.

3. “Monopole” means a tower characterized by an open framework of lateral cross members which stabilize the tower.

Z. “Underground facilities” means utility and telecommunications facilities located underground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities.

AA. “Usable space” means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified by applicable codes, rules, laws, policies, regulations and ordinances.

BB. “Utility easement” means any easement to the city or others, acquired, established, dedicated or devoted wholly or partially to public utility purposes. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.245.030 Administration and enforcement.

It shall be the responsibility of the city administrator or designee to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.245.040 Applicability.

A. Pre-existing Towers and Antennas.

1. Any tower, antenna or telecommunications facility for which the required approval has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this chapter, other than those set forth by the federal government, state building codes, or other applicable laws. Any such towers antennas or facilities shall be referred to in this chapter as pre-existing towers or antennas.

2. Upon expiration of said pre-existing approval, any tower, antenna or telecommunications facility shall become subject to the provisions herein.

B. Exemptions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following are exempt:

1. Cable television service.

2. Open video system service.

3. Direct-to-home satellite service.

4. Over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public-at-large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto.

5. Send and receive citizen band radio antennas or antennas operated by federally licensed amateur (“ham”) radio operators.

6. Industrial, scientific and medial equipment as regulated by the Federal Communications Commission in 47 DFR Part 18.

7. Military and government radar antennas and associated communications towers used for navigational purposes as regulated by the Federal Communications Commission in 47 DFR Parts 95 and 97.

8. Military and federal, state and local government communications facilities used for public safety and emergency preparedness purposes.

9. Normal, routine and emergency maintenance and repair of existing telecommunications facilities which do not increase the height, size, bulk or footprint of such facilities and which otherwise comply with city, state and federal law and regulations. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.245.050 Application procedure.

A. Telecommunications Facility Application. Any person wishing to obtain approval for a telecommunications facility shall complete an application form provided by the city which shall contain the following information:

1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.

2. The name, address and telephone number of the contractor.

3. The name, address and telephone number of the electrical contractor.

4. The type of facility, height and any other pertinent information.

5. The location of the proposed telecommunications facility by street address and legal description.

B. Telecommunications Facility Proposal. A telecommunications facility proposal is required to accompany the telecommunications facility application and shall include the following information:

1. A description of the proposed facility to include the type, proposed height, and square footage of ground facilities.

2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunications, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the vicinity of the proposed facility.

3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with other telecommunications facilities.

4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant requests to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

5. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.

6. A preliminary traffic control plan, if applicable.

7. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and licenses to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.

8. A certification from a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application that comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations.

9. A report indicating the anticipated capacity of the telecommunications support structure, including the number and types of antennas which can be accommodated.

10. A visual study containing, at a minimum, a vicinity map depicting where, within the city of Fairview, any portion of the proposed tower which could be visible and a graphic simulation showing the appearance of the proposed tower and ancillary facilities from five points within the impacted vicinity. Such points are to be mutually agreed upon by the planning director and applicant.

This study shall be required for transmission towers only.

11. A landscape plan drawn to scale showing proposed landscaping, including type, spacing, size and irrigation methods. This plan shall not be required for co-location on existing buildings or where there is no opportunity to provide additional landscaping.

12. Evidence demonstrating co-location is impractical on existing structures, existing transmission towers and existing tower facility sites for reasons of safety, available space, or failing to meet service coverage area needs. This evidence shall not be required for co-location proposals.

13. Such other and further information as may be required by the city administrator. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.245.060 Design criteria.

A. All telecommunications facilities shall meet the following design criteria:

1. Site Size. Property upon which a new or co-located telecommunications facility is to be located shall be of a size, shape and location sufficient to provide:

a. Setback from any property line to the tower footprint which is at least two-thirds the tower height. This standard shall not apply to co-located facilities.

b. Protection to adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure and ice falling from the tower. A licensed structural engineer’s analysis shall be submitted to demonstrate that such failure and ice fall will be accommodated on the site.

c. Separation from Pre-Existing Towers. Tower separation shall be measured by following a straight line from the base of the proposed new tower to the base of any pre-existing tower. Minimum separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as follows:

	 	Guyed	Monopole >80′	Monopole <80′

	Guyed	5,000	1,500	750

	Monopole >80′	1,500	1,500	750

	Monopole <80′	750	750	750

d. Each telecommunications facility shall include one adjacent parking space.

2. Co-location.

a. Applicants shall exhaust all co-location options prior to being granted a license by the city by:

i. Identifying all existing towers and other structures of sufficient height within the city to support co-location.

ii. Provide evidence that property owners declined to offer their property for lease.

b. New towers shall be constructed to accommodate future co-location, based on expected demand for transmission towers in the service area. Towers shall be designed to accommodate a minimum expansion of three two-way antennas for every 40 vertical feet of tower.

c. Antennas or attachments may be placed on existing structures such as athletic field light poles, utility poles or towers and tall buildings; provided, that the addition of the antenna equipment will not cause undue interference with the normal operation of utilities or existing transmission facilities and the tower or attachment either complies with the height limit of the underlying zoning district or is no more than 10 feet taller than the existing structure in a residential neighborhood or is no more than 20 feet taller than the existing structure in an agricultural or commercial zoning district. The color and design of such antennas, attachments and any ancillary facilities shall be compatible with the existing structure.

d. Applicants shall provide a report indicating the anticipated capacity of the telecommunications support structure, including the number and types of antennas which can be accommodated.

3. Height.

a. The height of a telecommunication facility shall include the support structure and any attached antennas proposed at the time of application.

b. Maximum height for a telecommunication support structure and antennas shall not exceed the maximum height allowed by the city airport overlay zone per Chapter 19.95 FMC.

c. Antennas attached to any building or facility shall not exceed the maximum height limitation set forth in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

d. Maximum allowable heights are as follows:

i. Community service/parks: 45 linear feet.

ii. F-2 – Agricultural holding: 55 linear feet.

iii. NC – Neighborhood commercial: 45 linear feet.

iv. TCC – Town center commercial: 45 linear feet.

v. CC – Corridor commercial: 55 linear feet.

vi. GI – General manufacturing: 55 linear feet.

vii. LI – Light manufacturing: 55 linear feet.

viii. V-O – Village office: 45 linear feet.

ix. VC – Village commercial: 45 linear feet.

x. VMU – Village mixed use: 45 linear feet.

4. Visual Impact. An applicant shall demonstrate that the tower or other facility will have the least visual impact on the environment by addressing the following:

a. The height and mass of the transmission tower shall not exceed that which is essential for its intended use and public safety as demonstrated in a report prepared by a licensed structural engineer.

b. All towers shall be painted in order to best camouflage the tower with regard to compatibility with surrounding objects and colors and as approved by the city. Unless towers are otherwise disguised or co-located, towers shall be camouflaged as trees whenever structurally possible.

c. Equipment shelters, buildings and cabinets housing radio electronics equipment shall be concealed, camouflaged or placed underground.

d. Telecommunication facility antennas shall be made to blend with the predominant background or architectural features to the greatest extent possible as seen from abutting uses, roadways or other public ways or thoroughfares and shall match the color of the facility to which they are attached whenever possible.

e. Antennas shall be designed to minimize their appearance to surrounding development.

f. A visual study containing, at a minimum, a vicinity map depicting where, within the city of Fairview, any portion of the proposed tower could be visible, and a graphic simulation showing the appearance of the proposed tower and ancillary facilities from five points within the impacted vicinity. Such points are to be mutually agreed upon by the planning director and applicant. This study shall not be required for co-location on preexisting transmission towers, but shall be required for co-location on other structures.

5. Fencing and Landscaping.

a. Telecommunications facilities shall be enclosed by a six-foot tall wall or fence which is compatible with surrounding walls or fencing.

b. Landscaping shall be placed outside of fences and shall consist of fast growing vegetation with a minimum planted height of six feet placed densely to form a solid hedge and shall be compatible with surrounding landscaping.

c. When antennas, attachments or ancillary facilities are to be located on existing buildings or structures and are secure from public access, landscaping and fencing requirements may be waived.

d. A landscape plan drawn to scale showing proposed landscaping, including type, spacing, size and irrigation methods, shall be provided. This plan shall not be required for co-location on existing buildings or where there is no opportunity to provide additional landscaping.

6. Signage.

a. All telecommunications support structures shall be identified with a non-illuminated sign not to exceed two square feet. The sign shall list the telecommunication provider’s name and emergency telephone number(s) and shall be posted in a place visible to the general public. The sign shall be constructed of weather resistant material and lettering shall contrast with the sign’s background.

b. Lettering, symbols, images or trademarks large enough to be legible to occupants of vehicular traffic on any adjacent roadway shall not be placed on or affixed to any part of a telecommunications facility or portion thereof other than as required by federal, state or county regulation(s) and subsection (A)(6)(a) of this section.

7. Lighting. Telecommunications facilities shall not be illuminated except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration and/or the Oregon State Aeronautics Division. High intensity white lights shall not be located on transmission towers.

8. Noise Reduction. Noise generating equipment shall be sound-buffered by means of baffling, barriers or other suitable means to reduce the sound level measured at the property line to 30 dBA above the level of ambient background noise when adjacent to residential uses and 45 dBA above the level of ambient background noise in other areas.

9. Anti-Climbing Devices. All telecommunications transmission towers and required fencing shall be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices.

10. Attachment to Trees Prohibited. It is prohibited to attach any telecommunications facility or portion thereof to any tree.

B. Setbacks.

1. Ancillary facilities and telecommunications support structures which are attached to existing buildings or other permanent structures shall comply with the setback requirements for the underlying zoning district.

2. Telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be set back from any property line by a minimum distance equal to or greater than 1.5 times the height of the transmission tower.

3. Setbacks for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be measured from the ground level base of the structure.

4. The setback in any zoning district may be reduced if the applicant can demonstrate that:

a. Reduction in the setback increases the screening opportunities between the facility and abutting uses.

b. The reduction in setback is the minimum required to achieve the increased screening of the facility for abutting uses.

c. The reduction in setback shall be wide enough to accommodate required landscaping and fencing.

d. The reduction in setback will not cause a greater visual, aesthetic or safety impact to abutting uses. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.245.070 Uses.

A. Community Service/Parks.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications transmission towers shall be 45 linear feet.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

B. F-2 – Agricultural.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications shall be subject to the limitations set forth by the airport overlay zone.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

6. Community service/parks are conditionally permitted.

C. NC – Neighborhood Commercial.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications transmission towers shall be 45 linear feet.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

6. Community service/parks are conditionally permitted.

D. TCC – Town Center Commercial.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications transmission towers shall be 45 linear feet.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

6. Community service/parks are conditionally permitted.

E. CC – Corridor Commercial.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications transmission towers shall be 55 linear feet.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

6. Community service/parks are conditionally permitted.

F. GI – General Manufacturing.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications transmission towers shall be subject to the limitations set forth by the airport overlay zones.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are conditionally permitted.

4. Monopoles are permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

6. Community service/parks are conditionally permitted.

G. LI – Light Manufacturing.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

6. Community service/parks are conditionally permitted.

H. VO – Village Office.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications transmission towers shall be 45 linear feet.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

I. VC – Village Commercial.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications transmission towers shall be 45 linear feet.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

J. VMU – Village Mixed Use.

1. Maximum height for telecommunications transmission towers shall be 45 linear feet.

2. Minimum setback for telecommunications support structures and transmission towers shall be 1.5 times the height of the support structure or transmission tower.

3. Guyed towers are not permitted.

4. Monopoles are conditionally permitted.

5. Antennas are permitted.

K. Prohibited Use.

1. Telecommunications facilities including telecommunications support structures, transmission towers, ancillary facilities and antennas shall not be permitted in the following zoning districts:

a. R – Residential.

b. MF – Multifamily.

c. M-H – Manufactured housing park.

d. VSF – Village single-family.

e. VTH – Village townhouse residential.

f. VA – Village apartment.

2. Lattice towers are not permitted.

L. Use Summary. For the purpose of this sub-section:

1. “P” shall mean permitted use.

2. “C” shall mean conditional use.

3. “X” shall mean specifically prohibited. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.250 MINIMUM DENSITIES

Sections:

19.250.010    Minimum density.


19.250.010 Minimum density.

A. When single-family lots are created through partition or subdivision, a minimum density permitted in the zone is required on all parcels within the R zones. For purposes of this section, the number of lots required shall be determined by multiplying the maximum density, exclusive of potentially allowable density transfer, by 0.8.

B. In all multifamily zones 80 percent of the allowable density must be achieved by all residential developments. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.400 ADMINISTRATION OF LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW

Sections:

19.400.010    Introduction.

19.400.020    Decision-making authority.

19.400.030    Time limit on land use decisions for approval.


19.400.010 Introduction.

This article specifies application requirements and procedures for obtaining land use permits required for development within the city of Fairview. Table 19.413.050 provides permit and decision-making requirements for land use permit applications. (Ord. 1-2012 § 1; Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.400.020 Decision-making authority.

This article shall be administered by the community development director or designee. (Ord. 1-2012 § 1; Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.400.030 Time limit on land use decisions for approval.

Unless otherwise specified in the decision or elsewhere in this title, an approved land use decision shall expire two years from date of final decision. (Ord. 1-2012 § 1)


Chapter 19.412 DESCRIPTION OF PERMIT PROCEDURES

Sections:

19.412.010    Preapplication conferences.

19.412.020    Forms, applications, and filing fees.

19.412.030    Concurrent review of multiple applications.

19.412.040    Consistency with state statutes (ORS 227.178 – 120-day rule).

19.412.050    Determination of completeness.

19.412.060    City duties.

19.412.070    Public hearing.


19.412.010 Preapplication conferences.

A preapplication conference is required for Type II, III, and IV applications. Preapplication conferences are held to provide direction, information, and a description of the land use permitting process for applicants prior to submission of a land use permit.

The applicant must submit the following items to the community development department two weeks prior to the preapplication meeting:

A. Signed application form.

B. Fee.

C. Preliminary site plan and drawings.

D. Project description.

E. Questions the applicant may have regarding the land use process, development standards, permitting procedures and application requirements. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.412.020 Forms, applications, and filing fees.

Applications and requests for actions authorized under this title shall be made in accordance with provisions of this chapter and shall include:

A. Application fee as adopted by the city council.

B. Completed application form signed by all owners of property included in the proposal or written authorization signed by the property owner(s) allowing the applicant to act as agent on behalf of property owners.

C. Plans and specifications, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon.

D. Sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and other structures, existing and proposed.

E. Existing and intended use of each building, structure, or part thereof.

F. All information specified on the site plan and application requirements form, the land use application submission requirements form, and the fire access and protection form.

G. Include one set of address labels for all real property owners of record who are entitled to notice of the application as required by Chapter 19.413 FMC.

H. Narrative demonstrating compliance with all applicable sections of the Fairview Municipal Code and Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.412.030 Concurrent review of multiple applications.

Applications for more than one land use review on the same property may be processed in a single hearing. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.412.040 Consistency with state statutes (ORS 227.178 – 120-day rule).

A. Applications for action authorized under this title shall be processed in accordance with ORS 227.178.

B. Time limit and appeal from ruling of planning commission.

Final action or ruling on any request pursuant to this title, including resolution of all appeals under ORS 227.180, shall be given within 120 calendar days after an application is received and is deemed complete. This section does not apply to amendment of an acknowledged Comprehensive Plan or adoption of a new land use regulation. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.412.050 Determination of completeness.

A. The community development director shall review applications for consistency with submission requirements of the Fairview Municipal Code. Applications that do not meet submission requirements shall be deemed incomplete for the purpose of ORS 227.178 and Chapter 19.400 FMC. The community development director shall provide notice to the applicant as to whether an application is complete or incomplete within 30 calendar days of receipt of the application. If the application is deemed incomplete, written notice shall be provided to the applicant that specifies information needed to make the application complete.

B. When an application is deemed complete, the community development director shall note the date of completeness. The completeness date will be determined the day materials were submitted to make the application complete. If the application was complete upon submission, the original submission date of the application shall be the complete date. If the application was deemed incomplete and additional materials were submitted, the completeness date shall be the date the additional materials were submitted. An application shall be deemed complete when the following are submitted:

1. Application form that is properly filled out and signed;

2. Application fee has been paid;

3. The correct number of copies of the application materials has been provided;

4. Authorization of the property owner to submit the application;

5. All required submittal information identified in FMC 19.412.020.

C. If the application was complete when first submitted, or the applicant submits the requested additional information within 180 calendar days of the date the application was first submitted, approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and criteria that were applicable at the time the application was first submitted. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.412.060 City duties.

The community development director shall:

A. Prepare application forms based on the criteria and standards in applicable state law, the city’s comprehensive plan, and implementing ordinance provisions;

B. Accept all development applications which comply with this chapter;

C. Prepare a staff report for Type II, III, and IV applications that summarizes the application(s) and applicable decision criteria, and provides findings of conformance and/or nonconformance with the criteria, and a recommended decision. The decision shall approve, deny, or approve with specific conditions that ensure conformance with approval criteria;

D. Provide public notice.

1. In the case of an application subject to a Type II review process, the city shall make the staff report and all case-file materials available at the time that the notice of the decision is issued;

2. In the case of an application subject to a hearing (Type II appeal, Type III, or IV process), the city shall make the staff report available to the public at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing date, and make the case-file materials available when notice of the hearing is mailed, as provided by FMC 19.413.020 (Type II), 19.413.030 (Type III), or 19.413.040 (Type IV);

E. Administer the hearings process consistent with FMC 19.412.070;

F. File notice of the final decision in the city’s records and mail a copy of the notice of the final decision to the applicant; all persons who provided comments or testimony; persons who requested copies of the notice; and any other persons entitled to notice by law;

G. Maintain and preserve the file for each application for the time period required by law. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice given; the application and all supporting information; the staff report; the final decision including the findings, conclusions and conditions, if any; all correspondence; and any other exhibit, information or documentation which was considered by the decision-maker(s) on the application; and

H. Administer the appeals and review process. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.412.070 Public hearing.

A. Conduct and Process. At the commencement of the hearing, the hearings body shall state to those in attendance the following:

1. The applicable approval criteria and standards that apply to the application or appeal.

2. A statement that testimony and evidence shall concern the approval criteria described in the staff report, or other criteria in the comprehensive plan or land use regulations which the person testifying believes to apply to the decision.

3. A statement that failure to raise an issue with sufficient detail to give the hearings body and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that no appeal may be made to the State Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue.

4. Before the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any participant may ask the hearings body for an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing. The hearings body shall grant the request by scheduling a date to finish the hearing (a “continuance”) per subsection B of this section, or by leaving the record open for additional written evidence or testimony per subsection C of this section.

5. Failure to raise constitutional or other issues relating to the proposed conditions of approval with sufficient detail to allow the hearings body to respond to the issue precludes an action for damages in circuit court.

B. Continuation of Hearing. If the hearings body grants a continuance, the completion of the hearing shall be continued to a date, time, and place at least seven days after the date of the first evidentiary hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at the second hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the second hearing, any person may request, before the conclusion of the second hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days, so that they can submit additional written evidence or testimony in response to the new written evidence.

The planning commission or city council may continue any hearing, and no additional notice of hearing shall be required if the matter is continued to a specified place, date, and time.

C. Record. If the hearings body leaves the record open for additional written evidence or testimony, the record shall be left open for at least seven days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the city in writing for an opportunity to respond to new evidence submitted during the period the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the hearings body shall reopen the record as follows:

1. When the hearings body reopens the record to admit new evidence or testimony, any person may raise new issues which relate to that new evidence or testimony.

2. An extension of the hearing or record is subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178 (“120-day rule”), unless the continuance or extension is requested or agreed to by the applicant.

3. The city shall allow the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons to submit final written arguments in support of the application, unless the applicant expressly waives this right. The applicant’s final submittal shall be part of the record but shall not include any new evidence. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


Chapter 19.413 PROCEDURES

Sections:

19.413.010    Type I ministerial review.

19.413.020    Type II administrative review.

19.413.030    Type III procedure (quasi-judicial).

19.413.040    Type IV procedures (legislative).

19.413.050    Summary of development decisions/permit by type of decision-making procedure.


19.413.010 Type I ministerial review.

Type I decisions are made by the community development director, without public notice and without a public hearing. The Type I procedure is used when there are clear and objective approval criteria, and applying city standards and criteria requires no use of discretion.

A. Notification. Notification is not required. The decision is final on the date it is mailed or otherwise provided to the applicant. The decision is effective the day after it is final.

B. Decision. A decision shall grant or deny the application. The decision will be made within 10 days of receipt of a complete application in the community development department. An applicant will be notified by phone or by mail within five days of the decision. The decision shall address approval criteria. Based on criteria, the decision shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested permit or action. A written record of decision shall be provided to applicant and kept in the city file.

Type I decisions are effective the day after they become final and cannot be appealed. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.413.020 Type II administrative review.

Type II decisions are made by the community development director with public notice and an opportunity for a public hearing. The community development director may determine that a public hearing is appropriate and needed because of the complexity or need for discretionary review. The appeal of a Type II decision is heard by the planning commission consistent with FMC 19.414.020.

A. Repealed by Ord. 1-2012.

B. Notice of Decision. Within 30 days of the receipt of a complete application, the director will mail a notice of tentative decision to adjacent property owners within 100 feet of the outer boundaries of the site. Based on the criteria and the facts contained within the record, the community development director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested permit or action. A written record of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and kept on file at City Hall. This notice shall contain the following:

1. A description of the request.

2. Description of the tentative decision and the specific permits or approvals requested and the nature of the application and the proposed uses which could be authorized.

3. List of applicable criteria used to decide the application.

4. Findings and conclusions based on the applicable criteria.

5. The deadline for the 14-day comment period where persons may request a public hearing and provide for potentially affected persons to communicate concerns to the community development director.

6. State that failure to raise an issue prior to the end of the 14-day comment period accompanied by statements and evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker and the parties an opportunity to respond precludes an appeal on that issue, and only comments on the relevant approval criteria will be considered.

7. The deadline for the 14-day appeal period where persons may appeal the decision to the planning commission.

8. The name and telephone number of a contact person regarding the administrative decision.

9. Description of the property, including the street address or other easily understandable reference to the location of the site.

10. All conditions necessary to support approval of the application.

C. Public Notice Requirements. The tentative notice of decision shall be mailed to the owner, applicant, and all property adjacent property owners within 100 feet of the outer boundaries of the site, and all governmental agencies entitled to notice. A 14-day comment period shall be given from the date of the tentative notice of decision was mailed to state objections or submit written comments. If comments are not received, the tentative decision becomes final. Once the decision becomes final, a 14-day appeal period begins.

D. If comments are received and the tentative notice of decision is changed, the applicant, property owner, and all property owners within the notification area shall be renotified. If either the applicant or persons with concerns are not satisfied with the director’s decision, they may appeal the final decision during the 14-day appeal period and the matter will be subject to the provisions of FMC 19.414.020, Type II review. (Ord. 1-2012 § 2; Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.413.030 Type III procedure (quasi-judicial).

Type III decisions are made by the planning commission after a public hearing. Appeals of Type III decisions are reviewed and decided by the city council.

A. Public Notification. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the property owner and applicant, if different, and to all property owners within 250 feet of the outer boundaries of the site, not less than 20 days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice must also be provided in a public news paper at least 20 days prior to the hearing date. In addition, a sign indicating the date of the public hearing, shall be posted on the subject property not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice must also be provided at least 20 days prior to the scheduled hearing to any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the city whose boundaries include the subject property.

B. Content of Public Notices. The mailed and published notices shall be consistent with ORS 197.763 and include the following information:

1. The file number and city contact information.

2. A description of the location of the proposal that effectively and clearly describes the location of the geographic area.

3. An explanation of the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which could be authorized.

4. A list of the applicable criteria from the ordinance that apply to the application at issue.

5. The time(s), place(s), and date(s) of the public hearing(s).

6. A statement that public oral or written testimony is invited.

7. A statement that the failure of an issue to be raised in a hearing, in person, or by letter or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal on the issue.

8. A statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost and a copy will be provided as a reasonable cost at least seven days before the hearing.

C. Public Hearing. The planning commission conducts a public hearing and renders a decision on the matter including findings, conclusions, and conditions, if necessary, consistent with FMC 19.412.070.

D. Notice of Decision. Written notice of a Type III decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to all participants of record within five business days after the hearings body decision. Failure of any person to receive mailed notice shall not invalidate the decision; provided, that a good faith attempt was made to mail the notice. The notice of decision shall include the following:

1. The file number and city contact information.

2. Description of the property, including the street address or other easily understandable reference to the location of the site.

3. All approval criteria and findings and conclusions in support of the decision adopted by the planning commission.

4. Decision made by the planning commission and conditions in support of the decision adopted by the planning commission.

5. Appeal process and deadline.

6. List of applicable criteria used to decide the application. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.413.040 Type IV procedures (legislative).

A. Type IV matters are considered initially by the planning commission with final decisions made by the city council. Type IV procedures apply to legislative matters and involve the following:

1. Zoning map amendments.

2. Development code text amendments.

3. Comprehensive plan text amendments.

4. Comprehensive plan map amendments.

5. Planned developments.

6. Park master plans.

7. Master plan adoption.

8. Annexations.

B. Required Hearings. A minimum of two hearings, one before the planning commission, and one before the city council, are required for all Type IV applications, except annexations where only a hearing by the city council is required.

C. Public Notification Requirements. Notice of public hearings shall be given by the city in the following manner:

1. At least 30 days, but not more than 40 days, before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to amend the comprehensive plan or any element thereof, or to adopt an ordinance that proposes to rezone property, a notice shall be prepared in conformance with ORS 227.175 and mailed to:

a. Each owner whose property would be rezoned in order to implement the ordinance.

b. Any affected governmental agency.

c. Recognized neighborhood groups or associations affected by the ordinance.

d. Any person who requests notice in writing.

e. For a zone change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175.

f. Any property owner affected by the zone changes where the change in regulations becomes more restrictive than the current regulations shall be notified.

2. At least 10 days before the scheduled planning commission public hearing date, and 10 days before the city council hearing date, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

3. Metro and the Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) shall be notified in writing of proposed Comprehensive Plan and development code amendments at least 35 days before the first public hearing at which public testimony or evidence will be received.

4. Notifications for annexation shall follow the provisions of this chapter. The notice must be received by the Department of Land Conservation and Development no later than 35 days prior to the evidentiary hearing.

D. Content of Notices. The mailed and published notices shall be consistent with ORS 227.186 and 197.610 and include the following information:

1. The file number and city contact information.

2. A description of the location of the proposal that effectively and clearly describes the location of the geographic area.

3. A detailed description of the proposed changes/modifications, and the place where all relevant materials and information may be obtained or reviewed.

4. The time(s), place(s), and date(s) of the public hearing(s); a statement that public oral or written testimony is invited; and a statement that the hearing will be held under this title and rules of procedure adopted by the council and available at City Hall.

E. Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate the action, providing:

1. Personal notice is deemed given where the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service.

2. Published notice is deemed given on the date it is published.

F. Process.

1. The planning commission shall:

a. After notice and a public hearing, vote on and prepare a recommendation to the city council to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative; and

b. Within 10 business days of determining a recommendation, the presiding officer of the planning commission shall sign the written recommendation, and it shall be filed with the city recorder.

2. Any member of the planning commission who votes in opposition to the planning commission’s majority recommendation may file a written statement of opposition with the city before the council public hearing on the proposal. The community development director shall send a copy to each council member and place a copy in the record.

3. If the planning commission fails to adopt a recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative proposal, within 60 days of its first public hearing on the proposed change, the community development director shall:

a. Report the failure together with the proposed change to the city council; and

b. Provide notice and put the matter on the city council’s agenda, a public hearing to be held, and a decision to be made by the council. No further action shall be taken by the commission.

4. The city council shall:

a. Approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny, or adopt an alternative to an application for legislative change, or remand the application to the planning commission for rehearing and reconsideration on all or part of the application.

b. Consider the recommendation of the planning commission; however, it is not bound by the commission’s recommendation.

c. Adopt ordinances, which shall be signed by the mayor after the council’s adoption of the ordinance.

G. Decision Making Consideration. The recommendation by the planning commission and the decision by the city council shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

1. Statewide planning goals and guidelines.

2. Comments from applicable federal or state agencies.

3. Applicable intergovernmental agencies.

4. Applicable Comprehensive Plan policies. 

H. Notice of Decision. Notice of a Type IV decision shall be mailed to the applicant, all participants of record, Metro, and the Department of Land Conservation and Development, within five business days after the city council decision is filed with the city administrator or designate. The city shall also provide notice to all persons as required by other applicable laws.

I. Final Decision and Effective Date. A Type IV decision, if approved, shall take effect and shall become final as specified in the enacting ordinance or, if not approved, upon mailing of the notice of decision to the applicant. (Ord. 5-2012 § 2; Ord. 1-2012 § 3; Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.413.050 Summary of development decisions/permit by type of decision-making procedure.

Table 19.413.050 

Summary of Development Decisions/Permit by Type of Decision-Making Procedure  

	Access Permit (Public Street)	Type I

	Annexation	Type IV

	Amendments	 

	• Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment	Type IV

	• Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment	Type IV

	• Zoning Text Amendment	Type IV

	• Zone Map Amendment (Zone Change)	Type IV

	• Master Plan Adoption or Amendment	Type IV

	• Parks Master Plan Adoption or Amendment

	• Annexations	Type IV

	• Vacations (Right-of-Way)

	Building Permit and Sign Permit	Type I

	Code Interpretation	Type II

	Conditional Use Permit	Type III

	Director’s Determination	Type II

	Floodplain Development Permit	Type II

	Home Occupation Permit	Type I

	Minor Modification of a Decision	Type I

	Major Modification of a Decision	Shall be reviewed by original decision-making body.

	Land Division	 

	• Minor Partition (2 or 3 parcels)	Type II

	• Subdivision with 4 to 10 Parcels	Type II

	• Subdivision with More Than 10 Parcels	Type III

	• Planned Development	Type III

	• Lot Line Adjustment	Type I

	• Extension of Land Use Decision	Type I

	Nonconforming Use Determination	Type II

	Riparian Buffer Permit	Type I/II/III

	Significant Environmental Concern (SEC) Permit	Type III

	Site Design Review	Type II/III

	Temporary Use Permit	Type I

	Variance	 

	• Class A	Type I

	• Class B	Type II

	• Class C	Type III

(Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


Chapter 19.414 APPEAL PROCESS

Sections:

19.414.010    Type I appeal process.

19.414.020    Type II appeal process.

19.414.030    Type III appeal process.

19.414.040    Type IV appeal procedures.

19.414.050    Resubmittal of applications following denial.


19.414.010 Type I appeal process.

Type I decisions may not be appealed. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.414.020 Type II appeal process.

Type II administrative decisions may be appealed to the planning commission as follows:

A. Who May Appeal. Legal standing to appeal a Type II administrative decision applies as follows:

1. The applicant;

2. Any other person who participated in the proceeding by submitting written comments.

B. Appeal Procedure.

1. Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in subsection A of this section, may appeal a Type II administrative decision by filing a notice of appeal according to the following procedures;

2. Time for Filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the community development director within 14 days of the date the tentative notice of decision became final (FMC 19.413.020(B));

3. Content of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain:

a. An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision;

b. A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal;

c. A statement explaining the specific issues raised on appeal along with a statement or evidence documenting that the issues were raised during the comment period;

d. If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period;

e. Filing fee.

C. Fees. The amount of the filing fee shall be established by resolution of the city council.

D. Scope of Appeal. The appeal of a Type II administrative decision by a person with standing shall be limited to the specific issues raised during the written comment period and presented in the notice of appeal, unless the hearings body decides otherwise. Only in extraordinary circumstances should new issues be considered by the hearings body on appeal of a Type II administrative decision. The applicant must submit the request in writing for community development consideration. The appeals shall be limited to the record unless the hearings body determines additional evidence is necessary to resolve the case. The purpose of this requirement is to limit the scope of Type II administrative appeals by encouraging persons with standing to submit their specific concerns in writing during the comment period.

E. Failure to file an appeal with the community development director by 5:00 p.m. on the due date in conformance with the requirements of this section including the proper filing fee shall be a jurisdictional defect, resulting in the immediate rejection of the appeal. Failure to amend an appeal to correct any identified deficiency within 14 calendar days of notice thereof shall be a jurisdictional defect, resulting in immediate rejection of the appeal.

E. Appeal Procedures. Type III notice and hearing procedures shall be used for all Type II administrative appeals.

F. Record. The record for a Type II appeal shall include all testimony and evidence submitted to the city during the 14-day comment period and not specifically rejected by the community development director. Evidence or testimony submitted after the comment period is generally not included within the record unless the hearings body expressly incorporates that information into the record.

G. Appeal to City Council. The decision of the planning commission for an appeal of a Type II administrative decision is the final decision unless the planning commission decision is appealed to city council. An appeal to city council shall follow the same notification and hearing procedures as for the planning commission appeal (FMC 19.414.030). (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.414.030 Type III appeal process.

A. Appeal of Planning Commission Decisions. Any action or ruling of the planning commission pursuant to this title may be appealed to the city council. Written notice of the appeal shall be filed with the community development director within 14 calendar days of the date the planning commission notice of final decision was mailed.

B. Who May Appeal.

1. Any person who participated in the proceeding by submitting written comments.

2. Any person who testified at the public hearing.

3. All participants of record.

C. Content of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain:

1. An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision;

2. A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal;

3. A statement explaining the specific issues raised on appeal along with a statement or evidence documenting that the issues were raised during the comment period;

4. If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period.

D. Filing Fee.

1. Fees. The amount of the filing fee shall be established by resolution of the city council.

E. Appeal Process. If the appeal is not filed within the 14-day period, the decision of the planning commission shall be final. If the appeal is filed, a report and recommendation on the planning commission’s decision shall be forwarded to the city council; and the council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 40 calendar days of receiving a request for an appeal. An appeal of a planning commission decision shall specify, in detail, the issues or findings in contention so as to afford the city council and interested parties an adequate opportunity to respond to and resolve each issue. The appeal shall be limited to the record, unless the city council determines additional evidence is necessary to resolve the case.

F. Failure to file an appeal with the community development director by 5:00 p.m. on the due date in conformance with the requirements of FMC 19.414.020 including the proper filing fee shall be a jurisdictional defect resulting in immediate rejection of the appeal. Failure to amend an appeal to correct any identified deficiency within 14 calendar days of notice thereof shall be a jurisdictional defect resulting in the immediate rejection of the appeal.

G. Notice of Appeal Hearing. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be provided to the applicant and other persons as otherwise provided by law; include a description of applicable criteria; include a street address or other geographical reference; state the time, date, and location of the hearing; state that failure to raise an issue in person or by letter precludes appeal and that failure to specify to which criterion the comment is directed precludes appeal based on that criterion; and be mailed at least 10 calendar days before the hearing. At the commencement of the city council appeal hearing, a statement shall be made to those in attendance that: describes the applicable substantive criteria, testimony and evidence must be directed at the issues raised in the appeal, and failure to address a criterion precludes an appeal based on that criterion. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.414.040 Type IV appeal procedures.

Type IV decisions made by the city council are appealed to the State of Oregon Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA). (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.414.050 Resubmittal of applications following denial.

An application which has been denied, or an application which was denied and which on appeal or review has not been reversed by a higher authority, including the land use board of appeals, the land conservation and development commission or the courts, may not be resubmitted as the same or a substantially similar proposal for the same land for a period of at least 12 months from the date the final city action is made denying the application, unless there is substantial change in the facts or a change in city policy which would change the outcome, as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


Chapter 19.415 AMENDMENTS TO DECISIONS

Sections:

19.415.010    Amended decision process.

19.415.020    Minor modification to approved land use decisions.

19.415.030    Major modification to approved land use decisions.


19.415.010 Amended decision process.

A. The purpose of an amended decision process is to allow the city to correct typographical errors, rectify inadvertent omissions and/or make other minor changes which do not materially alter the decision.

B. The community development director may issue an amended decision after the notice of final decision has been issued but before the appeal period has expired. If such a decision is amended, the decision shall be issued within 10 business days after the original decision would have become final, but in no event beyond the 120-day period required by state law. A new 10-day appeal period shall begin on the day the amended decision is issued.

C. Notice of an amended decision shall be given using the same mailing and distribution list as for the original decision notice.

D. Modifications to approved plans or conditions of approval requested by the applicant shall follow the procedures contained in FMC 19.415.020. All other requested changes to decisions that do not qualify as minor or major modifications shall follow the appeal process. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.415.020 Minor modification to approved land use decisions.

The purpose of this section is to allow for minor changes to land use decisions after the appeal period and the decision has become final including approved site plans that do not alter or contravene any adopted conditions of approval or established code requirements.

A. Minor changes to Type II and III land use application approvals may be approved at the staff level through the Type I process when the applicant demonstrates the proposed changes:

1. Does not increase the intensity of any use.

2. Meets all requirements of the underlying zone relating to building size and location and off-street parking and the standards of this title.

3. Does not result in deterioration or loss of any protected natural feature or open space, and does not negatively affect nearby properties.

4. Does not alter or contravene any conditions specifically placed on the development by the planning commission or city council.

5. Does not cause any public facility, including transportation, water, sewer and storm drainage, to fail to meet any applicable standards relating to adequacy of the public facility.

B. The record (meeting minutes) shall be reviewed by the community development director to ensure the requested modification does not conflict with the decisions and discussion that occurred during the planning commission or city council hearing. The community development director may refer the request to the decision-making body if believed the request is not consistent with criteria listed above and considerations of the hearing body during the public hearing process. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


19.415.030 Major modification to approved land use decisions.

Significant changes to land use decisions that do not meet the criteria listed in FMC 19.415.020 require additional review by the original decision-making body. Major modifications to applications approved through the Type II process will also be reviewed through the Type II process. Major modifications to applications approved through the Type III process will also be reviewed through the Type III process.

A modification is considered a major modification if one or more of the following are proposed:

A. Change in land use.

B. Increase in number of dwellings.

C. Change in the type and/or location of access ways, drives, or parking that affect off-site traffic.

D. Increase of floor area (for residential use) by more than five percent where previously specified.

E. Reduction of area by more than five percent for common open space and/or usable open space. (Ord. 6-2009 § 2 (Att. 1))


Chapter 19.416 TYPE IV PROCEDURE (LEGISLATIVE)

(Repealed by Ord. 6-2009)


Chapter 19.417 GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 6-2009)


Chapter 19.418 NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS

Sections:

19.418.010    Neighborhood meeting requirement.


19.418.010 Neighborhood meeting requirement.

Applicants are encouraged to meet with adjacent property owners and neighborhood representatives prior to submitting their application in order to solicit input and exchange information about the proposed development. In some cases, the city administrator or his or her designee may require the applicant to meet with a city-recognized neighborhood association or group prior to accepting an application as complete. A neighborhood meeting is required for the following types of applications:

A. Subdivisions;

B. Site design review applications within the residential land use district;

C. Other development applications that are likely to have neighborhood or community-wide impacts (e.g., traffic, parking, noise, or similar impacts), as determined by the city administrator or his or her designee. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.420 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND SITE DESIGN REVIEW

Sections:

19.420.010    Purpose.


19.420.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

A. Provide rules, regulations and standards for efficient and effective administration of site development review;

B. Carry out the development pattern and plan of the city and its comprehensive plan policies;

C. Promote the public health, safety and general welfare;

D. Lessen or avoid congestion in the streets, and secure safety from fire, flood, pollution and other dangers;

E. Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water supply, sewage and drainage;

F. Encourage the conservation of energy resources;

G. Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, mixed uses, transportation options, and detailed, human-scaled design. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.422 APPLICABILITY

Sections:

19.422.001    Applicability.

19.422.010    Site design review.

19.422.020    Development review.


19.422.001 Applicability.

Development review or site design review shall be required for all new developments and modifications of existing developments, except that regular maintenance, repair and replacement of materials (e.g., roof, siding, awnings, etc.), parking resurfacing, and similar maintenance and repair shall be exempt. The criteria for each type of review are as follows in this chapter. (Ord. 7-2018 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.422.010 Site design review.

Site design review is a discretionary review conducted by the planning commission with a public hearing. It applies to all developments in the city, except those specifically listed under FMC 19.422.020, Development review. Site design review ensures compliance with the basic development standards of the land use district (e.g., building setbacks, lot coverage, maximum building height), as well as other more detailed design standards and public improvement requirements in Articles II and III of this title. (Ord. 7-2018 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.422.020 Development review.

Development review is a nondiscretionary or “ministerial” review conducted by the city administrator’s designee without a public hearing. It is for less complex developments and land uses that do not require site design review approval. Development review is based on clear and objective standards and ensures compliance with the basic development standards of the land use district, such as building setbacks, lot coverage, maximum building height, and similar provisions. Development review is required for all of the types of development listed below, except that all developments in sensitive land areas and historic districts shall also use the development review procedures for those districts:

A. Single-family detached dwelling (including manufactured homes), when required by a condition of land division approval;

B. A single duplex, up to two single-family attached (townhome) units, or a single triplex which is not being reviewed as part of any other development, and accessory parking on the same lot;

C. Building additions of not more than 500 square feet, and minor modifications to development approvals;

D. Any proposed development which has a valid conditional use permit. Major modifications to a development with a conditional use permit shall require review and approval in accordance with Chapter 19.440 FMC, Conditional Use Permits;

E. Home occupation, subject to review under Chapter 19.490 FMC;

F. Temporary use, except that temporary uses shall comply with the procedures and standards for temporary uses as contained in Chapter 19.490 FMC;

G. Accessory structures with less than 600 square feet of floor area;

H. Other developments, when required by a condition of approval. (Ord. 7-2018 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.423 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW APPROVAL CRITERIA

Sections:

19.423.010    Development review approval criteria.


19.423.010 Development review approval criteria.

Development review shall be conducted only for the developments listed in FMC 19.422.020 and it shall be conducted as a Type I procedure. Prior to issuance of building permits, the following standards shall be met:

A. The proposed land use is permitted by the underlying land use district.

B. The land use, building/yard setback, lot area, lot dimension, density, lot coverage, building height and other applicable standards of the underlying land use district and any subdistrict(s) are met.

C. All applicable building and fire code standards are met.

D. The approval shall lapse, and a new application shall be required, if a building permit has not been issued within one year of site review approval, or if development of the site is in violation of the approved plan or other applicable codes. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.424 SITE DESIGN REVIEW – APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE

Sections:

19.424.010    Procedure.

19.424.020    Determination of Type II and Type III applications.


19.424.010 Procedure.

Site design review shall be conducted as a Type III procedure, as specified in FMC 19.424.020, using the procedures in Chapter 19.410 FMC, and using the approval criteria contained in Chapter 19.426 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.424.020 Determination of Type II and Type III applications.

Applications for site design review shall be subject to Type II or Type III review, based on the following criteria:

A. Residential buildings with three or fewer dwelling units shall be reviewed as a Type II application, except when development review is allowed under Chapter 19.423 FMC. Residential buildings with greater than three units shall be reviewed as a Type III application.

B. Commercial, industrial, public/semi-public, and institutional buildings with 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or smaller shall be reviewed as a Type II application, except when development review is allowed under Chapter 19.423 FMC. Commercial, industrial, public/semi-public, and institutional buildings with greater than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be reviewed as a Type III application.

C. Developments with more than one building (e.g., two duplex buildings or an industrial building with accessory workshop) shall be reviewed as Type III applications, notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsections A and B of this section.

D. Developments with 25 or fewer off-street vehicle parking spaces shall be reviewed as Type II applications, and those with more than 25 off-street vehicle parking spaces shall be reviewed as Type III applications, notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsections A through C and E and F of this section.

E. Developments involving the clearing and/or grading of 10 acres or a larger area shall be reviewed as Type III applications, notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsections A through D and F of this section.

F. All developments in designated sensitive lands and historic overlay districts shall be reviewed as Type III applications. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.425 SITE DESIGN REVIEW – APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

19.425.001    Site design review – Application submission requirements.

19.425.010    General submission requirements.

19.425.020    Site design review information.


19.425.001 Site design review – Application submission requirements.

All of the following information is required for site design review application submittal. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.425.010 General submission requirements.

The applicant shall submit an application containing all of the general information required by FMC 19.413.020 (Type II Application) or FMC 19.413.030 (Type III Application), as applicable. The type of application shall be determined in accordance with FMC 19.424.020. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.425.020 Site design review information.

An application for site design review shall include the following information, as deemed applicable by the city administrator or designee:

A. Site Analysis Map. At a minimum the site map shall contain the following:

1. The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the location of the development in the city, and the relationship between the proposed development site and adjacent property and development. The property boundaries, dimensions and gross area shall be identified;

2. Topographic contour lines at intervals determined by the city;

3. Identification of slopes greater than 25 percent;

4. The location and width of all public and private streets, drives, sidewalks, pathways, rights-of-way, and easements on the site and adjoining the site;

5. Potential natural hazard areas, including any areas identified as subject to a 100-year flood, areas subject to high water table, and areas mapped by the city, county, or state as having a potential for geologic hazards;

6. Resource areas, including marsh and wetland areas, streams, wildlife habitat identified by the city or any natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection;

7. Site features, including existing structures, pavement, large rock outcroppings, areas having unique views, and drainage ways, canals and ditches;

8. Locally or federally designated historic and cultural resources on the site and adjacent parcels or lots;

9. The location, size and species of trees and other vegetation having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade;

10. North arrow, scale, names and addresses of all persons listed as owners on the most recently recorded deed;

11. Name and address of project designer, engineer, surveyor, and/or planner, if applicable;

12. Other information, as determined by the city. The city may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features.

B. Proposed Site Plan. The site plan shall contain the following information, if applicable:

1. The proposed development site, including boundaries, dimensions, and gross area;

2. Features identified on the existing site analysis map which are proposed to remain on the site;

3. Features identified on the existing site map, if any, which are proposed to be removed or modified by the development;

4. The location and dimensions of all proposed public and private streets, drives, rights-of-way, and easements;

5. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, utilities, pavement and other improvements on the site. Setback dimensions for all existing and proposed buildings shall be provided on the site plan;

6. The location and dimensions of entrances and exits to the site for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access;

7. The location and dimensions of all parking and vehicle circulation areas (show striping for parking stalls and wheel stops, as applicable);

8. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas, including sidewalks, internal pathways, pathway connections to adjacent properties, and any bicycle lanes or trails;

9. Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading and delivery;

10. Outdoor recreation spaces, common areas, plazas, outdoor seating, street furniture, and similar improvements, as applicable;

11. Location, type, and height of outdoor lighting;

12. Location of mail boxes, if known;

13. Name and address of project designer, if applicable;

14. Location of bus stops and other public or private transportation facilities;

15. Locations, sizes, and types of signs;

16. Other information, determined by the city. The city may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features (e.g., traffic, noise, environmental features, natural hazards, etc.), in conformance with this code.

C. Architectural Drawings. Architectural drawings shall be submitted showing:

1. Building elevations (as determined by the city with building height and width dimensions;

2. Building materials, color and type;

3. The name of the architect or designer.

D. Preliminary Grading Plan. A preliminary grading plan prepared by a registered engineer shall be required for developments which would result in the grading (cut or fill) of 1,000 cubic yards or greater. The preliminary grading plan shall show the location and extent to which grading will take place, indicating general changes to contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed. Surface water detention and treatment plans may also be required.

E. Landscape Plan. A landscape plan is required and shall show the following:

1. The location and height of existing and proposed fences and other buffering or screening materials;

2. The location of existing and proposed terraces, retaining walls, decks, patios, shelters, and play areas;

3. The location, size, and species of the existing and proposed plant materials (at time of planting);

4. Existing and proposed building and pavement outlines;

5. Specifications for soil at time of planting, irrigation if plantings are not drought-tolerant (may be automatic or other approved method of irrigation) and anticipated planting schedule;

6. Other information as deemed appropriate by the city. An arborist’s report may be required for sites with mature trees that are protected under this code;

7. Sign drawings shall be required in conformance with the city’s sign code;

8. Copies of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants;

9. Letter or narrative report documenting compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in Chapter 19.426 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.426 SITE DESIGN REVIEW – APPROVAL CRITERIA

Sections:

19.426.001    Site design review approval criteria.

19.426.010    Complete application.

19.426.020    Compliance with land use district provisions.

19.426.030    Upgrade existing development.

19.426.040    Compliance with design standards.

19.426.050    Conditions.

19.426.060    Exceptions.


19.426.001 Site design review approval criteria.

The review authority shall make written findings with respect to all of the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.426.010 Complete application.

The application must be complete, as determined in accordance with FMC 19.412.050, on types of applications, and Chapter 19.425 FMC. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.426.020 Compliance with land use district provisions.

The application complies with all of the applicable provisions of the underlying land use district, including: building and yard setbacks, lot area and dimensions, density and floor area, lot coverage, building height, building orientation, architecture, and other special standards as may be required for certain land uses. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.426.030 Upgrade existing development.

The applicant shall be required to upgrade any existing development that does not comply with the applicable land use district standards, in conformance with Chapter 19.530 FMC, Nonconforming Uses and Development. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.426.040 Compliance with design standards.

The application complies with the design standards contained in Article III of this title. All of the following standards shall be met:

A. Chapter 19.162 FMC – Access and Circulation;

B. Chapter 19.163 FMC – Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls;

C. Chapter 19.164 FMC – Automobile and Bicycle Parking;

D. Chapter 19.165 FMC – Public Facilities Standards;

E. Other standards (telecommunications facilities, solid waste storage, environmental performance, signs), as applicable. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.426.050 Conditions.

All conditions required as part of an approval shall be met. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.426.060 Exceptions.

Exceptions to criteria in FMC 19.426.040(A) through (E) may be granted only when approved as a variance. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.427 BONDING AND ASSURANCES

Sections:

19.427.010    Performance bonds for public improvements.

19.427.020    Release of performance bonds.

19.427.030    Completion of landscape installation.

19.427.040    Business license filing.


19.427.010 Performance bonds for public improvements.

On all projects where public improvements are required, the city shall require a bond in an amount not greater than 110 percent or other adequate assurances as a condition of site development approval in order to guarantee the public improvements. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.427.020 Release of performance bonds.

The bond or assurance shall be released when the city finds the completed project conforms to the site development approval, including all conditions of approval. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.427.030 Completion of landscape installation.

Landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of occupancy permits, unless security equal to the cost of the landscaping as determined by the city is filed with the city recorder assuring such installation within 12 months after occupancy. If the installation of the landscaping is not completed within the 12-month period, the security may be used by the city to complete the installation. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.427.040 Business license filing.

The applicant shall ensure that all business occupants of the completed project, whether permanent or temporary, shall apply for and receive a city business license prior to initiating business. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.428 DEVELOPMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH PERMIT APPROVAL

Sections:

19.428.001    Development in accordance with permit approval.

19.428.010    Modifications to approved plans and developments.

19.428.020    Approval period.

19.428.030    Extension.

19.428.040    Phased development.


19.428.001 Development in accordance with permit approval.

Development shall not commence until the applicant has received all of the appropriate land use development approvals (i.e., site design review approval) and building permits. Construction of public improvements shall not commence until the city has approved all required public improvement plans (e.g., utilities, streets, public land dedication, etc.). The city may require the applicant to enter into a development agreement (e.g., for phased developments and developments with required off-site public improvements), and may require bonding or other assurances for improvements, in accordance with Chapter 19.427 FMC. Development review and site design review approvals shall be subject to all of the following standards and limitations. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.428.010 Modifications to approved plans and developments.

Minor modifications of an approved plan or existing development, as defined in Chapter 19.415 FMC, shall be processed as a Type I procedure and require only site review. Major modifications, as defined in Chapter 19.415 FMC, shall be processed as a Type II or Type III procedure and shall require site design review. For information on Type I, Type II and Type III procedures, please refer to Chapter 19.410 FMC. For modifications approval criteria, please refer to Chapter 19.415 FMC. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.428.020 Approval period.

Development review and site design review approvals shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval. The approval shall lapse if:

A. A building permit has not been issued within a one-year period; or

B. Construction on the site is in violation of the approved plan. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.428.030 Extension.

The community development director may, upon written request by the applicant, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

A. No changes are made on the original approved site design review plan.

B. The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the one-year extension period.

C. There have been no changes to the applicable code provisions on which the approval was based. If there have been changes to the applicable code provisions and the expired plan does not comply with those changes, then the extension shall not be granted; in this case, a new site design review shall be required.

D. The applicant demonstrates that failure to obtain building permits and substantially begin construction within one year of site design approval was beyond the applicant’s control. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.428.040 Phased development.

Phasing of development may be approved with the site design review application, subject to the following standards and procedures:

A. A phasing plan shall be submitted with the site design review application.

B. The city shall approve a time schedule for developing a site in phases, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than seven years without reapplying for site design review.

C. Approval of a phased site design review proposal requires satisfaction of all of the following criteria:

1. The public facilities required to serve each phase are constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

2. The development and occupancy of any phase dependent on the use of temporary public facilities shall require city council approval. Temporary facilities shall be approved only upon city receipt of bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required public improvements. A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard, subject to review by the city engineer;

3. The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other property owners to construct public facilities that were required as part of the approved development proposal; and

4. An application for phasing may be approved after site design review approval as a modification to the approved plan, in accordance with the procedures for minor modifications (Chapter 19.415 FMC). (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.430 LAND DIVISIONS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

19.430.110    Purpose.

19.430.120    General requirements.

19.430.130    Approvals process.

19.430.140    Preliminary plat submission requirements.

19.430.150    Approval criteria – Preliminary plat.

19.430.160    Variances authorized.

19.430.170    Final plat submission requirements and approval criteria.

19.430.180    Public improvements.

19.430.190    Performance guarantee.

19.430.200    Filing and recording.

19.430.210    Replatting and vacation of plats.

19.430.220    Lot line adjustments.


19.430.110 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

A. Provide rules, regulations and standards governing the approval of subdivisions, partitions and lot line adjustments.

1. Subdivisions involve the creation of four or more lots from one parent lot, parcel or tract, within one calendar year.

2. Partitions involve the creation of three or fewer lots within one calendar year.

3. Lot line adjustments involve modifications to lot lines or parcel boundaries which do not result in the creation of new lots.

B. Carry out the city’s development pattern, as envisioned by the Comprehensive Plan.

C. Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, and transportation options.

D. Promote the public health, safety and general welfare through orderly and efficient urbanization.

E. Lessen or avoid traffic congestion, and secure safety from fire, flood, pollution and other dangers.

F. Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water supply, sewage and drainage.

G. Encourage the conservation of energy resources. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.120 General requirements.

A. Subdivision and Partition Approval through Two-Step Process. Applications for subdivision or partition approval shall be processed through a two-step process: the preliminary plat and the final plat.

1. The preliminary plat shall be approved before the final plat can be submitted for approval consideration; and

2. The final plat shall demonstrate compliance with all conditions of approval of the preliminary plat.

B. Compliance with ORS Chapter 92. All subdivision and partition proposals shall be in conformance to state regulations set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) Chapter 92, Subdivisions and Partitions.

C. Future Redivision Plan. When subdividing or partitioning tracts into large lots (i.e., greater than two times or 200 percent the minimum lot size allowed by the underlying land use district), the city shall require that the lots be of such size, shape, and orientation as to facilitate future re-division in accordance with the requirements of the land use district and this code. A redivision plan shall be submitted which identifies:

1. Potential future lot division(s) in conformance with the housing and density standards.

2. Potential street right-of-way alignments to serve future development of the property and connect to adjacent properties, including existing or planned rights-of-way.

3. A disclaimer that the plan is a conceptual plan intended to show potential future development. It shall not be binding on the city or property owners, except as may be required through conditions of land division approval. For example, dedication and improvement of rights-of-way within the future plan area may be required to provide needed secondary access and circulation.

D. Lot Size Averaging. Single-family residential lot size may be averaged to allow lots less than the minimum lot size in the residential district, as long as the average area for all lots is not less than allowed by the district. No lot created under this provision shall be less than 80 percent of the minimum lot size allowed in the underlying district. For example, if the minimum lot size is 10,000 square feet, the following three lots could be created: 10,000 square feet, 9,000 square feet, and 8,000 square feet.

E. Temporary Sales Office. A temporary sales office in conjunction with a subdivision may be approved as set forth in FMC 19.490.100, Temporary use permits.

F. Minimize Flood Damage. All subdivisions and partitions shall be designed based on the need to minimize the risk of flood damage. No new building lots shall be created entirely within a floodway. All new lots shall be buildable without requiring development within the floodway. Development in a 100-year floodplain shall comply with Federal Emergency Management Agency requirements, including filling to elevate structures above the base flood elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such approvals from the appropriate agency before city approval of the final plat.

G. Determination of Base Flood Elevation. Where a development site consists of two or more lots, or is located in or near areas prone to inundation, and the base flood elevation has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be prepared by a qualified professional, as determined by the city administrator or his or her designee.

H. Need for Adequate Utilities. All lots created through land division shall have adequate public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to prevent or minimize flood damage to the extent practicable.

I. Need for Adequate Drainage. All subdivision and partition proposals shall have adequate surface water drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Water quality or quantity control improvements may be required.

J. Floodplain, Park, and Open Space Dedications. Where land filling and/or development is allowed within or adjacent to the 100-year floodplain outside the zero-foot rise floodplain, and the Comprehensive Plan designates the subject floodplain for park, open space, or trail use, the city may require the dedication of sufficient open land area for a greenway adjoining or within the floodplain. When practicable, this area shall include portions at a suitable elevation for the construction of a pedestrian/bicycle pathway within the floodplain in accordance with the city’s adopted trails plan or pedestrian and bikeway plans, as applicable. The city shall evaluate individual development proposals and determine whether the dedication of land is justified based on the development’s impact to the park and/or trail system. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.130 Approvals process.

A. Review of Preliminary Plat. Review of a preliminary plat for a subdivision or partition with 10 or fewer lots shall be processed by means of a Type II procedure, as governed by FMC 19.413.020. Preliminary plats with greater than 10 lots shall be processed with a Type III procedure under FMC 19.413.030. All preliminary plats shall be reviewed using approval criteria contained in FMC 19.430.140. An application for subdivision may be reviewed concurrently with an application for a master planned development under Chapter 19.450 FMC.

B. Review of Final Plat. Review of a final plat for a subdivision or partition shall be processed by means of a Type I procedure under Chapter 19.413 FMC, using the approval criteria in FMC 19.430.160.

C. Preliminary Plat Approval Period. Preliminary plat approval shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval. The preliminary plat shall lapse if a final plat has not been filed with the county within that one-year period unless extended consistent with subsection E of this section.

D. Modifications. The applicant may request changes to the approved preliminary plat or conditions of approval following the procedures and criteria provided in Chapter 19.415 FMC, Amendments to Decisions.

E. Extensions. The public works director or designee shall, upon written request by an applicant and payment of the required fee, grant up to two one-year extensions of the approval period not to exceed one year each. For a preliminary plat approved in 2007 or 2008, the city administrator or designee may, if requested during the 2013 calendar year, approve a fifth extension for periods up to six months expiring no later than December 31, 2014.

All extensions are subject to the following:

1. Any changes to the preliminary plat follow the procedures in Chapter 19.415 FMC;

2. The applicant has submitted written intent to file a final plat within the one-year extension period;

3. An extension of time will not prevent the lawful development of abutting properties;

4. There have been no changes to the applicable code provisions on which the approval was based. If such changes have occurred, a new preliminary plat application shall be required; and

5. The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan.

6. The fee shall be paid for each extension request.

F. Phased Development.

1. The city may approve a time schedule for developing a subdivision in phases, but in no case shall the actual construction time period (i.e., for required public improvements, utilities, streets) for any partition or subdivision phase be greater than two years without reapplying for a preliminary plat;

2. The criteria for approving a phased land division proposal are:

a. Public facilities shall be constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

b. The development and occupancy of any phase dependent on the use of temporary public facilities shall require city council approval. Temporary facilities shall be approved only upon city receipt of bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required permanent public improvements, in accordance with FMC 19.430.180. A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard;

c. The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or a third party (e.g., owners of lots) to construct public facilities that were required as part of the approved development proposal; and

d. The application for phased development approval shall be reviewed concurrently with the preliminary plat application and the decision may be appealed in the same manner as the preliminary plat. (Ord. 6-2013 § 1; Ord. 5-2012 § 1; Ord. 10-2011; Ord. 3-2010 § 1; Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.140 Preliminary plat submission requirements.

A. General Submission Requirements. For Type II subdivisions (10 lots or fewer) and partitions, the applicant shall submit an application containing all of the information required for a Type II procedure under FMC 19.413.020. For Type III subdivisions (greater than 10 lots), the application shall contain all of the information required for a Type III procedure under FMC 19.413.030, except as required for master planned neighborhood developments:

1. Master Planned Neighborhood Development. Submission of a master plan, as provided in Chapter 19.450 FMC, shall be required for:

a. Development sites in the residential district which are planned in accordance with the procedures for master planned developments.

The neighborhood master plan shall be approved either prior to, or concurrent with, the preliminary plat application.

B. Preliminary Plat Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection A of this section, the preliminary plat application shall consist of drawings and supplementary written material (i.e., on forms and/or in a written narrative) adequate to provide the following information:

1. General Information.

a. Name of subdivision (not required for partitions). This name must not duplicate the name of another subdivision in the county in which it is located (please check with county surveyor);

b. Date, north arrow, and scale of drawing;

c. Location of the development sufficient to define its location in the city, boundaries, and a legal description of the site;

d. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners, designer, and engineer or surveyor if any, and the date of the survey; and

e. Identification of the drawing as a “preliminary plat.”

2. Site Analysis.

a. Streets. Location, name, present width of all streets, alleys and rights-of-way on and abutting the site;

b. Easements. Width, location and purpose of all existing easements of record on and abutting the site;

c. Utilities. Location and identity of all utilities on and abutting the site. If water mains and sewers are not on or abutting the site, indicate the direction and distance to the nearest ones;

d. Ground elevations shown by contour lines at five-foot vertical intervals for ground slopes exceeding 10 percent and at two-foot intervals for ground slopes of less than 10 percent. Such ground elevations shall be related to some established bench mark or other datum approved by the county surveyor. This requirement may be waived for partitions when grades, on average, are less than two percent;

e. The location and elevation of the closest benchmark(s) within or adjacent to the site (i.e., for surveying purposes);

f. Potential natural hazard areas, including any floodplains, areas subject to high water table, landslide areas, and areas having a high erosion potential;

g. Sensitive lands, including wetland areas, streams, wildlife habitat, and other areas identified by the city or natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection;

h. Site features, including existing structures, pavement, areas having unique views, and drainage ways, canals and ditches;

i. Designated historic and cultural resources on the site and adjacent parcels or lots;

j. The location, size and species of trees having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade in conformance with Article III of this title;

k. North arrow, scale, name and address of owner;

l. Name and address of project designer, if applicable; and

m. Other information, as deemed appropriate by the city administrator or his or her designee. The city may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features and code requirements.

3. Proposed Improvements.

a. Public and private streets, tracts, driveways, open space and park land; location, names, right-of-way dimensions, approximate radius of street curves; and approximate finished street center line grades. All streets and tracts which are being held for private use and all reservations and restrictions relating to such private tracts shall be identified;

b. Easements. Location, width and purpose of all easements;

c. Lots and Private Tracts (e.g., private open space, common area, or street). Approximate dimensions, area calculation (e.g., in square feet), and identification numbers for all lots and tracts;

d. Proposed uses of the property, including all areas proposed to be dedicated to the public or reserved as open space for the purpose of surface water management, recreation, or other use;

e. Proposed improvements, as required by Article III of this title (Design Standards), and timing of improvements (e.g., in the case of streets, sidewalks, street trees, utilities, etc.);

f. The proposed source of domestic water;

g. The proposed method of sewage disposal, and method of surface water drainage and treatment if required;

h. The approximate location and identity of other utilities, including the locations of street lighting fixtures;

i. Proposed railroad crossing or modifications to an existing crossing, if any, and evidence of contact with Oregon Department of Transportation related to proposed railroad crossing(s);

j. Changes to navigable streams, shorelines or other water courses. Provision or closure of public access to these areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat, as applicable;

k. Identification of the base flood elevation for development in or near an identified floodplain. Evidence of contact with the Federal Emergency Management Agency to initiate a floodplain map amendment shall be required when development is proposed to modify a designated 100-year floodplain;

l. Evidence of contact with Multnomah County or Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) for any development requiring access to a county road or state highway as pertinent; and

m. Evidence of contact with the applicable natural resource regulatory agency(ies) for any development within or adjacent to jurisdictional wetlands and other sensitive lands, as identified in Article III of this title. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.150 Approval criteria – Preliminary plat.

A. General Approval Criteria. The city may approve, approve with conditions or deny a preliminary plat based on the following approval criteria:

1. The proposed preliminary plat complies with all of the applicable development code sections and other applicable ordinances and regulations. At a minimum, the provisions of this chapter, and the applicable sections of Article II (Land Use Districts) and Article III (Design Standards) of this title shall apply. Where a variance is necessary to receive preliminary plat approval, the application shall also comply with the relevant sections of Article V (Exceptions);

2. The proposed plat name is not already recorded for another subdivision, and satisfies the provisions of ORS Chapter 92;

3. The proposed streets, roads, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, pathways, utilities, and surface water management facilities are laid out so as to conform or transition to the plats of subdivisions and maps of major partitions already approved for adjoining property as to width, general direction and in all other respects. All proposed public improvements and dedications are identified on the preliminary plat; and

4. All proposed private common areas and improvements (e.g., homeowners’ association property) are identified on the preliminary plat.

B. Housing Density. The subdivision meets the city’s housing standards of Article II.

C. Block and Lot Standards. All proposed blocks (i.e., one or more lots bound by public streets), lots and parcels conform to the specific requirements below:

1. All lots shall comply with the lot area, setback, and dimensional requirements of the applicable land use district (Article II), and the standards for street connectivity and formation of blocks.

2. Setbacks shall be as required by the applicable land use district.

3. Each lot shall conform to the standards for access and circulation.

4. Landscape or other screening may be required to maintain privacy for abutting uses. See also Article II – Land Use Districts, and Article III – Landscaping.

5. In conformance with the Uniform Fire Code, a 20-foot width fire apparatus access drive shall be provided to serve all portions of a building that are located more than 150 feet from a public right-of-way or approved access drive. See also Article III – Access and Circulation.

6. Where a common drive is to be provided to serve more than one lot, a reciprocal easement which will ensure access and maintenance rights shall be recorded with the approved subdivision or partition plat.

D. Conditions of Approval. The city may attach such conditions as are necessary to carry out provisions of this code, and other applicable ordinances and regulations, and may require reserve strips be granted to the city for the purpose of controlling access to adjoining undeveloped properties. See also Article III – Public Facilities. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.160 Variances authorized.

Adjustments to the standards of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 19.520 FMC, Variances. Applications for variances shall be submitted at the same time an application for land division or lot line adjustment is submitted. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.170 Final plat submission requirements and approval criteria.

A. Submission Requirements. Final plats shall be reviewed and approved by the city prior to recording with Multnomah County. The applicant shall submit the final plat within one year of the approval of the preliminary plat as provided by FMC 19.430.120. Specific information about the format and size of the plat, number of copies and other detailed information can be obtained from the city administrator or his or her designee.

B. Approval Criteria. By means of a Type I procedure, the city administrator or his or her designee shall review the final plat and shall approve or deny the final plat based on findings regarding compliance with the following criteria:

1. The final plat complies with the approved preliminary plat, and all conditions of approval have been satisfied;

2. All public improvements required by the preliminary plat have been installed and approved by the city administrator or his or her designee. Alternatively, the developer has provided a performance guarantee in accordance with FMC 19.430.190;

3. The streets and roads for public use are dedicated without reservation or restriction other than revisionary rights upon vacation of any such street or road and easements for public utilities;

4. The streets and roads held for private use have been approved by the city as conforming to the preliminary plat;

5. The plat contains a dedication to the public of all public improvements, including but not limited to streets, public pathways and trails, access reserve strips, parks, sewage disposal, storm drainage and water supply systems;

6. The applicant has provided copies of all recorded homeowners association codes, covenants, and restrictions (CC&R’s); deed restrictions; private easements and agreements (e.g., for access, common areas, parking, etc.); and other recorded documents pertaining to common improvements recorded and referenced on the plat;

7. The plat complies with the applicable sections of this code (i.e., there have been no changes in land use or development resulting in a code violation since preliminary plat approval);

8. Certification by the city or service district, as applicable, that water and sanitary sewer service is available to each and every lot depicted on the plat; or bond, contract or other assurance has been provided by the subdivider to the city that such services will be installed in accordance with Chapter 19.165 FMC, Public Facilities Standards, and the bond requirements of FMC 19.430.190. The amount of the bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider shall be determined by a registered professional engineer, subject to review and approval by the city;

9. The plat contains an affidavit by the surveyor who surveyed the land, represented on the plat to the effect the land was correctly surveyed and marked with proper monuments as provided by ORS Chapter 92, and indicating the initial point of the survey, and giving the dimensions and kind of such monument, and its reference to some corner established by the U.S. Geological Survey or giving two or more permanent objects for identifying its location. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.180 Public improvements.

The following procedures apply to subdivisions and partitions when public improvements are required as a condition of approval:

A. Public Improvements Required. Before city approval is certified on the final plat, all required public improvements shall be installed, inspected, and approved. Alternatively, the subdivider shall provide a performance guarantee, in accordance with FMC 19.430.190. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.190 Performance guarantee.

A. Performance Guarantee Required. When a performance guarantee is required under FMC 19.430.180, the subdivider shall file an assurance of performance with the city supported by one of the following:

1. An irrevocable letter of credit executed by a financial institution authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon;

2. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon which remains in force until the surety company is notified by the city in writing that it may be terminated; or

3. Cash.

B. Determination of Sum. The assurance of performance shall be for a sum determined by the city as required to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental expenses.

C. Itemized Improvement Estimate. The developer shall furnish to the city an itemized improvement estimate, certified by a registered civil engineer, to assist the city in calculating the amount of the performance assurance.

D. Agreement. An agreement between the city and developer shall be recorded with the final plat that stipulates all of the following:

1. Specifies the period within which all required improvements and repairs shall be completed;

2. A provision that if work is not completed within the period specified, the city may complete the work and recover the full cost and expenses from the applicant;

3. Stipulates the improvement fees and deposits that are required;

4. Provides for the construction of the improvements in stages and for the extension of time under specific conditions therein stated in the contract.

The agreement may be prepared by the city, or in a letter prepared by the applicant. It shall not be valid until it is signed and dated by both the applicant and city administrator or his or her designee.

E. When Subdivider Fails to Perform. In the event the developer fails to carry out all provisions of the agreement and the city has un-reimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the city shall call on the bond, cash deposit or letter of credit for reimbursement.

F. Termination of Performance Guarantee. The developer shall not cause termination of nor allow expiration of the guarantee without having first secured written authorization from the city. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.200 Filing and recording.

A. Filing Plat with County. Within 60 days of the city approval of the final plat, the applicant shall submit the final plat to Multnomah County for signatures of county officials as required by ORS Chapter 92.

B. Proof of Recording. Upon final recording with the county, the applicant shall submit to the city a mylar copy and two paper copies of all sheets of the recorded final plat. This shall occur prior to the issuance of building permits for the newly created lots.

C. Prerequisites to Recording the Plat.

1. No plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem taxes and all special assessments, fees, or other charges required by law to be placed on the tax roll have been paid in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92;

2. No plat shall be recorded until it is approved by the county surveyor in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.210 Replatting and vacation of plats.

A. Replatting and Vacations. Any plat or portion thereof may be replatted or vacated upon receiving an application signed by all of the owners as appearing on the deed. Consistency with ORS Chapter 92 is required.

B. Procedure. All applications for a replat or vacation shall be processed in accordance with the procedures and standards for a subdivision or partition (i.e., the same process used to create the plat shall be used to replat or vacate the plat). The same appeal rights provided through the subdivision and partition process shall be afforded to the plat vacation process.

C. Basis for Denial. A replat or vacation application may be denied if it abridges or destroys any public right in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys; or if it fails to meet any applicable criteria.

D. Recording of Vacations. All approved plat vacations shall be recorded in accordance with FMC 19.430.200 and the following procedures:

1. Once recorded, a replat or vacation shall operate to eliminate the force and effect of the plat prior to vacation; and

2. Vacations shall also divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described on the plat.

E. After Sale of Lots. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated only in the manner herein, and provided that all of the owners of lots within the platted area consent in writing to the plat vacation.

F. Vacation of Streets. All street vacations shall comply with the procedures and standards set forth in city ordinance and ORS Chapter 271. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.430.220 Lot line adjustments.

Lot line adjustments include the consolidation of lots, and the modification of lot boundaries, when no new lots are created. The application submission and approvals process is as follows:

A. Submission Requirements. All applications for lot line adjustment shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall include information required for a Type I application, as governed by Chapter 19.413 FMC. The application shall include a preliminary lot line map identifying all existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions; footprints and dimensions of existing structures (including accessory structures); location and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject lots; location of significant vegetation as defined and mapped in Chapter 19.163 FMC; existing fences and walls; and any other information deemed necessary by the city administrator or his or her designee for ensuring compliance with city codes.

B. Approval Process.

1. Decision-Making Process. Lot line adjustments shall be reviewed by means of a Type I procedure, as governed by Chapter 19.413 FMC, using approval criteria contained in subsection C of this section.

2. Time Limit on Approval. The lot line adjustment approval shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval, during which time it must be recorded.

3. Lapsing of Approval. The lot line adjustment approval shall lapse if:

a. The lot line adjustment is not recorded within the time limit in subsection (B)(2) of this section;

b. The lot line adjustment has been improperly recorded with Multnomah County without the satisfactory completion of all conditions attached to the approval; or

c. The final recording is a departure from the approved plan.

C. Approval Criteria. The city administrator or his or her designee shall approve or deny a request for a lot line adjustment in writing based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

1. No additional parcel or lot is created by the lot line adjustment;

2. Lot standards. All lots and parcels comply with the applicable lot standards of the land use district (Article II of this title) including lot area and dimensions;

3. Access. All lots and parcels comply with the standards or requirements of Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation;

4. Setbacks. The resulting lots, parcels, tracts, and building locations comply with the standards of the land use district (Article II of this title); and

5. Exemptions from Dedications and Improvements. A lot line adjustment is not considered a development action for purposes of determining whether right-of-way dedication or improvement is required.

D. Recording Lot Line Adjustments.

1. Recording. Upon the city’s approval of the proposed lot line adjustment, the applicant shall record the lot line adjustment with Multnomah County within 60 days of approval (or the decision expires), and submit a copy of the recorded survey map to the city, to be filed with the approved application.

2. Time Limit. The applicant shall submit the copy of the recorded lot line adjustment survey map to the city within 15 days of recording and prior to the issuance of any building permits on the reconfigured lots.

E. Extension. The city shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year provided that:

1. No changes are made on the original plan as approved by the city;

2. The applicant can show intent of recording the approved partition or lot line adjustment within the one-year extension period;

3. There have been no changes in the applicable code or plan provisions on which the approval was based. In the case where the lot line adjustment conflicts with a code change, the extension shall be denied; and

4. The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.440 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sections:

19.440.100    Purpose.

19.440.200    Approvals process.

19.440.300    Application submission requirements.

19.440.400    Criteria, standards and conditions of approval.

19.440.500    Additional development standards for conditional use types.


19.440.100 Purpose.

There are certain uses, which, due to the nature of their impacts on surrounding land uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and analysis. These are identified as “conditional uses” in Article II of this title, Land Use Districts. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures under which a conditional use may be permitted, enlarged or altered if the site is appropriate and if other appropriate conditions of approval can be met. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.440.200 Approvals process.

A. Initial Application. An application for a new conditional use shall be processed as a Type III procedure. The application shall meet the submission requirements, and the approval criteria contained in this chapter.

B. Modification of Approved or Existing Conditional Use. Modifications to approved or existing conditional uses shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 19.415 FMC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.440.300 Application submission requirements.

In addition to the submission requirements required elsewhere, an application for conditional use approval must include the information in subsections A through H of this section, as applicable. For a description of each item, please refer to site design review application submission requirements.

A. Existing site conditions;

B. Site plan;

C. Preliminary grading plan;

D. A landscape plan;

E. Architectural drawings of all structures;

F. Drawings of all proposed signs;

G. A copy of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants;

H. Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with all applicable approval criteria. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.440.400 Criteria, standards and conditions of approval.

The city shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional use or to enlarge or alter a conditional use based on findings of fact with respect to each of the following standards and criteria.

A. Use Criteria.

1. The site size, dimensions, location, topography and access are adequate for the needs of the proposed use, considering the proposed building mass, parking, traffic, noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, visibility, safety, and aesthetic considerations;

2. The negative impacts of the proposed use on adjacent properties and on the public can be mitigated through application of other code standards, or other reasonable conditions of approval; and

3. All required public facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposal.

B. Site Design Standards. The criteria for site design review approval (Chapter 19.420 FMC) shall be met.

C. Conditions of Approval. The city may impose conditions that are found necessary to ensure that the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity, and that the negative impact of the proposed use on the surrounding uses and public facilities is minimized. These conditions include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Limiting the hours, days, place and/or manner of operation;

2. Requiring site or architectural design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor and/or dust;

3. Requiring larger setback areas, lot area, and/or lot depth or width;

4. Limiting the building height, size or lot coverage, and/or location on the site;

5. Designating the size, number, location and/or design of vehicle access points or parking areas;

6. Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and street(s), sidewalks, curbs, planting strips, pathways, or trails to be improved;

7. Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, water quality facilities, and/or improvement of parking and loading areas;

8. Limiting the number, size, location, height and/or lighting of signs;

9. Limiting or setting standards for the location, design, and/or intensity of outdoor lighting;

10. Requiring berms, screening or landscaping and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance;

11. Requiring and designating the size, height, location and/or materials for fences;

12. Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, drainage areas, historic resources, cultural resources, and/or sensitive lands;

13. Requiring the dedication of sufficient land to the public, and/or construction of pedestrian/bicycle pathways in accordance with the adopted plans. Dedication of land and construction shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 19.160 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.440.500 Additional development standards for conditional use types.

A. Concurrent Variance Application(s). A conditional use permit shall not grant variances to regulations otherwise prescribed by the development code. Variance application(s) may be filed in conjunction with the conditional use application and both applications may be reviewed at the same hearing.

B. Additional Development Standards. Development standards for specific uses are contained in Article II of this title, Land Use Districts. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.450 MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:

19.450.100    Purpose.

19.450.110    Applicability.

19.450.120    Review and approvals process.

19.450.130    Allowed uses.

19.450.140    Applicability of the land use district standards.

19.450.150    Applicability of design standards (Article III).

19.450.160    Overlay zone and concept plan submission.

19.450.170    Overlay zone and concept plan approval criteria.

19.450.180    Administrative procedures.

19.450.190    Detailed development plan submission requirements.

19.450.200    Detailed development plan approval criteria.

19.450.210    Development review and building permit approvals.


19.450.100 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to:

A. Implement the neighborhood development standards of Article II of this title, by providing a means for master planning large development sites;

B. Encourage innovative planning that results in more mixed use development, improved protection of open spaces, and greater housing and transportation options;

C. Encourage developments that recognize the relationship between buildings, their use, open space, and transportation options, providing varied opportunities for innovative and diversified living environments;

D. Facilitate the efficient use of land;

E. Promote an economic arrangement of land use, buildings, circulation systems, open space, and utilities;

F. Preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape features and amenities, that may not otherwise be protected through conventional development;

G. Encourage energy conservation and improved air and water quality. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.110 Applicability.

The master planned development designation is an overlay zone which may be applied over any of the city’s land use districts. An applicant may elect to develop a project as a master planned development in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. In addition, the city may require that the following types of development be processed using the provisions of this chapter:

A. Subdivisions required to conform to the master planned neighborhood development standards of Chapter 19.30 FMC (Residential District).

B. Business parks, industrial parks or other large developments when phased over a multiyear period. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.120 Review and approvals process.

A. Review Steps. There are three required steps to planned development approval:

1. The approval of a planned development overlay zone and concept plan;

2. The approval of a detailed development plan; and

3. The approval of a preliminary subdivision plat(s) and/or site design review application(s).

B. Approval Process.

1. The master planned development (PD) overlay zone and concept plan shall be reviewed together using the Type III procedure in FMC 19.413.030, the application requirements in FMC 19.412.020, and the decision process in FMC 19.413.030.

2. The detailed development plan shall be reviewed using the Type III procedure in FMC 19.413.030 to ensure substantial compliance with the approved concept plan.

3. Preliminary subdivision plats and site design review applications for approved planned developments shall be reviewed using a Type II procedure, as governed by FMC 19.413.020 (this variation from the standard procedures of Chapter 19.420 FMC, Site Design Review, and Chapter 19.430 FMC, Land Divisions, is intended to streamline review for projects which have received the required planned development approvals).

4. The steps in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section may be combined in any manner, so long as the decision-making sequence follows that in subsection A. Notification and hearings may be combined. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.130 Allowed uses.

A. In the Residential District(s). In the residential district the following uses are allowed outright when they are included in an approved master planned development:

1. All uses allowed outright in the underlying land use district;

2. Single-family detached and attached residential units;

3. Duplex and triplex residential units;

4. Multifamily residential units;

5. Manufactured homes;

6. Neighborhood commercial uses;

7. Public uses, as determined during master plan review;

8. Indoor recreation facility; athletic club, fitness center, racquetball court, swimming pool, tennis court or similar use;

9. Outdoor recreation facility, golf course, golf driving range, swimming pool, tennis court, or similar use; and

10. Recreational vehicle storage area.

11. Conditional uses shall require a conditional use permit, in accordance with Chapter 19.440 FMC (except that the following “conditional uses” may be permitted by right when approved as part of the master planned development: (reserved for list)).

B. In the Town Center District. In the TCC district, all of the uses permitted outright in the district are allowed within a master planned development. In addition, the ground-floor restriction on residential uses on individual city blocks shall not apply if ground floor residential uses occupy no more than 50 percent of the ground floor space in the entire development (i.e., all blocks).

C. In the Industrial or Commercial Districts. In I and C districts, a planned development shall contain only those uses allowed outright in the underlying district. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.140 Applicability of the land use district standards.

A. Land Use District Standards. Master planned developments shall conform to the provisions of the underlying land use district, as follows:

1. Density, Floor Area, Building Size. The density, floor area, and building size standards of the district shall apply. The floor area standards may be increased by up to 25 percent, if balanced by social or environmental benefits useful to the community as a whole;

2. The lot area and dimensional standards of the district may not apply;

3. The lot coverage standards of the district shall apply;

4. Building Height. The maximum building height standard shall apply; and

5. Setbacks.

a. Front yard and rear yard setbacks for structures on the perimeter of the project shall be the same as that required by the underlying district, unless increased through the master plan review;

b. The side yard setback provisions may be reduced except that all detached structures shall meet Uniform Building Code requirements for fire walls; and

c. Front yard and rear yard setback requirements of the underlying district shall not apply to structures on the interior of the project except that:

i. A minimum front yard setback of 15 feet is required for any garage structure which opens facing a public or private street;

ii. A minimum front yard setback of eight feet is required for any garage opening facing an alley.

B. Other Provisions of the District. All other provisions of the land use district shall apply, except as modified by this chapter.

C. More than One Overlay Zone. When more than one overlay zone applies to the development, and standards conflict between the overlay zones, the more restrictive standards shall apply (i.e., those which afford the greatest protection to identified resources and amenities, compatibility between land uses, etc.). (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.150 Applicability of design standards (Article III).

The design standards of Article III apply to all master planned developments. Variances shall conform to the standards and procedures of Chapter 19.520 FMC, Variances. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.160 Overlay zone and concept plan submission.

A. General Submission Requirements. The applicant shall submit an application containing all of the general information required for a Type III procedure, as governed by FMC 19.413.030. In addition, the applicant shall submit the following:

1. A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant.

2. A development schedule indicating the approximate dates when construction of the planned development and its various phases are expected to be initiated and completed.

3. A statement of the applicant’s intentions with regard to the future selling or leasing of all or portions of the planned development.

4. Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in FMC 19.450.170.

5. Special studies prepared by qualified professionals may be required by the city staff, planning commission or city council to determine potential traffic, geologic, noise, environmental, natural resource and other impacts, and required mitigation.

B. Additional Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection A of this section, the concept plan, data, and narrative shall include the following exhibits and information:

1. Existing conditions map, as defined in Chapter 19.420 FMC, Development Review and Site Design Review;

2. Conceptual site plan (e.g., general land use, building envelopes, circulation, open space, utility connections, and other information necessary to convey the concept plan);

3. Grading concept (for hillside or sloping properties, or where extensive grading is anticipated);

4. Landscape concept (e.g., shows retention of existing vegetation and general planting areas);

5. Architectural concept (e.g., information sufficient to describe architectural styles, building heights, and general materials);

6. Sign concept (e.g., locations, general size, style and materials of signs);

7. Copy of all existing covenants and restrictions, and general description of proposed restrictions or covenants (e.g., for common areas, access, parking, etc.). (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.170 Overlay zone and concept plan approval criteria.

The city shall make findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied when approving or approving with conditions the overlay zone and concept plan. The city shall make findings that all of the criteria are not satisfied when denying an application:

A. Comprehensive Plan. All relevant provisions of the Comprehensive Plan are met;

B. Land Division Chapter. All of the requirements for land divisions, as applicable, shall be met (Chapter 19.430 FMC);

C. Article II Land Use and Design Standards. All of the land use and design standards contained in Article II of this title are met, except as modified in FMC 19.450.140 and the following provisions for density bonuses:

1. Density Bonus. The housing density standards shall be determined based on the densities in Article II of this title. When allowed by the Comprehensive Plan, the city may authorize a density bonus above the density allowed by Article II, as an incentive to increase or enhance open space, protect sensitive lands, provide unique architectural character, and or accomplish other purposes of the district, as identified in FMC 19.450.100. The density bonus shall not result in the allowable density exceeding 25 percent of the allowable density in Article II. The criteria in subsections (C)(1)(a) through (d) of this section shall be used in granting density bonuses. The percentage of density bonus granted shall be proportional to the land area used to meet the criteria in subsections (C)(1)(a) through (d).

a. A maximum of 10 percent of the density allowed by the district may be approved for the provision of public open space, or protection of natural features in common open space;

b. A maximum of two percent of the density allowed by the district may be approved for streetscape (e.g., parkways or landscaped boulevard) development; plazas, pathways or other pedestrian amenities; or recreation area development;

c. A maximum of three percent of the density allowed by the district may be approved for the protection or enhancement of community views and vistas (e.g., by providing a public view point, parkway, plaza, or open space);

d. A maximum of 10 percent of the density allowed by the district may be approved for development of affordable housing. Affordable housing is defined as housing affordable to households earning 80 percent of the median household income in Multnomah County, or less. Such households, on average, do not spend more than 30 percent of their income on housing. Housing prices and/or rents shall be limited to that level through deed restriction for up to five years.

D. Requirements for Common Open Space. Where common open space is designated, the following standards apply:

1. The open space area shall be shown on the final plan and recorded with the final plat or separate instrument; and

2. The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

a. By dedication to the city as publicly owned and maintained open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the city must be acceptable to the city administrator or his or her designee with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition (i.e., the applicant may be required to provide a level one environmental assessment), and budgetary and maintenance abilities;

b. By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, home association or other legal entity, with the city retaining the development rights to the property. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions (e.g., maintenance, property tax payment, etc.) suitable to the city. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.180 Administrative procedures.

A. Land Use District Map Designation. After a planned development overlay zone has been approved, the land use district map shall be amended in accordance with Chapter 19.415 FMC, to indicate the approved planned development designation for the subject development site. The approval of the planned development overlay zone shall not expire.

B. Time Limit on Filing of Detailed Development Plan. Within one and one-half years after the date of approval of the concept plan, the applicant or his or her successor shall prepare and file with the city a detailed development plan, in conformance with FMC 19.450.190.

C. Extension. The city shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

1. No changes have been made on the original conceptual development plan as approved;

2. The applicant can show intent of applying for detailed development plan review within the one-year extension period;

3. There have been no changes to the applicable Comprehensive Plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based; and

4. The extension request is made before expiration of the original approval period. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.190 Detailed development plan submission requirements.

The contents of the detailed development plan shall be determined based on the conditions of approval for the concept plan. At a minimum, the detailed development plan shall identify the final proposed location of all lots, tracts, parcels, open space, rights-of-way, building envelopes and other features, prior to approval of a development permit (e.g., land division, development review, site design review, etc.). The detailed development plan shall be reviewed using a Type III procedure. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.200 Detailed development plan approval criteria.

The city shall approve the detailed development plan upon finding that the final plan conforms with the concept plan and required conditions of approval. Minor changes to the approved concept plan may be approved with the detailed plan, consistent with the following criteria:

A. Increased residential densities by no more than five percent, when such change conforms to the Comprehensive Plan.

B. A reduction to the amount of open space or landscaping by no more than three percent.

C. An increase in lot coverage by buildings or changes in the amount of parking by no more than five percent. Greater changes require a major modification (Chapter 19.415 FMC).

D. No change in land use shall be permitted without approving a major modification to the concept plan (Chapter 19.415 FMC).

E. No change which places development within environmentally sensitive areas or areas subject to a potential hazard shall be approved without approving a major modification to the concept plan (Chapter 19.415 FMC).

F. The location of buildings, proposed streets, parking lot configuration, utility easements, landscaping or other site improvements shall be as proposed on the concept plan, or as modified through conditions of approval. Changes in the location or alignment of these features by more than 10 feet shall require approval of a major modification, in conformance with Chapter 19.415 FMC.

G. Other substantial modifications made to the approved conceptual development plan shall require approval of either a minor modification or major modification, in conformance with Chapter 19.415 FMC. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.450.210 Development review and building permit approvals.

Upon receiving detailed development plan approval, the applicant may apply for development review (e.g., land division, development review, site design review, etc.). Building permits shall not be issued until all required development permits have been issued and appeal periods have ended.

A. Chapter 19.420 FMC applies to developments requiring development review or site design review.

B. Chapter 19.430 FMC applies to land divisions.

C. Streamlined Review Option. Preliminary subdivision plats and site design review applications for approved master planned developments may be reviewed using a Type II procedure, rather than the conventional Type III procedure. This shall be the applicant’s option. The variation from the standard procedures of Chapter 19.420 FMC, Site Design Review, and Chapter 19.430 FMC, Land Divisions, is intended to streamline review of projects that have received planned development approvals, since those projects have previously been subject to public review and hearings. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.460 MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED PLANS AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL

(Repealed by Ord. 6-2009)


Chapter 19.470 LAND USE DISTRICT MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS

Sections:

19.470.100    Purpose.

19.470.200    Legislative amendments.

19.470.300    Quasi-judicial amendments.

19.470.400    Conditions of approval.

19.470.500    Record of amendments.

19.470.600    Transportation planning rule compliance.


19.470.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures for legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to this code and the land use district map. These will be referred to as “map and text amendments.” Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs and desires, to correct mistakes, or to address changes in the law. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.470.200 Legislative amendments.

Legislative amendments are policy decisions made by city council. They are reviewed using the Type IV procedure in FMC 19.413.040. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.470.300 Quasi-judicial amendments.

A. Quasi-Judicial Amendments. Quasi-judicial amendments are those that involve the application of adopted policy to a specific development application or code revision. Quasi-judicial map amendments shall follow the Type III procedure, as governed by FMC 19.413.030, using standards of approval in FMC 19.470.400. The approval authority shall be as follows:

1. The planning commission shall review and recommend land use district map changes which do not involve comprehensive plan map amendments. The city council shall decide such applications;

2. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on an application for a comprehensive plan map amendment. The city council shall decide such applications; and

3. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on a land use district change application which also involves a comprehensive plan map amendment application. The city council shall decide both applications.

B. Criteria for Quasi-Judicial Amendments. A recommendation or a decision to approve, approve with conditions or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial amendment shall be based on all of the following criteria:

1. Demonstration of compliance with all applicable comprehensive plan policies and map designations. Where this criterion cannot be met, a comprehensive plan amendment shall be a prerequisite to approval;

2. Demonstration of compliance with all applicable standards and criteria of this code, and other applicable implementing ordinances;

3. Evidence of change in the neighborhood or community or a mistake or inconsistency in the comprehensive plan or land use district map regarding the property which is the subject of the application. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.470.400 Conditions of approval.

A quasi-judicial decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions. A legislative decision may be approved or denied. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.470.500 Record of amendments.

The city recorder shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this code and the land use districts map in a format convenient for public use. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.470.600 Transportation planning rule compliance.

A. When a development application includes a proposed comprehensive plan amendment or land use district change, the proposal shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a transportation facility consistent with OAR 660-012-0060.

B. Amendments to the comprehensive plan and land use standards which significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility identified in the Transportation System Plan. This shall be accomplished by one of the following:

1. Limiting allowed land uses to be consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility; or

2. Amending the Transportation System Plan to ensure that existing, improved, or new transportation facilities are adequate to support the proposed land uses consistent with the requirement of the Transportation Planning Rule; or

3. Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.480 CODE INTERPRETATIONS

Sections:

19.480.100    Purpose.

19.480.200    Code interpretation procedure.


19.480.100 Purpose.

Some terms or phrases within the code may have two or more reasonable meanings. This section provides a process for resolving differences in the interpretation of the code text. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.480.200 Code interpretation procedure.

A. Requests. A request for a code interpretation (“interpretation”) shall be made in writing to the city administrator or his or her designee.

B. Decision to Issue Interpretation. The city administrator or his or her designee shall have the authority to review a request for an interpretation. The city administrator or his or her designee shall advise the requester in writing within 14 days after the request is made, on whether or not the city will issue the requested interpretation.

C. Declining Requests for Interpretations. The city administrator or his or her designee is authorized to issue or decline to issue a requested interpretation. The basis for declining may include, but is not limited to, a finding that the subject code section affords only one reasonable interpretation and the interpretation does not support the request. The city administrator’s decision to issue or decline to issue an interpretation is final when the decision is mailed to the party requesting the interpretation and the decision is not subject to any further local appeal.

D. Written Interpretation. If the city administrator or his or her designee decides to issue an interpretation, it shall be issued in writing and shall be mailed or delivered to the person requesting the interpretation and any other person who specifically requested a copy of the interpretation. The written interpretation shall be issued within 14 days after the city advises the requester that an interpretation shall be issued. The decision shall become effective 14 days later, unless an appeal is filed in accordance with subsections E through G of this section.

E. Appeals. The applicant and any party who received such notice or who participated in the proceedings through the submission of written or verbal evidence of an interpretation may appeal the interpretation to the city planning commission within 14 days after the interpretation was mailed or delivered to the applicant. The appeal may be initiated by filing a notice of appeal with the city administrator or his or her designee pursuant to FMC 19.414.020.

F. Appeal Procedure. City planning commission shall hear all appeals of a city administrator’s interpretation as a Type III action pursuant to FMC 19.413.030 except that written notice of the hearing shall be provided to the applicant, any other party who has filed a notice of appeal, and any other person who requested notice.

G. Final Decision/Effective Date. The decision of the city planning commission on an appeal of an interpretation shall be final and effective when it is mailed to the applicant. If an appeal of the planning commission decision is made to the city council it shall follow the same process as above. The decision of the city council remains effective unless or until it is modified by the land use board of appeals or a court of competent jurisdiction.

H. Interpretations on File. The city administrator or his or her designee shall keep on file a record of all code interpretations. (Ord. 6-2009 § 4; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.490 MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS (TEMPORARY USES, HOME OCCUPATIONS, OTHERS)

Sections:

19.490.100    Temporary use permits.

19.490.200    Home occupation permits.

19.490.300    Fairview Lake dock permits.


19.490.100 Temporary use permits.

Temporary uses are characterized by their short-term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses include, but are not limited to: construction trailers, leasing offices, temporary carnivals and fairs, parking lot sales, retail warehouse sales, and seasonal sales such as Christmas tree sales and vegetable stands. Three types of temporary uses require permit approval:

A. Seasonal and Special Events. These types of uses occur only once in a calendar year and for no longer a period than 90 days.

Using a Type I procedure under FMC 19.414.010, the city shall approve, approve with conditions or deny a temporary use permit based on finding that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

1. The use is permitted in the underlying land use district and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval);

2. The applicant had proof of the property owner’s permission to place the use on his/her property;

3. No parking will be utilized by customers and employees of the temporary use which is needed by the property owner to meet his or her minimum parking requirement under Chapter 19.164 FMC, Vehicle and Bicycle Parking;

4. The use provides adequate vision clearance, as required by FMC 19.162.020(O), and shall not obstruct pedestrian access on public streets;

5. Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with other uses of the property as required by Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation;

6. The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use; and

7. The use is adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable (the applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits);

8. An extension of 60 days may be obtained if determined appropriate by the city administrator.

B. Temporary Sales Office or Model Home. Using a Type I procedure under FMC 19.414.010, the city may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for the use of any real property within the city as a temporary sales office, offices for the purpose of facilitating the sale of real property, or model home in any subdivision or tract of land within the city, but for no other purpose, based on the following criteria:

1. Temporary Sales Office.

a. The temporary sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be sold; and

b. The property to be used for a temporary sales office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose.

2. Model House.

a. The model house shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land where the real property to be sold is situated; and

b. The model house shall be designed as a permanent structure that meets all relevant requirements of this code.

C. Temporary Building. Using a Type I procedure under FMC 19.414.010, the city may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for a temporary trailer or prefabricated building for use on any real commercial or industrial property within the city as a temporary commercial or industrial office or space associated with the primary use on the property, but for no other purpose, based on the following criteria:

1. The temporary trailer or building shall be located within the boundaries of the parcel of land on which it is located;

2. The primary use on the property to be used for a temporary trailer is already developed;

3. Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the other uses of the property; as required by Chapter 19.162 FMC, Access and Circulation;

4. There is adequate parking for the customers or users of the temporary use as required by Chapter 19.164 FMC, Vehicle and Bicycle parking;

5.  The use will not result in vehicular congestion on streets;

6. The use will pose no hazard to pedestrians in the area of the use;

7. The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect adjoining use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use;

8. The building complies with applicable building codes; 

9. The use can be adequately served by sewer and water if necessary. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits;

10. The length of time that the temporary building will be used does not exceed 12 months, and if a temporary building exceeds this time frame, the applicant shall be required to remove the building, or renew the temporary use permit; and

11. Adequate landscaping, screening, buffering or other method to assure the structure is visually consistent with conditions surrounding the site. (Ord. 6-2009 § 3; Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.490.200 Home occupation permits.

The purpose of this section is to encourage those who are engaged in small commercial ventures which could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters or which, by the nature of the venture, are appropriate in scale and impact to be operated within a residence. Home occupations are encouraged for their contribution in reducing the number of vehicle trips often generated by conventional businesses. They are permitted by right in all residential units (dwellings), subject to the following standards:

A. Appearance of Residence.

1. The home occupation shall be restricted to lawfully built enclosed structures and be conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance of a business.

2. The home occupation shall not result in any structural alterations or additions to a structure that will change its primary use or building code occupancy classification.

3. The home occupation shall not violate any conditions of development approval (i.e., prior development permit approval).

4. No products and/or equipment produced or used by the home occupation may be displayed to be visible from outside any structure.

5. Home occupation activities will occupy no more than 30 percent of the gross floor area.

6. One professional, nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted  in accordance with FMC 19.170.080(B)(3).

7. Home occupations in accessory structures are only allowed after approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission.

B. Storage.

1. Outside storage, visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties, is prohibited.

2. On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, noxious, combustible or flammable) beyond those normally incidental to residential use is prohibited.

3. Storage of inventory or products and all other equipment, fixtures, and activities associated with the home occupation shall be allowed in any structure.

C. Employees.

1. Other than family members residing within the dwelling located on the home occupation site, there shall be no more than one full-time equivalent employee at the home occupation site at any given time. As used in this chapter, the term “home occupation site” means the lot on which the home occupation is conducted.

2. Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the home occupation, so long as they do not report to work or pick up/deliver at the home.

3. The home occupation site shall not be used as a headquarters for the assembly of employees for instruction or other purposes, including dispatch to other locations.

D. Advertising and Signs. Signs shall comply with Chapter 19.170 FMC. In no case shall a sign exceed two square feet in area.

E. Vehicles, Parking and Traffic.

1. One commercially licensed vehicle associated with the home occupation is allowed at the home occupation site. It shall be of a size that would not overhang into the public right-of-way when parked in the driveway or other location on the home occupation site.

2. There shall be no more than three commercial vehicle deliveries to or from the home occupation site daily. There shall be no commercial vehicle deliveries during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

3. There shall be no more than one client’s or customer’s vehicle at any one time and no more than eight per day at the home occupation site.

F. Business Hours. There shall be no restriction on business hours, except that clients or customers are permitted at the home occupation from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. only, subject to subsections A and E of this section.

G. Prohibited Home Occupation Uses.

1. Any activity that produces radio or TV interference, noise, glare, vibration, smoke or odor beyond allowable levels as determined by local, state or federal standards, or that can be detected beyond the property line, is prohibited.

2. Any activity involving on-site retail sales is prohibited, except that the sale of items that are incidental to a permitted home occupation is allowed. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music from music teachers, art or craft supplies from arts or crafts instructors, computer software from computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by a home business are allowed subject to subsections A through F of this section.

3. Any uses described in this section or uses with similar objectionable impacts because of motor vehicle traffic, noise, glare, odor, dust, smoke or vibration, such as:

a. Ambulance service;

b. Animal hospital, veterinary services, kennels or animal boarding;

c. Auto and other vehicle repair, including auto painting;

d. Repair, reconditioning or storage of motorized vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, airplanes or large equipment on site.

H. Enforcement. The city administrator or his or her designee may visit and inspect the site of home occupations in accordance with this chapter periodically to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations, during normal business hours, and with reasonable notice. Code violations shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 19.14 FMC, Enforcement. (Ord. 2-2010 § 5 (Att. 2); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.490.300 Fairview Lake dock permits.

The purpose of this section is to identify a permit process for proposed docks on Fairview Lake and to clarify regulations for the length, width, number, materials and accessory structures associated with the construction and design of docks on Fairview Lake. 

A. Permit Required. A permit must be obtained prior to constructing or installing a dock in or on Fairview Lake. Using a Type II review procedure under FMC 19.413.020, the city shall approve or deny a Fairview Lake dock permit based on finding that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

1. Width.

a. A dock may have a minimum width of 10 feet; however, the total width of the dock may not exceed 20 percent of the width of the applicant’s property at water’s edge to which the dock will be attached.

b. Method of Measurement. The width of the dock is calculated based on the total of all dock components measured to the furthest dimensions of the dock. (See figure below.)

2. Length.

a. Total length of a dock structure may not exceed 35 feet as described in subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section. 

b. A dock may not extend into Fairview Lake more than 35 feet. 

c. Method of Measurement.

i. Calculate the length of the dock as one component from the shoreline to the furthest dimension of the dock (L1 in figure below).

ii. Calculate the total distance that the dock extends out into the lake from the shoreline to the furthest dimension the dock extends into the lake (L2 in figure below).

Figure 1: Method of measurement for length and width of docks.


[IMAGE]


3. Number. One dock per tax lot is allowed. Shared docks are permitted in accordance with standards in subsection E of this section.

4. Shoreline Attachment. The mechanism for attaching the dock to the shoreline including, but not limited to, a concrete pad or wooden platform not exceeding 32 square feet does not require a natural resource permit. 

5. Materials. The use of Styrofoam, bead board or chemical treatments on wooden docks is prohibited on any portion of the dock. 

6. Accessory Structures.

a. The attachment of accessory structures, as defined by FMC 19.13.010, including but not limited to boat houses and canopies, is prohibited on any portion of the dock.

b. Boat lifts are permitted but shall be included in the total width and length calculations of the dock. 

B. All Fairview Lake dock permit applications must include:

1. City of Fairview dock permit application form. 

2. Detailed narrative including:

a. Description of proposed dock including length, width, and materials.

b. Dock installation details including how dock parts will be transported to the site and method of attachment to the shoreline and lake bottom.

c. Demonstration that the proposed dock meets the approval criteria in subsection A of this section.

d. Any additional site alterations proposed in association with installation of the proposed dock (see subsection C of this section). 

3. Scaled site plan including:

a. Location of the proposed dock.

b. Property dimensions.

c. Dock dimensions.

d. Natural resource protection area boundaries.

e. Existing structures on the property owned by the applicant to which the dock will be attached. 

4. Application fee as set forth by resolution. 

C. Additional Permits Required. If alterations in the resource protection area are proposed in association with the installation of the dock, including but not limited to a path, vegetation removal, erosion control measures or structures, additional permits may be required (i.e., natural resource permit, building permit).

A shoreline attachment mechanism that is less than 32 square feet in area does not require a natural resource permit as described in subsection (A)(4) of this section.

D. Shared Docks. A shared dock shall meet all approval criteria for an individual dock. The maximum width for a shared dock shall be 20 percent of the total width of all contiguous properties adjacent to the lake that the shared dock will serve. 

E. Nonconforming Docks.

1. The provisions of subsections A to E of this section do not apply to a structure that was lawfully established or to a permit that was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. An application for a permit to alter, expand or otherwise modify a lawfully permitted structure that is submitted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section is subject to the provisions of this section. 

2. Normal maintenance and repair of an existing legal dock is permitted.

3. Legal nonconforming docks are subject to Chapter 19.530 FMC, Nonconforming Uses and Developments. (Ord. 1-2013 § 1 (Att. 1))


Chapter 19.510 INTRODUCTION

Sections:

19.510.010    Introduction.


19.510.010 Introduction.

This chapter provides standards and procedures for variances and nonconforming situations (i.e., existing uses or development that do not comply with the code). This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The city’s varied geography, and complexities of land development, requires flexibility. This article provides that flexibility, while maintaining the purposes and intent of the code. The variance procedures provide relief from specific code provisions when they have the unintended effect of preventing reasonable development in conformance with all other codes. The standards for nonconforming uses and development are intended to provide some relief from code requirements for older developments that do not comply. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.520 VARIANCES

Sections:

19.520.010    Purpose.

19.520.020    Class A variances.

19.520.030    Class B variances.

19.520.040    Class C variances.

19.520.050    Variance application and appeals.


19.520.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide flexibility to development standards, in recognition of the complexity and wide variation of site development opportunities and constraints. The variance procedures are intended to provide flexibility while ensuring that the purpose of each development standard is met. Because some variances are granted using “clear and objective standards,” they can be granted by means of a Type I procedure. Other variances, as identified below, require a Type II or III procedure because they involve discretionary decision-making. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.520.020 Class A variances.

A. Class A Variances. The following variances are reviewed using a Type I procedure, as governed by Article IV of this title, using the approval criteria in subsection B of this section:

1. Front Yard Setbacks. Up to a 10 percent change to the front yard setback standard in the land use district.

2. Interior Setbacks. Up to a 10 percent reduction of the dimensional standards for the side and rear yard setbacks required in the base land use district.

3. Lot Coverage. Up to a 10 percent increase of the maximum lot coverage required in the base zone.

4. Landscape Area. Up to a 10 percent reduction in landscape area (overall area or interior parking lot landscape area).

B. Class A Variance Approval Criteria. A Class A variance shall be granted if the applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the following criteria:

1. The variance requested is required due to the lot configuration, or other conditions of the site;

2. The variance does not result in the removal of trees, or it is proposed in order to preserve trees, if trees are present in the development area;

3. The variance will not result in violation(s) of Article III of this title, or other design standards. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.520.030 Class B variances.

A. Class B Variances. Due to their discretionary nature, the following types of variances shall be reviewed using a Type II procedure, in accordance with Article IV of this title.

1. Variance to Minimum Housing Density Standard (Article II). The city may approve a variance after finding that the minimum housing density provided in Article II of this title cannot be achieved due to physical constraints that limit the division of land or site development. “Physical constraint” means steep topography, sensitive lands (Article III) unusual parcel configuration, or a similar constraint. The variances approved shall be the minimum variance necessary to address the specific physical constraint on the development.

2. Variance to Vehicular Access and Circulation Standards (Article III). Where vehicular access and circulation cannot be reasonably designed to conform to code standards within a particular parcel, shared access with an adjoining property shall be considered. If shared access in conjunction with another parcel is not feasible, the city may grant a variance to the access requirements after finding the following:

a. There is not adequate physical space for shared access, or the owners of abutting properties do not agree to execute a joint access easement;

b. There are no other alternative access points on the street in question or from another street;

c. The access separation requirements cannot be met;

d. The request is the minimum adjustment required to provide adequate access;

e. The approved access or access approved with conditions will result in a safe access; and

f. The visual clearance requirements will be met.

3. Variances to Street Tree Requirements (Article III). The city may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a variance to the street tree requirements in Article III of this title, after finding the following:

a. Installation of the tree would interfere with existing utility lines;

b. The tree would cause visual clearance problems; or

c. There is not adequate space in which to plant a street tree; and

d. Replacement landscaping is provided elsewhere on the site (e.g., parking lot area trees).

4. Variance to Parking Standards.

a. The city may approve variances to the minimum or maximum standards for off-street parking upon finding the following:

i. The individual characteristics of the use at that location require more or less parking than is generally required for a use of this type and intensity;

ii. The need for additional parking cannot reasonably be met through provision of on-street parking or shared parking with adjacent or nearby uses; and

iii. All other parking design and building orientation standards are met.

b. The city may approve a reduction of required bicycle parking, if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed use by its nature would be reasonably anticipated to generate a lesser need for bicycle parking.

c. The city may allow a reduction in the amount of vehicle stacking area required in for drive-through facilities if such a reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the size and location of the development, limited services available and other pertinent factors.

B. Variance to Maximum or Minimum Yard Setbacks to Reduce Tree Removal or Impacts to Wetlands. The city may grant a variance to the applicable setback requirements of this code for the purpose of preserving a tree or trees on the site of proposed development or avoiding wetland impacts. Modification shall not be more than is necessary for the preservation of trees on the site.

C. Variances to Transportation Improvement Requirements. The city may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a variance to the transportation improvement standards, based on the criteria for granting variances. When a variance request cannot be supported by the provisions of that chapter, then the request shall be reviewed as a Class C variance. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.520.040 Class C variances.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for variances which exceed the Class A and Class B variance criteria in this article. Class C variances may be granted if the applicant shows that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific property, the literal application of the standards of the applicable land use district would create a hardship to development which is peculiar to the lot size or shape, topography, sensitive lands, or other similar circumstances related to the property over which the applicant has no control, and which are not applicable to other properties in the vicinity (e.g., the same land use district); except that no variances to “permitted uses” shall be granted.

B. Applicability.

1. The variance standards are intended to apply to individual platted and recorded lots only.

2. An applicant who proposes to vary a specification standard for lots yet to be created through a subdivision process may not utilize the Class C variance procedure.

3. A variance shall not be approved which would vary the “permitted uses” of a land use district.

C. Approvals Process and Criteria.

1. Class C variances shall be processed using a Type III procedure, using the approval criteria in subsection (C)(2) of this section. In addition to the application requirements contained in this code, the applicant shall provide a written narrative or letter describing his/her reasoning for the variance, why it is required, alternatives considered, and compliance with the criteria in subsection (C)(2) of this section.

2. The city shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a variance based on finding that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

a. The proposed variance will not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this code, to any other applicable policies and standards, and to other properties in the same land use district or vicinity;

b. A hardship to development exists which is peculiar to the lot size or shape, topography, sensitive lands, or other similar circumstances related to the property over which the applicant has no control, and which are not applicable to other properties in the vicinity (e.g., the same land use district);

c. The use proposed will be the same as permitted under this title and city standards will be maintained to the greatest extent that is reasonably possible while permitting reasonable economic use of the land;

d. Existing physical and natural systems, such as but not limited to traffic, drainage, natural resources, and parks will not be adversely affected any more than would occur if the development occurred as specified by the subject code standard;

e. The hardship is not self-imposed; and

f. The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.520.050 Variance application and appeals.

The variance application shall conform to the requirements for Type I, II, or III applications, as applicable. In addition, the applicant shall provide a narrative or letter explaining the reason for his/her request, alternatives considered, and why the subject standard cannot be met without the variance. Appeals to variance decisions shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


Chapter 19.530 NONCONFORMING USES AND DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:

19.530.010    Nonconforming uses.

19.530.020    Nonconforming development.


19.530.010 Nonconforming uses.

Where at the time of adoption of this code a use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this code and was lawful at the time it was established, the use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:

A. Expansion Prohibited. No such nonconforming use is enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or space than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code. No additional structure, building or sign shall be constructed on the lot in connection with such nonconforming use of land.

B. Location. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code.

C. Discontinuation or Abandonment. The nonconforming use of land is not discontinued for any reason for a period of more than 12 months. For purposes of calculating the 12-month period, a use is discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

1. On the date when the use of land is physically vacated;

2. On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services;

3. On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; or

4. On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility districts.

D. Application of Code Criteria and Standards. If the use is discontinued or abandoned for any reason for a period of more than 12 months, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the applicable standards and criteria specified by this code for the land use district in which such land is located. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)


19.530.020 Nonconforming development.

Where a structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, height, yard, equipment, its location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure; and the structure was lawful when constructed, the structure may remain on the site so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

A. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; but any structure or portion thereof may be enlarged up to 10 percent, or altered in a way that satisfies the current requirements of the development code or will decrease its nonconformity;

B. Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent more than 75 percent of its current value as assessed by the Multnomah County assessor, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the development code; and

C. Should such structure be moved for any reason and by any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the development code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)



-----------------------------

The Fairview Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 5-2020, passed April 15, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder’s office has the official version of the Fairview Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.fairvieworegon.gov/ City Telephone: (503) 674-6224

Code Publishing Company