CITY OF HAPPY VALLEY CITY CHARTER
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 ELECTIONS
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (Reserved)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (Reserved)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 (Reserved)
Title 14 (Reserved)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE

CITY OF HAPPY VALLEY CITY CHARTER
PREAMBLE
 

We, the voters of Happy Valley, Oregon exercise our power to the fullest extent possible under the Oregon Constitution and laws of the state, and enact this Home Rule Charter.

 

Chapter I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES
 

Section 1. Title. This charter may be referred to as the 2009 City of Happy Valley Charter.

 

Section 2. Name. The City of Happy Valley, Oregon, continues as a municipal corporation with the name City of Happy Valley.

 

Section 3. Boundaries. The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or are legally modified. The city will maintain an accurate and current description of the boundaries as a public record.

 

Chapter II POWERS
 

Section 4. Powers. The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow the city, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.

 

Section 5. Construction. The charter will be liberally construed so that the city may exercise fully all powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law.

 

Section 6. Distribution. The Oregon Constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all municipal legislation to city voters. This charter vests all other city powers in the council except as the charter otherwise provides. The council has legislative, administrative and quasi-judicial authority. The council exercises legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by resolution, and quasi-judicial authority by order. The council may not delegate its authority to adopt ordinances.

 

Chapter III COUNCIL
 

Section 7. Council. The council consists of a mayor and four councilors nominated and elected by the city at large.

 

Section 8. Mayor.

 

(a) The mayor presides over and facilitates council meetings, preserves order, enforces council procedures, and determines the order of council business.

 

(b) With the consent of council, the mayor appoints members of commissions and committees established by ordinance or resolution.

 

(c) The mayor must sign all records of council decisions.

 

(d) The mayor serves as the political head of the city government.

 

Section 9. Council President. At its first meeting of each odd numbered year, the council must elect a president from its membership. The president presides in the absence of the mayor and acts as mayor when the mayor is unable to perform duties.

 

Section 10. Rules. The council must by resolution adopt rules to govern its meetings.

 

Section 11. Meetings. The council must meet at least once a month at a time and place designated by its rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules.

 

Section 12. Quorum. The mayor and two councilors or three councilors is a quorum to conduct business, but a smaller number may meet and compel attendance of absent members as prescribed by rule.

 

Section 13. Vote Required. The express approval of a majority of a quorum of the council is necessary for any council decision, except when this charter requires approval by a majority of the council.

 

Section 14. Record. A record of council meetings must be kept in a manner prescribed by rule.

 

Chapter IV LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
 

Section 15. Ordinances. The council will exercise its legislative authority by adopting ordinances. The enacting clause for all ordinances must state “The City of Happy Valley ordains as follows:”

 

Section 16. Ordinance Adoption.

 

(a) Except as authorized by subsection (b), the council must adopt an ordinance with the approval of a majority of the council at two meetings.

 

(b) The council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the unanimous approval of at least three members of the council, provided the proposed ordinance is available to the public at least one week before the meeting.

 

(c) Any substantive amendment to a proposed ordinance must be read aloud or made available to the public before the council adopts the ordinance at that meeting.

 

(d) After the adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.

 

(e) After adoption of an ordinance, the city recorder must attest to the adoption and the date of adoption.

 

Section 17. Effective Date of Ordinances. Ordinances normally take effect on the 30th day after adoption, or on a later day provided in the ordinance. An ordinance may take effect as soon as adopted or other date less than 30 days after adoption if it contains an emergency clause.

 

Chapter V COUNCIL ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY
 

Section 18. Resolutions. The council will normally exercise its administrative authority by approving resolutions. The approving clause for resolutions may state “The City of Happy Valley resolves as follows:”

 

Section 19. Resolution Approval.

 

(a) A resolution or any other council administrative decision may be approved by the council at one meeting.

 

(b) Any substantive amendment to a resolution must be read aloud or made available to the public before the council adopts the resolution at that meeting.

 

(c) After approval of a resolution or other administrative decision, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.

 

(d) After approval of a resolution, the mayor must sign it and the city recorder must attest to the date of approval.

 

Section 20. Effective Date of Resolutions. Resolutions and other administrative decisions take effect on the date of approval, or on a later day provided in the resolution.

 

Chapter VI QUASI-JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 

Section 21. Orders. The council will normally exercise its quasi-judicial authority by approving orders. The approving clause for orders may state “The City of Happy Valley orders as follows:”

 

Section 22. Order Approval.

 

(a) An order or any other council quasi-judicial decision may be approved by the council at one meeting.

 

(b) Any substantive amendment to an order must be read aloud or made available to the public at the meeting before the council adopts the order.

 

(c) After approval of an order or other council quasi-judicial decision, the vote of each member must be entered in the council minutes.

 

(d) After approval of an order, the mayor must sign it and the city recorder must attest to the date of approval.

 

Section 23. Effective Date of Orders. Orders and other quasi-judicial decisions take effect on the date of final approval, or on a later day provided in the order or by ordinance.

 

Chapter VII ELECTIONS
 

Section 24. Councilors. At each general election after the adoption of this charter, two councilors will be elected for four-year terms by position. The terms of councilors in office when this charter is adopted are the terms for which they were elected.

 

Section 25. Mayor. At every general election after the adoption of this charter, a mayor will be elected for a four-year term. The term of the mayor in office when this charter is adopted is the term for which the mayor was elected.

 

Section 26. State Law. City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or ordinances provide otherwise. All elections for city offices must be nonpartisan.

 

Section 27. Qualifications.

 

(a) To hold a city elective position, each person must be a qualified elector under state law, and reside within the city for at least one year immediately before election or appointment to office.

 

(b) No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one city office.

 

(c) Neither the mayor nor a councilor may be employed by the city.

 

(d) The council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members.

 

Section 28. Nominations. The council must prescribe by ordinance other procedures for the nomination and election of persons for city elective positions.

 

Section 29. Terms. The term of an officer elected at a general election begins at the first council meeting of the calendar year immediately after the election, and continues until the successor qualifies and assumes the office.

 

Section 30. Oath. To hold a city elective position each person must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitutions and laws of the United States and Oregon.

 

Section 31. Vacancies: A city elective position becomes vacant:

 

(a) Upon the incumbent’s:

     (1)    Death,

     (2)    Adjudicated incompetence, or

     (3)    Recall from the office.

 

(b) Upon declaration by the council after the incumbent’s:

     (1)    Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the term of office is to begin,

     (2)    Absence from the city for 30 days without council consent, or from all council meetings within a 60-day period,

     (3)    Ceasing to reside in the city,

     (4)    Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,

     (5)    Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty,

     (6)    Assuming another elected office,

     (7)    Resignation from the office, or

     (8)    Removal under Section 33(h).

 

Section 32. Filling Vacancies. A vacant city elective position will be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining councilors. The appointee’s term of office runs from appointment until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that office. If a disability prevents a councilor from attending council meetings, a majority of the council may appoint a councilor pro tem.

 

Chapter VIII APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
 

Section 33. City Manager.

 

(a) The office of city manager is established as the chief administrative officer of the city government. The city manager is responsible to the mayor and council for the proper administration of all city business. The city manager will assist the mayor and council in the development of city policies, and carry out policies established by ordinances and resolutions.

 

(b) A majority of the council must appoint and may remove the manager. The appointment must be made without regard to political considerations and solely based on education and experience with local government management.

 

(c) The manager may be appointed for a definite or an indefinite term, and may be removed at any time by a majority of the council. The council must fill the office by appointment as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs.

 

(d) The manager must:

     (1)    Attend all council meetings unless excused by the mayor or council;

     (2)    Make reports and recommendations to the mayor and council about the needs of the city;

     (3)    Administer and enforce all city ordinances, resolutions, franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and other city decisions;

     (4)    Appoint, supervise and remove city employees;

     (5)    Organize city departments and administrative structure;

     (6)    Prepare and administer the annual city budget;

     (7)    Administer city utilities and property;

     (8)    Encourage and support regional and intergovernmental cooperation;

     (9)    Promote cooperation among the council, staff and citizens in developing city policies, and building a sense of community;

     (10)  Perform other duties as directed by the council;

     (11)  Delegate duties, but remain responsible for acts of all subordinates.

 

(e) The manager has no authority over the mayor or council or over the judicial functions of the municipal judge.

 

(f) The manager and other employees designated by the council may sit at council meetings but have no vote. The manager may take part in all council discussions.

 

(g) When the manager is temporarily disabled from acting as manager or when the office becomes vacant, the council must appoint a manager pro tem. The manager pro tem has the authority and duties of manager, except that a pro tem manager may appoint or remove employees only with council approval.

 

(h) Neither the mayor nor a councilor may attempt directly or indirectly to coerce the manager or a candidate for the office of manager in the appointment or removal of any city employee, or in administrative decisions. Violation of this prohibition is grounds for removal from office by four councilors after a public hearing. In council meetings, the mayor and councilors may discuss or suggest any topic with the manager relating to city employees or administrative matters.

 

Section 34. City Attorney. The office of city attorney is established as the chief legal officer of the city government. A majority of the mayor and councilors must appoint and may remove the attorney.

 

Section 35. Municipal Court and Judge.

 

(a) A majority of the council may appoint and remove a municipal judge. The municipal judge will hold court in the city at such place as the council directs. The court will be known as the municipal court. The municipal judge must be admitted to practice in the Supreme Court of Oregon.

 

(b) All proceedings of this court will conform to state laws governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

(c) All areas within the city and areas outside the city as permitted by state law are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

 

(d) The municipal court has jurisdiction over every offense created by city ordinance. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties created by such ordinances. The court also has jurisdiction under state law unless limited by city ordinance.

 

(e) The municipal judge may:

     (1)    Render judgments and impose sanctions on persons and property;

     (2)    Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city;

     (3)    Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of a city offense;

     (4)    Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;

     (5)    Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve for trials;

     (6)    Penalize contempt of court;

     (7)    Issue processes necessary to enforce judgments and orders of the court;

     (8)    Issue search warrants; and

     (9)    Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions assigned by ordinance.

 

(f) The council may appoint and may remove municipal judges pro tem.

 

(g) The council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate state court.

 

Chapter IX PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
 

Section 36. Procedure. The council must provide by ordinance for procedures governing the making, altering, vacating, or abandoning of a public improvement. A proposed public improvement may be suspended for six months upon remonstrance by the owners of real property to be specially assessed for the improvement. The numbers of owners necessary to suspend the action must be determined by ordinance.

 

Section 37. Special Assessments. The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing special assessments for public improvements or other services charged against real property must be governed by ordinance.

 

Chapter X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
 

Section 38. Debt. City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.

 

Section 39. Ordinance Continuation. All ordinances consistent with this charter in force when it takes effect remain in effect until amended or repealed.

 

Section 40. Repeal. All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are repealed.

 

Section 41. Severability. The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by a court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter.

 

Section 42. Time of Effect. This charter takes effect January 1, 2009.

 
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION (Reserved)
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY (Reserved)
Chapter 1.09 CODE ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 1.12 PENALTY PROVISIONS

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION (Reserved)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words and phases:

     “City” and “town” each mean the city of Happy Valley, Oregon, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provisions.

     “Council” means the city council of the city. “All its members” or “all councilors” means the total number of councilors holding office.

     “County” means the county of Clackamas.

     “Day” means a calendar day.

     “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of Oregon, the ordinances of the city of Happy Valley, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

     “May” is permissive.

     “Month” means a calendar month.

     “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

     “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

     “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenants, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.

     “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

     “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

     “Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.

     “Property” means and includes real and personal property.

     “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

     “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

     “State” means the state of Oregon.

     “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state.

     “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

     “Written” means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

     “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 226 § 1, 2001)

 

1.04.020 Interpretation of language.
     All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 226 § 2, 2001)

 

1.04.030 Grammatical interpretation.
     The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

     A.    Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

     B.     Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

     C.     Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 226 § 3, 2001)

 

1.04.040 Acts by agents.
     When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well as by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 226 § 4, 2001)

 

1.04.050 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
     Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 226 § 5, 2001)

 

1.04.060 Computation of time.
     Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 226 § 6, 2001)

 

1.04.070 Construction.
     The provisions of the ordinances of the city and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 226 § 7, 2001)

 

1.04.080 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
     The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 226 § 8, 2001)

 

1.04.090 Correction of clerical or typographical errors.
     In preparing adopted ordinances for codification and distribution, the city recorder shall not alter the sense, meaning, effect, or substance of any ordinance, but, with such limitations, may correct manifest clerical or typographical errors. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 1.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY (Reserved)

Chapter 1.09 CODE ENFORCEMENT
1.09.010 Municipal court jurisdiction—Authority of city employees and agents to pursue violations.
     A.    Any violation(s) of the Happy Valley Municipal Code, in addition to any other enforcement device provided the city by local or state law, may be remedied or addressed by bringing an action before the municipal court for the city of Happy Valley consistent with this chapter.

     B.     Only those city employee(s) and agent(s) authorized by the city council as set out in Section 1.09.020 may pursue the enforcement of the city’s ordinances in municipal court.

     C.     As used in Section 23 of the 2000 Happy Valley Charter, the term “offense” includes non-penal and non-criminal sanctions and remedies for violations of the city’s ordinances. (Ord. 265 § 1, 2003)

 

1.09.020 Persons authorized to enforce city ordinances in municipal court.
     The city manager, the city attorney and their “designees” in writing are authorized to enforce the terms of this code by bringing action(s) in the name of the city in the municipal court (Ord. 299 § 1, 2004: Ord. 265 § 1, 2003)

 

1.09.030 Citation into municipal court.
     A citation conforming to the requirements of Section 1.09.040 shall be used by any authorized employee(s) or agent(s) of the city when enforcing the terms of the city’s regulatory ordinances in municipal court. (Ord. 265 § 1, 2003)

 

1.09.040 Citation contents.
     The citation shall act as the summons and complaint in any action brought before the municipal court to enforce the terms of the city’s ordinances and contain, at a minimum, the following information:

     A.    The name or other identifying information of the person or entity cited for the violation of the city code;

     B.     The violation being asserted by the city along with a reference to the appropriate provision(s) in the Happy Valley Municipal Code;

 

     C.     A short descriptive narrative setting out the salient facts constituting the violation;

     D.    The name of the city employee(s) or agent(s) initiating the proceeding;

     E.     The date and time when the person or entity is to appear before the municipal court; and

     F.     The civil penalty, if any, proposed for the violation and/or other relief sought by the city for the violation. (Ord. 265 § 1, 2003)

 

1.09.050 Service of the citation—Failure to receive citation.
     A.    Service of the citation may be by any means reasonably calculated under all the circumstances to apprise the person or entity alleged to be responsible for the violation of the existence and pendency of the action and to afford that person or entity a reasonable opportunity to appear and defend against the same. By way of illustration, notice of the action may be given by:

     1.     Personally delivering the citation to the person or entity; or

     2.     Mailing the notice by United States mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the residence or business address of the person or entity being charged; or

     3.     Any method allowed by the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure for service of summons.

     B.     The failure of a person or entity to receive actual notice of the proceeding shall not invalidate the hearing or any determination, decision or order of the court hearing the matter.

     C.     An order adverse to a party or entity may be issued upon default only upon a prima facie showing made by the city on the record before the municipal court that:

     1.     A violation exists;

     2.     That the remedy and/or civil penalty requested is appropriate; and

     3.     That if a civil penalty is requested, that the amount thereof reflects consideration of the criteria set out in Section 1.09.080(C). (Ord. 265 § 1, 2003)

 

1.09.060 Notice of rights—Procedure.
     A.    Prior to the commencement of a contested hearing, the municipal court shall inform, (either in writing or orally) the parties to the hearing of the following:

     1.     A general description of the hearing procedure including the order of presentation of evidence, the kinds of evidence admissible, whether objections may be made to the introduction of evidence as well as the kind of objections allowed and an explanation of the burdens of proof or burdens going forward with the evidence.

     2.     Whether an attorney will represent the city in the matters to be heard and whether the parties ordinarily and customarily are represented by an attorney.

     3.     In the event a particular party is not represented by an attorney, whether the party may, during the course of proceedings, request a recess if at that point the party determines that representation by an attorney is necessary for the protection of the party’s rights.

     4.     Whether there exists an opportunity for an adjournment at the end of the hearing if a party determines that additional evidence should be brought to the attention of the court and the hearing reopened.

     5.     A description of the appeal or judicial review process from the determination or order of the court.

     B.     The failure to give notice of any item specified in subsection A of this section shall not invalidate any determination or order of the court unless on appeal from or review of the determination or order, a reviewing court finds that the failure affects the substantive rights of the complaining party. In the event of such a finding, the reviewing court shall remand the matter to the municipal court for a reopening of the hearing and shall direct the municipal court as to what steps shall be taken to remedy the prejudice to the rights of the complaining party. (Ord. 265 § 1, 2003)

 

1.09.070 Hearing procedure.
     A.    Unless otherwise precluded by another provision of the Happy Valley Municipal Code, informal disposition of any proceeding may be made with or without a hearing by stipulation, consent order, agreed settlement, or default.

     B.     The parties (including the city) may elect to be represented by counsel and respond to and present evidence and argument on all issues involved.

     C.     Testimony shall be taken upon oath or affirmation of the witness from whom received. The municipal court may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses.

     D.    The municipal court shall place on the record a statement of the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications made to the court on a fact in issue during the pendency of the proceedings. The court shall notify the parties of the communication and of their right to rebut such communications.

     E.     The record in a proceeding shall include:

     1.     All pleadings, motions, and intermediate rulings;

     2.     Evidence received or considered;

     3.     Stipulations;

     4.     A statement of matters officially noticed;

     5.     Questions and offers of proof, objections, and rulings thereon;

     6.     A statement of any ex parte communications on a fact in issue made to the court during the pendency of the proceedings;

     7.     Any proposed, intermediate, or final order prepared by the court and any objections thereto. (Ord. 265 § 1, 2003)

 

1.09.080 Order to comply—Factors considered when imposing civil penalty.
     A.    The court may order a person or entity found in violation of the Happy Valley Municipal Code to comply with the provisions of the code within such time as the court may direct by order. The order may require the party to do any and all of the following:

     1.     Make any necessary repairs, modifications, and/or improvements to a structure, real property, or equipment involved;

     2.     Abate or remove any nuisance;

     3.     Change the use of the building, structure or real property involved;

     4.     Pay a civil penalty consistent with Section 1.12.010;

     5.     Undertake any other action deemed by the court to be reasonably necessary to correct the violation or mitigate the effects thereof.

     B.     In the event a party fails to comply with any provision of an order of the court (excepting the payment of a civil penalty), the court may authorize the city to undertake such actions as the court determines necessary to correct the violation and/or eliminate or mitigate the effects thereof. The city’s reasonable costs of such actions may be made a lien against the affected real property.

     C.     In the event the court believes it appropriate to impose a civil penalty for violation(s) of city ordinance(s), the court shall determine the amount thereof by reference to any or all of the following factors the court deems relevant:

     1.     Where the party being assessed the civil penalty has committed any prior city code violation regardless of the nature thereof;

     2.     The history of the party in taking all feasible steps reasonably necessary or appropriate to correct the violation;

     3.     The economic condition of the party being assessed the penalty;

     4.     The gravity or magnitude of the violation;

     5.     Whether the violation was repeated or continuous;

     6.     Whether the violation was due to conditions or circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the party or was due to the party’s negligence or as a result of an intention act;

     7.     The difficulty in remedying the violation;

     8.     The economic or financial benefit accruing or likely to accrue to the party being assessed the civil penalty;

     9.     The cost to the city to investigate and correct the violation; and

     10.   Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant in the particular circumstances. (Ord. 265 § 1, 2003)

 

1.09.090 Judgment liens—Renewal.
     A.    When a judgment is entered by the Municipal Court in favor of the city in an amount equal to or greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00) consistent with Section 1.09.080 and remains unsatisfied for thirty (30) or more days, a person authorized pursuant to Section 1.09.020 shall cause a judgment transcript (including a declaration by the court clerk of the judgment’s nonsatisfaction in whole or part) to be filed with the finance department for said judgment monies.

     B.     Upon receipt of the transcript, the judgment shall be entered for the still unsatisfied sum on the city’s lien docket and accrue interest at the legal rate as established by state law.

     C.     From the time of entry of the judgment in the city’s lien docket, the unsatisfied sum (along with any interest thereon) shall be deemed a lien upon real property located in the city of Happy Valley owned by the person against whom the judgment was entered.

     D.    Entry of the judgment in the city’s lien docket has a life of ten (10) years from date of entry on the lien docket unless renewed pursuant to subsection (E) below.

     E.     A judgment may be renewed once with the lien established by subsection (C) above automatically extending for ten (10) years from the date of the renewal order.

     F.     In addition to the lien authorized by this section, the city may employ any other method authorized by law to enforce or collect judgments. (Ord. 511 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 1.12 PENALTY PROVISIONS
1.12.010 General penalty.
     A.    Any person violating any of the provisions (by omission or commission) of any regulatory ordinance of the city, except in case(s) where a different penalty or remedy is specifically provided for, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) plus assessments.

     B.     A violation shall be deemed to exist separately for each and every day during which a violation exists. (Ord. 265 § 2, 2003: Ord. 227 § 1, 2001)

 

1.12.050 Recovery of attorney and other professional fees.
     In the event the city brings an action in its name in either law or equity in any of the courts of this state other than its municipal court for the enforcement of any of its ordinances, resolutions or any right(s) afforded it by its charter or state statute, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable attorneys fees as well as other professional fees incurred in the prosecution of the case in the event it is the prevailing party. (Ord. 247 § 1, 2002)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 553. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.08 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.12 OTHER OFFICERS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 2.16 VOLUNTEER COMMITTEES

Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
2.04.010 Office of city manager created.
     There is created the office of city manager for the city of Happy Valley. (Ord. 105 § 1, 1991)

 

2.04.020 Appointed by charter.
     The city manager shall be appointed as provided by the city charter. (Ord. 105 § 2, 1991)

 

2.04.030 Powers and duties.
     A.    The city manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned and granted to the city manager by the city council.

     B.     The city manager shall attend all meetings of the city council, shall keep the council informed as to the affairs of the city, and shall recommend to the city council such actions as may be necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city. (Ord. 105 § 3, 1991)

 

2.04.040 Recommend action on all proposed contracts.
     The city manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be a party, and shall be prepared to recommend to the council action on such proposed contracts. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see to it that all terms of any contract to which the city is a party are fully performed by the parties to such contracts. (Ord. 105 § 4, 1991)

 

2.04.050 Control of purchases of supplies, materials and equipment.
     The city manager shall be general purchasing agent of the city, and except where specific provision to the contrary is made by law or by the council, he or she shall make all purchases of supplies, materials and equipment authorized by the council, in the manner prescribed by, and subject to the limitations imposed by law. No purchase shall be made or obligation incurred except upon authorization by the council, and no expense shall be incurred, except for the purpose of which no prior appropriation is required by law, if the amount of such purchase is not covered by an unexpended appropriation for the purpose. (Ord. 105 § 5, 1991)

 

2.04.060 Prepare annual appropriation budget.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause to be prepared each year the annual appropriation budget in time for consideration and enactment by the city council.

     B.     The city manager shall cause current accounts be kept of the amounts appropriated and the amount spent out of each appropriation, showing the unexpended appropriations at all times. (Ord. 105 § 6, 1991)

 

2.04.070 Keep fiscal accounts—Collection of moneys due.
     It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep current accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the city, including the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand and anticipated revenue of all municipal accounts; and the city manager shall see to the collection of all moneys due the municipality. (Ord. 105 § 7, 1991)

 

2.04.080 Keep inventory of real and personal city property.
     The city manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the city and its location, and shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such property including equipment, buildings, parks and all other city property, which is not by law assigned by some other officer or body for care and control. (Ord. 105 § 8, 1991)

 

2.04.090 Oversee publication of all notices and ordinances.
     It shall be the duty of the city manager to see to the publication of all notices, ordinances or other documents required by law to be published, and to prepare or cause to be prepared, all reports which the city or any of the officials are required by law to prepare. (Ord. 105 § 9, 1991)

 

2.04.100 Prepare all notices, ballots and election supplies.
     The city manager shall prepare or cause to be prepared all notices, ballots and election supplies necessary in connection with municipal elections. (Ord. 105 § 10, 1991)

 

2.04.110 Custodian of municipal records.
     A.    The city manager shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records required by law to be kept by the city and not by a specific officer. Where the law makes it the duty of a specific officer to keep or maintain records, the city manager shall make available to such officer all necessary clerical assistance for the preparation of such records and shall make available a place for custody of such records. Any records kept by an official of the city other than the city manager shall have a true copy thereof maintained by the city manager.

     B.     Where the law requires or provides for certification of any records or documents by any officer of the city, the city manager shall cause such records or documents to be properly prepared and presented to such officer for the city manager’s signature. (Ord. 105 § 11, 1991)

 

2.04.120 Maps and plats.
     The city manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and plats showing the location of all city utilities and other municipal property, all streets and other public places and all lots or parcels of land subdivided according to law. (Ord. 105 § 12, 1991)

 

2.04.130 Performance time of duties as required.
The city manager shall spend such time in the performance of the city manager duties as may be required by the city council. (Ord. 105 § 13, 1991)

 

2.04.140 Temporary appointment to position if necessary.
     In the event that the city manager shall be absent from the city or incapacitated from performing the duties of the city manager position, the city council shall make a temporary appointment during such absence or incapacity. (Ord. 105 § 14, 1991)

Chapter 2.08 CITY ATTORNEY
2.08.010 Offices of city attorney and deputy city attorney created.
     There is created the offices of city attorney and deputy city attorney for the city. These officers shall be appointed by the mayor, and with the consent of the city council. (Ord. 18 § 1, 1967)

 

2.08.020 Prosecute for or defend city in legal actions.
     The attorneys shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the city may be party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of the city on behalf of the city, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the city. (Ord. 18 § 2, 1967)

 

2.08.030 Oversee enforcement of all judgments or decrees.
     It shall be the duty of attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city, and of all similar interlocutory orders. (Ord. 18 § 3, 1967)

 

2.08.040 Legal advisors of city.
     The attorneys shall be the legal advisers of the city, and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the city, whenever requested to do so by any city official. Upon request by the mayor or by the council, they shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (Ord. 18 § 4, 1967)

 

2.08.050 Special assessment/condemnation proceedings.
     It shall be the duty of the attorneys to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings. (Ord. 18 § 5, 1967)

 

2.08.060 Draft or supervise phraseology of legal documents of city.
     It shall be the duty of the attorneys to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other documents or instruments to which the city may be a party; and upon the request of the council, to draft ordinances covering any subject within the power of the city. They shall represent the city in litigation except where the city council directs otherwise, and to render such other legal services as may be required by the city council. (Ord. 18 § 6, 1967)

Chapter 2.12 OTHER OFFICERS
2.12.010 Position of city engineer created.
     A.    The position of city engineer for the city of Happy Valley shall be appointed by the city manager and report to the economic and community development director. The city engineer shall advise the city council and city officials on engineering matters and perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city manager or city council.

     B.     The city engineer shall, from time to time, report to council regarding the condition repair and improvement of the city’s streets, rights-of-way and other public infrastructure as well as other matters as may be requested by council or the city manager.

     C.     The city engineer and/or public works director shall be responsible for keeping, maintaining and updating design manual(s) which shall create the standard(s) required for construction of new public infrastructure (i.e., streets, water, sanitary and storm water, etc.), the standards for repair and maintenance of same as well as other related matters as the city engineer and/or public works director deem necessary and appropriate to carryout their duties.

     D.    Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the city council from entering into a contract with any consulting engineer(s) for any engineering work. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 352 § 2, 2007; Ord. 28, 1968)

 

2.12.020 Definition.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Building official” means the officer appointed by the city manager to regulate and enforce all provisions of this code regarding building construction and improvements pursuant to ORS Section 455.150 and who shall possess a state building official certification.

     “City engineer” means the officer appointed by the city manager to regulate and enforce all provisions of this code regarding civil engineering. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 153 § 3, 1996)

 

2.12.030 Authority of the building official.
     A.    General. The building official is authorized to enforce all the provisions of this code regarding building construction and improvements. The building official shall have the power to render written and oral interpretations and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order to clarify the application of provisions relating to building construction and improvements. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of such authority.

     B.     Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the appointing authority, the building official may appoint technical officers and inspectors and other employees to carry out the functions of this section, including enforcement. (Ord. 153 § 4, 1996)

 

2.12.040 Office of municipal court judge.
     A.    The office of municipal court judge is hereby created. The judge shall be appointed by the city council. The judge shall hold, within the city at a place and at times specified by the city council, the municipal court for the city of Happy Valley and shall have original jurisdiction over every offense or violation made punishable by the ordinances of the city.

     B.     The municipal court judge is granted all powers established by the Charter and as he or she may be granted by the terms of this code and as allowed by Oregon and federal law. (Ord. 271 § 1, 2003)

 

2.12.050 City recorder.
     The city recorder serves as the council clerk, city custodian of records and city elections official. The city recorder must attend all council meetings unless excused by the manager or council. (Ord. 524 § 1, 2017; Ord. 393 § 1, 2009; Ord. 342 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 2.16 VOLUNTEER COMMITTEES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 553. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


2.16.010 Establishment.
     There are seven city volunteer committees. The names of these committees are the:

     A.    Planning commission.

     B.     Design review board.

     C.     Parks advisory committee.

     D.    Traffic and public safety committee.

     E.     Budget committee.

     F.     Library board.

     G.    Public art committee.

     Additional city volunteer committees can be created if approved by the city manager and city council. All committees shall adhere to the city rules governing citizen volunteer committees. (Ord. 495 § 1, 2016; Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 2.16.020 Membership.
     Committee memberships shall consist of not less than five members and not more than nine members. Exceptions may be approved by council. Prospective members shall make application to the city staff in the manner and by the deadline so announced. With the consent of council, the mayor appoints members of commissions and committees established by ordinance or resolution.

     A.    General Restrictions on Membership. Committee members shall not be officers, agents or employees of the city. The maximum number of committees upon which one member may serve is one committee plus the budget committee.

     B.     Design Review Board Membership Requirements. The design review board shall include members with the following specific qualifications:

     1.     One registered landscape architect or other person with landscape design experience.

     2.     One registered architect or building designer.

     3.     One registered engineer.

     4.     One representative from the field of finance or the construction or development industry.

     5.     One to three residents from the general public having any relevant experience.

     If there are at least five qualified volunteer applicants, but one of the areas of qualifications is not represented, the design review board may be formed with membership of three areas of qualifications. If the city council is unable to fill all positions for the design review board, the city may contract for the services of a design professional as deemed necessary by the city council or the director of economic and community development, though a quorum of design review board voting members must exist. A design professional may be retained on a professional services agreement that may be terminated upon the appointment of a design review board member for that design position. A retained design professional will be a consultant to the design review board and the director of economic and community development, but will not be a voting member of the design review board. Design review application fees will include consultant costs. Design review consultants will be paid a professional hourly rate agreed upon by contract between the consultant and the city.

     C.     Budget Committee Membership Requirements. The budget committee shall consist of the members of city council and a number, equal to the number of members of the city council, of electors of the city appointed by the city council; if there are electors fewer than the number required, the city council and the electors who are willing to serve shall be the budget committee; and if there are no electors willing to serve, the city council shall be the budget committee.

     1.     Budget Committee Change in Number of Members of City Council. If the number of members of the city council is reduced or increased by law or charter amendment, the city council of the city shall reduce or increase the number of appointive members of the budget committee so that the number of members of the budget committee shall be equal to but not greater than the number of members of the city council. To effect a reduction, the city council of the city may remove such number of appointive members as necessary. The removals shall be made so that the number remaining will be divided into three equal or approximately equal groups as to terms. In case of an increase, additional appointive members shall be appointed for such terms so that they, together with the members previously appointed, will be divided into three equal or approximately equal groups as to terms.

     D.    Public Art Committee Membership. During predetermined occasions, such as public art juries, the public art committee may request a larger, limited-duration subcommittee. (Ord. 553 § 1, 2021; Ord. 495 § 1, 2016; Ord. 484 § 1, 2015; Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

2.16.030 Residency.
     Committee members shall reside within the city of Happy Valley and shall have been residents for one calendar year preceding the date of their appointment. To maintain committee membership, the member must be a resident. If a member moves out of the city, their seat will be declared vacant. (Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

2.16.035 Library board residency.
     No less than two, and no more than four, members of the library board shall reside within the area of the Happy Valley Library service population that is outside the city limits. The remainder of the library board members shall reside within the city of Happy Valley and shall have been residents for one calendar year preceding the date of their appointment. (Ord. 535 § 1, 2018; Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

2.16.040 Compensation.
     Members of committees serve as volunteers and do not receive compensation. (Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

2.16.050 Terms of office and vacancy.
     A.    The terms of office for the planning commission, design review board, parks advisory committee, traffic and public safety committee, library board, and public art committee shall be for two years. Terms of office shall be staggered with approximately half of the committee members being appointed to terms expiring on even numbered years, and half the committee members being appointed to terms expiring on odd numbered years. The terms of office for the budget committee shall be for three years. The terms shall be staggered so that one-third or approximately one-third of the terms of the appointive members ends each year.

     B.     Members may apply for re-appointment to all committees with the exception of the budget committee up to four times but cannot serve for more than eight consecutive years. Re-appointment shall be made by the mayor with council consent. Budget committee members may apply for re-appointment one time but cannot serve more than six consecutive years.

     C.     Any vacancy occurring during a term shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with council consent. Members may be removed by the mayor with the council consent.

     D.    Members may continue to serve on their committee at the discretion of the mayor with council consent in the event that special circumstances exist. (Ord. 495 § 1, 2016; Ord. 485 § 1, 2015; Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

2.16.060 Officers and duties.
     A.    General Officers and Duties. The officers of each committee shall be a chairperson and a vice chairperson.

     1.     Chairperson. Each committee shall elect a chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of their respective committee. Each chairperson shall hold their position for a term of two years. Once a chairperson has served in that capacity for two years, they cannot be selected to serve as chairperson again until an additional two years have passed for the same committee.

     2.     Vice Chairperson. Each committee shall elect a vice chairperson. The vice chairperson shall preside over meetings in the absence of the chairperson.

     B.     Budget Committee Officers and Duties. The budget committee shall have in addition to the chairperson and vice chairperson an official record keeper. (Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

2.16.070 Powers and duties.
     Each committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council in their respective scope as defined in the committee’s by-laws and in concert with the city council’s mission statement. Each committee shall communicate those recommendations upon which they reach consensus to the city council for consideration. Each committee member is required to adhere to the city rules governing city volunteer committees.

     A.    Planning Commission Powers and Duties.

     1.     The planning commission is charged with the express duty of administering and enforcing the land development ordinances of the city and shall have the powers and duties set forth in such ordinances and govern themselves accordingly. In addition, the planning commission is charged with the duties given and powers provided as set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 227 as may be applicable to planning commissions so formed, and in particular those enumerated in ORS Section 227.090. At all times such commission shall act in a manner consistent with the laws of the United States, the state of Oregon, and the charter and ordinances of the city. The planning commission shall make its decisions in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in the city’s land development ordinance.

     2.     The planning commission shall act as the urban forest board, in an advisory capacity to the city council, through the planning department unless otherwise deemed by city council in the following areas:

     a.     Determination of urban forest needs and recommendation of programs and ordinances to meet identified need.

     b.     Recommendations for the annual urban forest budget expenditures.

     c.     Recommendations for the implementation of the city of Happy Valley’s urban forestry plan.

     d.     Recommendations on long-range planning for the urban forest.

     e.     Organization and administration of special city events such as Arbor Day plantings, Earth Day events, or other events approved by city council. Volunteers may be recruited as needed.

     f.      Organization and administration of special city programs such as the heritage tree program, tree education program, tree planting and maintenance programs and achieving and maintaining Tree City USA status, or other programs approved by council. Volunteers may be recruited as needed.

     B.     Design Review Board Powers and Duties.

     1.     The design review board will administer and enforce the land development ordinances of the city and is delegated the powers and duties set forth in those ordinances. In addition, the board has the powers and duties of ORS Chapter 227 applicable to design review boards. The design review board must make its decisions in accordance with state and federal law and the city land development code.

     2.     The design review board will serve as expert professional advisors to aid in the review of certain development applications which will be processed in accordance with the administrative procedures and design review regulations in the city development code.

     3.     The design review board will review the following:

     a.     Design review type III applications.

     C.     Parks Advisory Committee Powers and Duties. The parks advisory committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council, unless otherwise deemed by city council, in the following areas:

     1.     The improvement of playgrounds, recreation facilities, and other places as outlined in the Happy Valley Parks Master Plan.

 

     2.     Consider means of bringing parks, trails and open spaces inside the city limits up to an acceptable standard, as outlined in the Happy Valley Parks Master Plan.

     3.     Recommendations to the city council on long-range planning for parks in accordance with the Happy Valley Parks Master Plan.

     4.     Review and recommend contract terms regarding maintenance and operation for parks and recreation services as necessary. Make recommendations to city council.

     5.     Give due attention and study to recreation and park services as they affect the welfare of residents of the city of Happy Valley.

     6.     Perform other park duties as assigned by city council.

     The advisory committee may make and establish such rules and regulations as are necessary for their government and procedure, consistent with the city charter, city ordinances and directives of city council.

     D.    Traffic and Public Safety Committee Powers and Duties. The traffic and public safety committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council in the creation, development and implementation of official traffic and public safety activities. The powers and duties of this committee shall include the following:

     1.     Develop and recommend coordinated traffic safety and public safety programs.

     2.     Recommend traffic safety and public safety priorities for the city.

     3.     Review and recommend project applications for funding.

     4.     Provide research and information to the city on matters related to traffic and public safety.

     5.     Promote public acceptance of city traffic and public safety programs.

     6.     Foster public knowledge and support of traffic law enforcement, public safety, and traffic engineering problems and needs.

     7.     Perform other duties as assigned by city council.

     E.     Budget Committee Powers and Duties. The budget committee shall approve the proposed budget for the ensuing year in compliance with the local budget law of the state of Oregon which is presently identified as ORS 294.305 to 294.520, 294.555 and 294.565.

     F.     Library Board Powers and Duties. The library board shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council in the creation, development and implementation of library programs and activities including, but not limited to:

     1.     Recommendation of programming.

     2.     Representation within the community.

     3.     Reconsideration of materials.

     G.    Public Art Committee. The public art committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council in the creation, development and implementation of official public art activities, selection, and programming. The powers and duties of the committee shall include the following:

     1.     Recommendation of a long-term public art vision for the city.

     2.     Review and recommend art applications for selection/admission into municipal exhibitions and programs.

 

     3.     Promote public engagement in city art programs.

     4.     Foster public appreciation and support of art both in public and private spaces. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2017; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 495 § 1, 2016; Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

2.16.080 Meetings and quorum.
     A.    Meetings for each committee shall be held on a regular basis or as needed as established by each respective committee. All meetings shall be posted on the city’s website and shall be open to the public.

     B.     A quorum shall exist when a majority of the voting members of the committee are present. (Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

 

2.16.090 Report.
     The staff liaison for each committee shall report to council annually chronicling the activities and achievements of that committee for the preceding twelve-month period. Each committee liaison shall establish their reporting date and reserve time for council presentation through the agenda request process. (Ord. 475 § 1, 2015; Ord. 410 § 2, 2011)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
Chapter 3.05 PARKS AND RECREATION SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
Chapter 3.08 REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS
Chapter 3.12 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Chapter 3.14 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
Chapter 3.16 EXEMPTIONS FROM COMPETITIVE BIDDING FOR PUBLIC CONTRACTS
Chapter 3.20 MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL TAX
Chapter 3.26 MARIJUANA TAX

Chapter 3.04 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
3.04.010 Purpose.
     A.    New development within the city of Happy Valley contributes to the need for increased capacity on arterial and collector roads, and multi-modal transportation facilities and related improvements, and therefore should contribute to the funding for such improvements. The TSDC will fund a portion of the needed auto, bicycle and pedestrian system capacity for new development.

     B.     ORS 223.297 through 223.314 grants the city authority to impose a TSDC to equitably spread the costs of essential capacity increasing capital improvements to new development.

     C.     The TSDC is incurred upon the issuance of a permit to develop property at a specific use or density. The TSDC is separate from other fees provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. It is a fee for service because the amount of the fee relates to a development’s receipt of services based upon the nature of that development.

     D.    The TSDC is not a tax on property or on a property owner as a direct consequence of ownership of property within the meaning of Section 11b, Article XI of the Oregon Constitution or the legislation implementing that section.

     E.     The TSDC shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the city council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charges (rate schedule), the methodology for calculating the charges, and the list of TSDC capital improvement projects intended to be funded by improvement fees (referred to as the TSDC Capital Project List).

     F.     The TSDC constitutes a mandatory collection method based upon the guidelines set forth in ORS 223.297 to 223.314, and is intended as a financing mechanism for the increased capacity in multi-modal improvements, and arterial and collector facilities associated with new development, and does not represent a means to fund maintenance of existing roads. (Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

 

3.04.020 Definitions.
All terms not defined below shall be defined by the city’s Land Development Code (LDC).

     A.    Accessory Dwelling Unit means a unit complying with the LDC, and ADUs will be charged the adopted rate for the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) classification of “220 - Apartment.”

     B.     Arterial means that term as defined and used in the city’s Transportation System Plan (TSP).

     C.     Average Weekday Trips are the average twenty-four (24) hour total of all vehicle trips counted to and from a study site from Monday through Friday.

     D.    Assignment refers to the transfer of a credit voucher or portion of a credit voucher that is transferred to another party.

     E.     Board means the board of county commissioners of Clackamas County, Oregon.

     F.     Building Official means that person, or designee, certified by the state and designated as such to administer the State Building Codes for the city.

     G.    Building Permit means that permit issued by the city building official pursuant to the most recently published versions of the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code, and the Oregon Residential Specialty Code. In addition, “building permit” shall mean the manufactured home installation permit issued by the city or county building official, relating to the placement of manufactured homes.

     H.    Bus Transit Corridor includes current fixed-route public bus service (excludes dial-a-ride shuttles and taxi service).

     I.      Capital Project List means the list of transportation improvements adopted as part of the TSDC methodology.

     J.      City means the city of Happy Valley, Oregon.

     K.    City Attorney means the legal counsel of the city of Happy Valley, Oregon.

     L.     Collector means that term as defined and used in Chapter 8 of the city’s Transportation System Plan.

     M.    Comprehensive Plan means the city generalized, coordinated land use map and policy statement that interrelates all functional and natural systems and activities relating to the use of lands, including, but not limited to, sewer and water systems, transportation facilities, recreational and natural resources, and air and water quality management programs.

     N.    Construction Cost Index means that index published by the Engineering News Record (ENR) Northwest (Seattle, Washington) titled “Construction Cost Index.”

     O.    Contiguous means that a property and an improvement or portion thereof share a common boundary line. A determination of contiguous includes all property subject to the development approval. The boundary lines and area of an improvement shall be determined by the right-of-way and easement areas for the improvement. In addition, multiple properties under common ownership separated by features such as a common area, non-motorized vehicle or pedestrian way, creek, wetland, park, or similar areas; up to a distance of not more than one hundred (100) feet between the properties at the boundary with the improvement, are deemed to include the feature in their combined boundary line. Any portion of an improvement that is located beyond the frontage of a property, as determined by the extension of boundary lines perpendicular to the frontage of the property, is not deemed to be contiguous to that property. An intersection improvement shall be deemed contiguous to all property with frontage on the intersection, or that touches the intersection at a point.

     P.     Council means the city council of the city of Happy Valley.

     Q.    County means Clackamas County, Oregon.

     R.     Development Agreement means the tool the city will use to secure the developer’s compliance with the commitment to build-out a phased master-plan project, qualifying the initial phases for a reduction under the station area and/or mixed-use reduction provisions.

     S.     Development Permit means a grading, excavation, engineering, building permit, land use or similar permit issued by the city that approves new development as defined by this section.

     T.     Department means the city’s economic and community development department.

     U.    Department Director means the director of the city’s economic and community development department, or designee.

     V.    Finance Director is that person employed by the city of Happy Valley that has the responsibility of managing the finance department, or designee.

     W.    Floor Area Ratio (FAR) means the ratio of the total amount of enclosed gross floor area within a structure to the amount of buildable acreage. For purposes of calculation, both floor area and net site area shall be converted to square feet. (For example, a single-story building constructed on one-quarter of the net developable site would have a floor area ratio of 0.25. If a second story were added, the floor area ratio would increase to 0.50, etc.)

     X.    Gross Floor Area, for the purposes of this chapter, will mirror the definition in the most recent ITE manual.

     Y.    Guest Home means a unit complying with the LDC. Guest homes will not be charged a TSDC assessment because these units share a kitchen and laundry facility with the primary dwelling on the parcel, and as such are not used for boarding, lodging or rental.

     Z.     Hearings Officer is defined as the land use hearings officer for the department.

     AA.  Improvement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed.

     BB.  Internal Capture Rate is defined as a percent reduction of trip generation for component land uses to account for trips made internally on site. A reduction of trip generation rates can potentially decrease traffic impact and help reduce external congestion. The internal capture rate is the percent reduction of trip generation estimates for land uses to account for trips made internally on a mixed-use development site.

     CC.  ITE Trip Generation Manual means the most recently published edition of the manual entitled Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. A copy of the ITE Trip Generation Manual shall be kept on file with the department.

     DD.  Light Rail Transit Station Area is defined as the passenger station platform along a fixed-route light rail alignment.

     EE.   Long-Term Financing means bonds issued by the city to finance a capital improvement in accordance with ORS 223.205 to 223.295.

     FF.   Methodology means the narrative, formulas and charts that serve as the framework for determining the TSDC.

     GG.  Minimum Standard Facility means the facilities necessary to meet the adopted standards for a local public street or road applicable in the location of the subject development.

     HH.  Mixed-Use Development is generally a land development project with a structure, or structures, containing two or more different and interacting land uses. These areas are characteristically higher density, compact walkable areas. Mixing of uses typically includes residential (townhomes, apartments, or detached homes on small lots), retail (mostly specialty and convenience), restaurants, hotels, office buildings, movie theatres, and any other compatible and complimentary uses. Reference Table 2—Mixed-use Development TSDC Reduction Requirements, in Section 3.04.030(G), for further definition of project requirements to qualify for a mixed-use development reduction.

     II.     Multi-Modal means vehicular, transit, bicycle, pedestrian and wheel chair transportation.

     JJ.    New Development means site improvements that increase overall trip generation.

     KK.  Over-Capacity means that portion of an improvement that is built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary to serve the applicant’s new development or mitigate for transportation system impacts attributable to the applicant’s new development.

     LL.   PM Peak Hour Trips means all vehicle trips to and from a study site during the sixty (60) minute time period of highest trip generation during the afternoon period between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.

     MM. Qualified Public Improvement means a capital improvement that is required as a condition of development approval, identified in the TSDC capital project list adopted by resolution and is:

     1.     Not located on or contiguous to the new development site; or

     2.     Located on or contiguous to the new development site, and as demonstrated in the traffic study for the new development is required to be built larger or with greater capacity (over-capacity) than is necessary for the new development to mitigate for transportation system impacts attributable to the new development.

     NN.  Rate Schedule means the TSDC associated with new development types, as adopted by resolution.

     OO.  Reimbursement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements already constructed or under construction when the fee is established, for which the local government determines that capacity exists.

     PP.   Right-of-Way means that portion of land that is dedicated for public use. Public uses may include, but are not limited to, pedestrian facilities (e.g., sidewalks, plazas), utility placement, signage, etc.

     QQ.  Station Area Development includes parcels with some portion of the development site located within a 0.25-mile radius (straight line distance measurement) of a light rail station platform or a bus transit corridor, both of which facilitate travel to multiple geographic routes, typically resulting in reduced impact to the transportation system by encouraging multi-modal transportation and reducing the impact on the surrounding transportation system. Reference Table 1—Station Area Development TSDC Reduction Requirements, in Section 3.04.030(F), for further definition of project requirements to qualify for a station area reduction.

     RR.  Transportation System Development Charge (TSDC) means the fee to be paid pursuant to Section 3.04.030 of this chapter.

     SS.   TSDC Capital Project List means a list of capital projects adopted by the council, identifying the estimated cost, timing, and portion of project costs to be funded by the TSDC.

     TT.   Zone of Influence shall be identified by drawing a border around the outermost intersections/facilities studied in the Traffic Impact Analysis as measured in relationship to the city limits to develop a boundary. If the improvements that generated the original credits are within the zone of influence boundary of the development receiving the credit, including within areas of unincorporated Clackamas County, or otherwise located within the city limits of the city of Happy Valley, the credits may be reassigned because the two developments have similar impacts and traffic patterns. (Ord. 548 § 1, 2019; Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

 

3.04.030 Application.
     A.    A TSDC may be imposed upon all new development within the city for which a development permit is required.

     B.     The applicant for a development permit shall, at the time of application, provide the department with the necessary and applicable information, such as the description of use, number of dwelling units or square footage of structures, information about occupancy and size of any existing use on the site, necessary to calculate the TSDC. The department shall notify the applicant of the right to appeal the decision on the calculation of the charge pursuant to Section 3.04.080.

     C.     The amount of the TSDC shall be determined as identified in the methodology and rate schedule adopted pursuant to Section 3.04.010(E), and amended pursuant to subsection G and Section 3.04.090 or adjusted pursuant to subsection D or E of this section.

     D.    If the city has not assigned a TSDC category for the identified land use in the adopted rate schedule, the department shall at its option either:

     1.     Identify the land use category that is most applicable to the use in question and apply that rate.

     2.     Consider trip generation data, gathered in a credible manner, preferably by a registered traffic engineer, for the same or similar use. Such a study shall be prepared at the applicant’s expense and must be submitted at least two weeks prior to expected issuance of a development or building permit. The department director has the right to accept, accept in part, modify, or reject the calculations offered under this option.

     3.     The following guidelines apply to data collection under Option 2:

     a.     The applicant shall submit a list of similar uses with similar characteristics in Oregon, Washington, California, or preferably in the Portland region. Uses must have been open for business for at least a year.

     b.     The department will determine the number of sites and locations, and if applicable for consolidated land use categories, the types of uses for which the applicant will be required to submit traffic counts.

     c.     The applicant shall supply the department with the following information for each site:

     i.      Standard days and hours of operations.

     ii.     Counts from sites on a weekday for twenty-four (24) hours. Actual counting time and days of the week may vary depending on land uses and standard days of operation and shall be approved by the department. Data collection shall be compliant with the ITE Trip Generation Manual.

     iii.    Quantification of pass by and diverted link trips, when applicable, shall be compliant with the ITE Trip Generation Handbook.

     iv.    A vicinity map for each site.

     d.     The applicant shall adjust this data as follows:

     i.      Adjust daily number to PM peak hour trips or the peak hour of the day for the land use if weekend data are collected.

     ii.     Adjust pass by and diverted link trips for potential trip reduction compliant with the ITE Trip Generation Handbook.

     e.     The department shall review the applicant’s data collection and adjustments, and the department director shall issue a final ruling to the applicant regarding which data and adjustments will be used for calculating the TSDC.

     i.      A fee will be charged for the review of formal alternate trip generation data. The fee will be set by Resolution.

     E.     Any developer requiring the execution of a formal development agreement to clarify TSDC reductions for station area development (Table 1) or reductions for mixed-use development (Table 2) will be required to pay a deposit (as set by resolution) prior to staff drafting the development agreement.

     F.     Station Area developments reduce vehicle trips on the adjacent roadway. Projects meeting the development density requirements that fall within a station area development are eligible to receive a reduction that correlates to the reduced impact of the eligible development. An approved station area development is eligible for a reduction on TSDC assessments as outlined in Table 1 (below) when some portion of the development site is located within a 0.25-mile radius (straight line distance measurement) of a light rail station platform or a bus transit corridor route alignment. This reduction may be combined with any applicable mixed-use development reduction (Table 2).

 

Table 1 Station Area Development TSDC Reduction Requirements

 

Reduction Level

TSDC Reduction (% Transportation Impact Reduction)

Transit Access Requirement Within 0.25 Mile Radius of:1

Development Density Requirement(s)

Level 1

5% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Bus Transit Corridor2

Minimum residential density of 24 units per acre

Minimum FAR of 2.0 per acre for non-residential development

Level 2

10% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Bus Transit Corridor2

Minimum residential density of 24 dwellings per acre AND minimum FAR of 2.0 per acre for non-residential development

Level 3

5% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Light Rail Transit Station3

Minimum residential density of 12 dwellings per acre4

Minimum FAR of 1.0 per acre for non-residential development

Level 4

10% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Light Rail Transit Station3

Minimum residential density of 24 dwellings per gross acre

Level 5

15% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Light Rail Transit Station3

Minimum residential density of 24 dwellings per acre AND at least 15% of the total gross res. & non-residential floor area devoted to commercial/retail uses

Minimum FAR of 2.0 per acre for non-residential development

Level 6

20% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Light Rail Transit Station3

Minimum residential density of 24 dwellings per acre AND minimum FAR of 2.0 per acre for non-residential development

Notes:

1       Some portion of the development site must be located within a 0.25 mile radius (straight line distance measurement) of a light rail station platform or a bus transit corridor route alignment to qualify for TSDC reduction.

2       Bus transit corridors include current fixed-route public bus service (excludes dial-a-ride shuttles and taxi service).

3       Light rail transit station area is defined as the passenger station platform along a fixed route alignment.

4       The stated residential density for this TSDC reduction level has been interpolated based on ITE Trip Generation Handbook results.

Source: ITE, Trip Generation Handbook, 2nd Edition, Appendix B, with noted exception.

 

     G.    Mixed-use development generates an internal trip capture, thus reducing external trip generation rates on surrounding roads. In such event, the department, for purposes of establishing the TSDC for a mixed-use development, shall apply a mixed-use development TSDC reduction to the eligible structure, or structures, which correlate to the internal capture rate of the proposed development as detailed in Table 2 (below). This reduction may be combined with any applicable station area development reduction (Table 1).

 

Table 2 Mixed-Use Development TSDC Reduction Requirements

 

Reduction Level

TSDC Reduction

(% Transportation Impact Reduction)

Development Density Requirement(s)

Level 1

7% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Mixed-use development with at least two different land use types (e.g., retail and office) within the same tax lot or master-planned area

Level 2

10% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Mixed-use development with a minimum residential density of 12 dwellings per gross acre AND minimum of 0.3 FAR per gross acre for non-residential development

Level 3

14% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Mixed-use development with a minimum res. density of 24 dwellings per gross acre AND minimum of 0.3 FAR per gross acre for non-residential development

Level 4

16% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Mixed-use development with a minimum residential density of 32 dwellings per gross acre AND minimum of 0.3 FAR per gross acre for non-residential development

Level 5

18% Vehicle Trip Reduction

Mixed-use development with a minimum residential density of 40 dwellings per gross acre AND minimum of 0.5 FAR per gross acre for non-residential development

Source: derived using EPA Mixed-Use Trip Generation Model v4.0.

 

     1.     If the proposed development includes more than one parcel of land and/or more than one structure, the mixed-use development and/or station area development

 

reductions shall be authorized as part of a development approval outlining the final build-out of the master plan development area. The applicable reduction shall be memorialized in a development agreement and recorded as a right-to-lien against each parcel included within the approved development area, allowing for renewal on active development projects.

     a.     If a development avails itself of the mixed-use development and/or station area development reductions and does not construct the development within the term of the development agreement, the city will capture any unwarranted reduction provided by the department at the time of permitting any built structures based on the original conceptual plan that the final built development does not warrant, by:

     i.      The developer will have an opportunity to pay the TSDC reductions that were attributed to a built structure within the mixed-use development and/or station area development; or

     ii.     The city can collect the TSDC reductions that were attributed to a built structure within the mixed-use development and/or station area development by filing a lien against the benefitting parcels.

     H.    Notwithstanding any other provision, the rate schedule adopted pursuant to subsection C shall, annually, be adjusted to account for changes in the costs of acquiring and constructing transportation facilities, based on the change in construction cost index. The construction cost index shall be used to adjust the TSDC rate schedule each fiscal year, unless it is otherwise adjusted by the council based on adoption of an updated methodology or TSDC capital project list. (Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

 

3.04.040 Collection.
     A.    The TSDC is due and payable at the time of issuance of the building permit. The building permit shall not be issued, except as provided in subsection C or D of this section, until payment is made. The TSDC rate schedule in effect at the time that a complete development permit submittal is received by the city will be applied to that permit. That TSDC rate applied is effective for one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the land use approval is in effect, or the development permit is submitted to the department, whichever comes last. At the expiration of the one hundred eighty (180) day period, if the permit is not yet issued, any adjustments applied under Section 3.04.030(H) can be applied to the permit.

     B.     Notwithstanding Section 3.04.030(A), the following are exempt from the TSDC:

     1.     Alteration permits for tenant improvements, new construction or remodeling where:

     a.     No additional dwelling unit(s) or structure(s) are created.

     b.     A change of use, building addition, or other modification does not result in an increase in PM peak hour trips as determined in the manner set forth in a methodology adopted pursuant to Section 3.04.010(E), or as provided in Section 3.04.030(D) or (E), whichever is applicable.

     2.     Relocation of any structure originally located on property that the city acquires in-fee as a part of a capital transportation project that results in a building encroachment over public right-of-way or easements, when the remaining remnant will not be re-developable, such that the structure is relocated to another parcel within the city limits. Except to the extent such relocation creates additional dwelling units and/or additional PM peak hour trips as determined in the manner set forth in a methodology adopted pursuant to Section 3.04.010(E), or as provided in Section 3.04.030(D) or Section 3.04.030(E), whichever is applicable.

     3.     Replacement of any structure located on excess property that the city acquires in-fee as a part of a capital transportation project that can be marketed, or available for occupancy, except to the extent such remodeling or replacement creates additional dwelling units and/or additional PM peak hour trips as determined in the manner set forth in a methodology adopted pursuant to Section 3.04.010(E), or as provided in Section 3.04.030(D) or (E), whichever is applicable:

     a.     The agency has been provided a reasonable period of time to meet public notification requirements for sale or other disposition (i.e., public auction); and

     b.     Upon completion of the project, after access has been restored and/or recorded whichever is the later, such that the property has legal ingress/egress for development or occupancy purposes.

     C.     Payment of the TSDC by a person who is also eligible for a credit voucher for construction of a qualified public improvement may be delayed until a date certain to be set by the department at the time of development permit issuance.

     Payment may only be delayed for the same development which is associated with the construction of the capital improvement for which credit is given, and the permittee shall provide the department with security to secure payment of the TSDC. The amount of security shall equal the TSDC assessment for the development as calculated by the department, and must be in a form outlined in subsection (C)(1), (2) or (3), or an alternative method approved by the city attorney.

     A permittee eligible for delay of payment of the TSDC pursuant to this section shall secure payment of the assessment, prior to issuance of the development or building permit, by any of the following:

     1.     Placing cash in the amount of the assessment in an escrow account accessible by the city. Permittee shall reconcile any remaining balance after applying the credit voucher to the outstanding balance, or revenue in the escrow account shall be withdrawn to cover the balance. Once the balance is reconciled any remaining revenue in the escrow account shall be released, but not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the credit voucher against the improvement pursuant to Section 3.04.050.

     2.     Issuing a letter of credit in the amount of the assessment which is accessible by the city. The permittee shall reconcile any remaining balance after applying the credit voucher to the outstanding balance, or the city shall send a demand to draw down on the letter of credit to cover the balance. Once the balance is reconciled any remaining balance on the letter of credit shall be released, but not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the credit voucher against the improvement pursuant to Section 3.04.050.

     3.     The permittee can apply for delay of payment of the TSDC assessment pursuant to ordinance Section 3.04.040(D). The administrative fee and interest will be waived for a deferral under Section 3.04.040(C)(2) until the credit voucher is issued. Once the credit voucher is issued, the permittee can apply all (or a portion of) the credit voucher toward the principal and interest balance on the account, or continue making installment payments in accordance with the payment plan throughout the duration of the loan. If the installment plan is continued, the applicant would pay an administrative fee and interest would begin accruing on the principal balance as of the date of credit voucher issuance.

     D.    When a TSDC is due and payable, the parcel owner may apply to the city for payment in twenty (20) semiannual installments, secured by a lien on the property upon which the development is to occur, to include interest on the unpaid balance, if that payment option is required to be made available to the permittee by ORS 223.207:

     1.     A parcel owner may request installment payments for up to five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in TSDC assessments; any remaining balance must be paid in full prior to issuance of the development permit.

     2.     The city shall prepare the agreement for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors. The application fee for this option shall be set by resolution.

     3.     The applicable interest rate shall be determined as follows:

 

 

Principal

Interest Rate

$0—$24,999

Current prime lending rate plus 3.0 percentage points

$25,000—$500,000

Current prime lending rate plus 2.0 percentage points

     4.     An applicant requesting installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the property and that the interest of the permittee is adequate to secure payment of the lien. The department director may order the imposition of the lien as recommended by the department.

     5.     Upon the department director order, the department shall cause the lien to be recorded on the city’s lien docket. From that time the city shall have a lien upon the described parcel at the amount of the TSDC, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the department director. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223, and shall be superior to all other liens pursuant to ORS 223.230. Upon satisfaction of the obligation the department director shall request the county clerk to release the lien.

     6.     With the passage of Article XI, Section 11B of the Oregon Constitution, progressive payment shall be taken for all unpaid debt. The department director will be notified immediately by the department of any account thirty (30) days or more past due. The department director shall then send a letter to the defaulting party demanding payment no later than thirty (30) days following the date of the demand letter. The demand letter shall require payment of all amounts to bring the account current including any applicable interest or other penalty and shall demand full compliance with a “time is of the essence” clause according to the type of obligation at issue. The time for payment to bring the account current shall be left to the best professional judgment of the department director depending upon the type of debt and amount owed but in no event shall time for payment exceed the next payment due date or any other requirements imposed by debt instruments executed by the city in favor of any third party or other agreements that may have been executed by the city.

     7.     If payment has not been made following the first notice, the department director shall refer the matter to the city attorney, who shall send a second notice, detailing the prior defaults and notices thereof indicating that further action, including legal action, will be taken.

     8.     If, following the second notice, time for payment has expired, then the city attorney shall include the defaulting person or entity on a list entitled “Collection/Fore-closure” and consult with appropriate staff regarding the most efficient and cost-effective method for collection of the debt.

     9.     The city attorney shall determine if the matter will be retained for pursuit by the city attorney, or referred to a debt collection agency or other method for collection. If retained by legal counsel, a demand letter to the debtor shall be sent declaring a default, accelerating the entire balance and requiring full payment within a reasonable period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. If no satisfactory response is forthcoming, legal counsel may extend the time limits for legal action in cases of extraordinary hardship; such determination shall be at the sole discretion of legal counsel and not subject to review by the council.

     10.   Upon referral and direction by the council, the city attorney may proceed with foreclosure of the assessment lien or take other legal action authorized by law which is deemed most appropriate under the circumstances.

     11.   If the city attorney determines that it is most effective to use the services of a collection agency, the city attorney may solicit proposals and make a recommendation to the council regarding selection of a firm consistent with the county local contract review board rules and ORS Chapter 279. The city attorney shall be authorized to negotiate a contract regarding the amount of compensation, length of term and methods of collection, subject to final review and approval by the council. However, the contract shall specifically provide that the collection agency shall fully comply with the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. 1601, et seq., and shall provide for full indemnification and protection of the city from any and all claims for unfair or unlawful debt collection practices. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

 

3.04.050 Credit.
     An applicant for a development permit, shall be entitled to a credit against the TSDC for payment of a fee in lieu of construction or for the construction of a qualified public improvement. Calculation of any TSDC credit value will be based on the TSDC capital project list in place upon the city’s receipt of a TSDC credit application. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating in its application for credit that an improvement qualifies for credit.

     A.    The city shall provide credit for the documented, reasonable cost of construction (whether paid via fee-in-lieu of or a constructed improvement) of all or part of a qualified public improvement listed in the TSDC capital project list, adopted pursuant to Section 3.04.010(E), based on the following criteria:

     1.     A transportation improvements that is located neither on nor contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval shall be considered for credit at one hundred (100) percent of the cost of the qualified improvements.

     2.     A transportation improvements that is located on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval, and that is required to be built larger, or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project, shall be considered for credit. Credit for these improvements may be granted only for the cost of that portion of the improvement that exceeds the capacity needed to serve the development project or property provided in a development. The city may grant greater credits (up to the total cost of the improvement) to a developer in limited circumstances where doing so serves the public interest on collector and/or arterial facilities, and the city in its sole discretion concludes, based on traffic impact analysis documents that the development project’s impact is incidental to the overall improvement. To grant additional credits, the city must enter into a development agreement with the developer that identifies the developer’s commitments to completing the improvements, including the timing of same, and that establishes the conditions for the city’s issuance of credits.

     3.     In accordance with the city ‘s land development code, utility relocations to accommodate these road designs shall be fully creditable.

     4.     No more than thirteen and one-half (13.5) percent of the total qualifying construction cost shall be creditable for survey, engineering, and inspection.

     5.     No credits shall be granted for Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) facilities unless clearly identified as a qualified public improvement listed in the TSDC capital project list.

     6.     Road right-of-way dedicated pursuant to the applicable development conditions shall be considered for credit as follows:

     a.     Road right-of-way located neither on nor contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval shall receive credit for the dedication.

     b.     Road right-of-way located on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval, may be granted credits in accordance with subsection (A)(2) of this section.

     c.     Credit for right-of-way shall be allowed based on the reasonable market value of the public right-of-way measured at the time of the city’s final land use decision or other permit decision that required the transportation improvement(s) as condition of development approval. The value of the public right-of-way may be demonstrated by an appraisal, the purchase price if the purchases closes on or before the city’s decision, or other measure of value as approved by the city. The value may assume any entitlements conferred by the land use decision or other decision that approved the development but shall not include any value added by the public improvements required by the decision. An applicant for TSDC credits shall provide documentation sufficient to establish the value of the public right-of-way as determined by the city in its sole discretion.

     B.     All requests for credit vouchers must be in writing and filed with the department not more than ninety (90) days after acceptance of the improvement. Improvement acceptance shall be in accordance with the practices, procedures and standards of the department.

     C.     The amount of any credit shall be determined by the department and based upon the subject improvement contract documents, and other appropriate information, provided by the applicant for the credit. In the credit application, the applicant must identify the improvement(s) for which credit is sought and explain how the improvement(s) meet the requirements of this section.

     D.    The applicant shall also document, with credible evidence, the value of the improvement(s) for which credit is sought. If, in the department’s opinion, the improvement(s) meets the requirements of this section and the department concurs with the proposed value of the improvement(s), a credit shall be granted for the eligible amount.

     E.     The value of the credits under this section shall be determined by the city based on the actual or projected cost of construction and land valuation, as applicable, as verified by receipts and other credible evidence submitted by the applicant and concurred with by the city. Upon a finding by the city that the contract amounts, including payments for right-of-way, exceed prevailing market rates for a similar project, the credit shall be based upon market rates.

     F.     The department shall respond to the applicant’s request in writing within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a technically complete request. The department shall provide a written explanation of the decision on the credit request.

     G.    If a TSDC credit is approved, the department shall provide the applicant with a credit voucher signed by the department director. The credit voucher shall state a dollar amount that may be applied against any TSDC imposed against the subject property. In no event shall a subject property be entitled to redeem credit vouchers exceeding the TSDC imposed on the subject property.

     H.    A TSDC credit has no cash or monetary value and a remaining balance on a voucher shall not be a basis for any refund. A credit shall only apply against the TSDC and its only value is to be used to reduce the TSDC otherwise due, subject to all conditions, limitations, and requirements of this chapter.

     I.      Any person claiming the right to redeem a credit shall have the burden of demonstrating ownership of the credit.

     J.      Prior to issuing a building permit or other permit that requires payment of the TSDC, and upon written application to the department, a credit shall be applied to the TSDC on a permit for development on a lot or parcel.

     1.     In the case of multi-phase development, excess credit generated in one phase may be applied to reduce the TSDC in subsequent phases of the original development project.

     K.    Credits may be reassigned from the applicant to another individual or entity for use on the new development or another property if all the following conditions are met:

     1.     A request for reassignment of a credit voucher must be made in writing with a notarized letter to the department signed by the person who owns the credit. The request for reassignment of a credit voucher shall contain all the information necessary to establish that such a reassignment is allowable under this subsection. The burden of proof that a reassignment is allowable is on the applicant. The department shall respond in writing to the applicant’s request for reassignment within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request.

     2.     Credits may be reassigned if the department determines that either:

     a.     The lot or parcel that is to receive the credit is adjacent to and served by the transportation improvements that generated the credits; or

     b.     The transportation improvements that generated the original credits are located within the zone of influence of the approved traffic impact analysis for the development receiving the credit or are otherwise located within the city limits of the city of Happy Valley.

     3.     When a credit voucher or portion of a credit voucher is reassigned a notarized assignment of transportation TSDC credits notice shall be sent from the department to both parties clarifying the reassignment. The amount reassigned shall be deducted from the transferor’s credit voucher balance and reassigned to the transferee:

     a.     The assignment shall reference the original credit voucher number, which is associated with the property to which the initial credit was assigned.

     b.     The assignment shall have the same expiration date as the initial credit voucher.

     c.     The credit shall be applied to the TSDC on a permit for development on a lot or parcel within the confines of the property eligible for assignment as described in subsection I of this section.

     4.     A reassigned credit voucher shall follow all rules regarding redemption of credits.

     5.     The department may charge a fee, as set by resolution, for administering the reassignment of credits.

     L.     A TSDC credit must be redeemed at the time the city issues the building permit or other permit that requires payment of the TSDC. The applicant is responsible for presenting a credit prior to issuance of the permit. Except as provided in Section 3.04.060, under no circumstances shall any credit redemption be considered after issuance of the related permit.

     M.    A TSDC credit voucher expires on the date ten (10) years after the date the voucher was issued. The expiration date may not be extended.

     N.    The department director may delegate signature authority for credit vouchers to a designee. (Ord. 548 § 1, 2019; Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

 

3.04.060 Refunds.
     A.    Refunds may be given by the city upon finding that there was a clerical error in the calculation of the TSDC. Refunds shall not be allowed for failure to claim credit, as provided for in Section 3.04.050, at the time of development or building permit issuance. The refund must be requested within six months of the date the assessment was paid; failure to avail oneself of this grace period forfeits any future right or interest in the assessment paid and the credit will remain with the parcel for future development.

     B.     A fee (set by resolution) will be charged on any refund of an assessment paid on development that did not commence. The fee may be paid in cash or the applicant can opt to reduce the amount of the refund to cover the cost of the fee. (Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

 

3.04.070 Dedicated funds, project lists.
     A.    All monies derived from the TSDC shall be placed in the city TSDC fund. Monies in the TSDC fund shall be used solely to provide the TSDC capital project list, listed capacity increasing improvements, according to the TSDC capital project list as it currently exists or as hereinafter amended, and eligible administrative costs. All monies derived from the TSDC shall be placed in the city TSDC fund. TSDC revenue shall be used to fund those projects identified in the TSDC capital project list adopted pursuant to Section 3.04.010(E), and costs related to compliance with the provisions of this chapter, as provided by ORS 223.307.

     B.     The TSDC shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

     C.     The TSDC shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.

     D.    The TSDC capital project list adopted pursuant to Section 3.04.010(E) may be amended from time to time by council resolution. If the rate schedule will be increased by a proposed modification of the TSDC capital project list to include capacity increasing capital improvement cost(s):

     1.     The city shall provide, at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of the modification, notice of the proposed modification to the persons who have requested written notice under ORS 223.305(6).

     2.     If the city receives a written request for a hearing on the proposed modification within seven days of the date the proposed modification is scheduled for adoption, the city shall hold a public hearing.

     3.     Notwithstanding ORS 294.160, a public hearing is not required if the city does not receive a written request for a hearing.

     4.     The decision of the city to increase the rate schedule by modifying the list may be judicially reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

 

3.04.080 Appeal.
     A.    A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of TSDC revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the hearings officer by filing a written request with the department director. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.

     1.     After providing notice to the appellant, the hearings officer shall determine whether the expenditure is in accordance with this ordinance and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.214. If the hearings officer determines that there has been an improper expenditure of TSDC revenues, the hearings officer shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.

     B.     Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the department under this chapter must be filed with the hearings officer by filing a written request and paying the appeals fee with the department within fourteen (14) days of the department’s decision, or payment of the assessment, whichever comes first.

     1.     After providing notice to the appellant, the hearings officer shall determine whether the department’s decision is in accordance with this ordinance and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.214 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decisions.

     2.     The fee for formally appealing a decision to the hearings officer will be set by resolution.

     C.     The decision of the hearings officer shall be reviewable solely under ORS 34.010 through 34.100. The person who has appealed a decision shall be notified of this right to review of the decision.

     D.    A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the council pursuant to Section 3.04.010(E) shall not be filed later than sixty (60) days after adoption. A person may contest the methodology used for calculating a TSDC only as provided in ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100, and not otherwise. (Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

 

3.04.090 Annual review.
     Prior to January 1 of each year, the city shall provide an annual accounting for the activity occurring in the dedicated fund created by Section 3.04.070 for the previous fiscal year. The accounting shall show the total amount of TSDC’s collected, the amount spent on each project that was funded in whole or in part in that fiscal year, and the amount attributed to the costs of complying with the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314. (Ord. 528 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 3.05 PARKS AND RECREATION SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
3.05.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the parks and recreation system development charge (PSDC) is to ensure that new development contributes to the cost of new parks and recreation facilities and any expansion of existing parks and recreation facilities required to accommodate additional demand generated by the development. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions apply to this ordinance:

     A.    Capital Improvements mean public facilities or assets, including real property, used for parks and recreation. Capital improvements do not include costs of the operation or routine maintenance of any facilities or assets.

     B.     Capital Improvement Plan means the list of capital improvements adopted Section 3.05.070 that the city intends to finance, in whole or in part, using PSDCs.

     C.     Council means the city council of the city of Happy Valley, Oregon.

     D.    Construction Cost Index means that index published by the Engineering News Record (ENR) Northwest (Seattle, Washington) titled “Construction Cost Index.”

     E.     Department Director means the direction of the city’s economic and community development department or person designated by the director.

     F.     Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including a building or other land construction, or making a physical change in the use of a structure or land that may have the effect of increasing demand for parks and recreation facilities or that may contribute to the need for additional or enlarged parks and recreation facilities as determined in this ordinance. Development includes redevelopment of property. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways but does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved lands.

     G.    Finance Director means the finance director of the city of Happy Valley or the director’s designee.

     H.    Improvement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed.

     I.      Improvement Fee Credit means a credit granted for the construction of a qualified public improvement under the provisions of ORS 223.304(4).

     J.      Minimum Standard Facility means facilities to meet the adopted standards for a neighborhood park.

     K.    New Development means development that occurs on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     L.     Owner means the owner or owners of record of real property as shown in the records of Clackamas County, or a person purchasing a piece of property under contract, or a public body or public agency with authority to exercise the power of eminent domain which has formally enacted a resolution of its intent to acquire the property described in the resolution.

     M.    Parcel means a tract, partition parcel, subdivision lot, legal lot of record or other unit of land or interest in real property.

     N.    Parks and Recreation System Development Charge or PSDC means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee, or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of capital improvements or issuance of a development permit or building permit. A PSDC does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision.

     O.    Permittee means the person to whom a building permit, development permit, or other permit related to the use of a parcel is issued.

     P.     Qualified Public Improvement means a capital improvement that is:

     1.     Required as a condition of development approval; and

     2.     Identified in the adopted Capital Improvement Plan; and is either:

     a.     Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval, or

     b.     Located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and is required to be built larger or with greater capacity (overcapacity) than is necessary for the applicant’s new development.

     Q.    Reimbursement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements that are:

     1.     Constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to this chapter, and

     2.     For which the council determines that capacity for future users exists. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.030 Parks system development charge established.
     A.    PSDCs may be established and revised by resolution of the council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge, the type of permit to which the charge applies, and, if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire city, the geographic area subject to the charge.

     B.     PSDCs may be annually adjusted to account for changes in the costs of acquiring and constructing park and recreation facilities, based on the change in Construction Cost Index. The construction cost index shall be used to adjust the PSDCs unless they are otherwise adjusted by the council based on adoption of an updated methodology report or capital improvement project list. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.040 Methodology.
     A.    The methodology used to establish or modify the reimbursement fee shall, where applicable, be based on the cost of then-existing facilities, including, without limitation, design, financing and construction costs, prior contributions by then-existing users, gifts or grants from federal or state government or private persons, the cost of the unused capacity of existing facilities, rate-making principals employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

     B.     The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee shall demonstrate, where applicable, consideration of the estimated cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the parks and recreation system. The methodology shall be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for the projected need for available system capacity for future system users.

     C.     The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the council. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.050 Authorized expenditures.
     A.    Reimbursement fees shall be spent only on capital improvements that are included in the plan adopted by the council pursuant to Section 3.05.070, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the improvements. However, expenditure of reimbursement fees is not limited to the portions of projects that create capacity for future system users.

     B.     Improvement fees shall be spent only on portions of capital improvements that create additional capacity for future users, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or providing new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by new development. A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the council pursuant to Section 3.05.070.

     C.     Notwithstanding Section 3.05.060, PSDC revenue may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing PSDC methodologies and providing an annual accounting of PSDC expenditures. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.060 Expenditure restrictions.
     PSDCs shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative facilities that are more than an incidental part of a capital improvement. PSDCs shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements or other park and recreation facilities. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.070 Capital Improvement Plan.
     A.    Prior to establishing a PSDC, the council shall adopt a Capital Improvement Plan by resolution that includes a list and description of:

     1.     The capital improvements the council intends to fund in whole or in part with PSDC revenues;

     2.     The estimated cost and time of construction of each capital improvement and the percentage of the cost eligible to be funded with PSDC revenues; and

     3.     A description of the process to modify the plan.

     B.     In adopting the plan, the council may incorporate by reference all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section.

     C.     The council may modify the plan and list at any time. If a PSDC will be increased by a proposed modification to the list the council will:

     1.     At least thirty (30) days prior to adoption of the proposed modification, provide written notice to persons who have requested notice pursuant to this chapter; and

     2.     Hold a public hearing if a written request for a hearing is received at least seven days prior to the date of the proposed modification.

     D.    A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is not a modification of the system development charge if the change in amount is based on the periodic application of a the Construction Cost Index. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.080 Collection of charge.
     A.    The PSDC is due and payable at the time the city issues a building permit for any types of development. If a building or development permit is not required, the PSDC is payable at the time use of a capital improvement is increased based on changes in the use of the property that are unrelated to seasonal or ordinary fluctuations. A PSDC is imposed when a change of use of a parcel, lot or structure occurs, but the amount of the PSDC shall be reduced by an amount equal to the existing PSDC for the pre-existing type and level of the use. The reduction may not exceed the calculated PSDC. No refund or credit shall be on account of such reduction.

     B.     Notwithstanding issuance of a development, building, or occupancy permit without payment, the PSDC liability shall survive and become a personal obligation of the permittee.

     C.     Except as provided for installment payments under Section 3.05.090, failure to pay the charge within sixty (60) days of the due date shall result in a penalty equal to fifty (50) percent of the charge. After sixty (60) days, interest on any unpaid balance shall accrue at the legal rate established by statute.

     D.    The finance director is authorized to take the following actions with respect to PSDCs, penalties, and interest:

     1.     Any action described in this section to collect and enforce the charge, penalties, and interest;

     2.     To initiate legal action or exercise any other statutory right to collect any delinquent charge, penalties and interest under this chapter upon approval of the city council, as applicable, or in accordance with any general city collection policy; and

     3.     If the finance director determines that the delinquent charges for any development are for any reason wholly uncollectible, the finance director may request, in writing, to the council, an order directing that the charges be cancelled. The council, when so requested, may in its discretion order and direct the finance director to cancel such uncollectible charges. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.090 Installment payments.
     A.    When a PSDC is due and payable, the permittee may apply to the city for payment in twenty (20) semiannual installments, secured by a lien on the property upon which the development is to occur, to include interest on the unpaid balance, if an option for installment payments is required to be made available by ORS 223.205, 223.210 to 223.295.

     B.     The city shall provide an application form for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors. The application fee shall be set by the council by resolution.

     C.     If the principal amount owed is less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), interest shall accrue at the current prime lending rate plus three percentage points. Otherwise, interest shall accrue at the current prime lending rate plus two percentage points.

     D.    An applicant requesting installment payments has the burden of demonstrating that the applicant has authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the property and that the applicant’s interest in the property is adequate to secure payment of the lien. The finance director may order the imposition of the lien as directed by the department.

     E.     Upon the finance director’s order, the finance department shall cause the lien to be recorded on the city’s lien docket. From that time the city shall have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the PSDC, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the finance director. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223 and shall be superior to all other liens pursuant to ORS 223.230. Upon satisfaction of the obligation the finance director shall direct the finance department to release the lien. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.100 Exemptions.
     The uses listed and described in this subsection are exempt, either partially or fully, from payment of the PSDC. Any applicant seeking an exemption under this section shall request that exemption, in writing, no later than the time of application for the building permit. Where development consists of only part of one or more of the uses described in this section, only that/those portion(s) of the development that qualify under this section are eligible for an exemption:

     A.    Remodeling or replacing an existing structure (including mobile homes) except to the extent that the remodeling or replacement creates demands on the parks and recreation system greater than those of the existing use of the property;

     B.     A structure or use established and legally existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is exempt from a system development charge to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of land, as constituted on that date;

     C.     An addition to a single-family dwelling that does not add a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code;

     D.    Temporary uses that do not exceed ninety (90) days in a calendar year; and

     E.     Temporary construction facilities as determined by the finance director.

     The balance of the development that does not qualify for any exemption under this section shall be subject to the full PSDC. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.110 Credits.
     A permittee may be entitled to a credit against the PSDC for constructing a Qualified Public Improvement or payment of a fee-in-lieu of construction. The value of the PSDC credit will be determined as described in this section. The permittee has the burden of demonstrating that an improvement qualifies as a Qualified Public Improvement.

     A.    The city shall provide credit for the documented, reasonable cost of construction (whether paid via fee-in-lieu or as constructed) for all or part of a Qualified Public Improvement listing the Capital Improvement Plan and based on the following criteria:

     1.     Park improvements that are not located on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval shall be considered for credit at one hundred (100) percent of the cost of the Qualified Public Improvement.

     2.     A park improvement that is located on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval and that is required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project shall be considered for credit. Credit for the improvement may be granted only for the cost of that portion of the improvement that exceeds the capacity needed to serve the development project. In addition, the city may grant greater credit (up to the total cost of the improvement) to a permittee in limited circumstances where doing so serves the public interest as determined by the city in its sole discretion based on impact analysis documents that show the impact of the project is incidental to the overall improvement. To grant the additional credits, the city must enter into a development agreement with the permittee that identifies the permittee’s commitments to completing the improvements, including the timing and delivery of same and that establishes the conditions for the city’s issuance of credits.

     3.     The value of an interest in real property shall be based on the written appraisal of fair market value by a qualified, professional appraiser:

     a.     The appraisal shall determine the value of the property on the date of the city’s land use or other permit decision that requires the permittee to provide the park improvement(s).

     b.     The appraisal shall assume the value of the real property as approved by land or other permit decision but not including any public improvements required by the decision or permit. Constrained lands, such as conservation slope areas, riparian areas, wetlands, habitat conservation areas and any associated buffers shall be valued with the constraints. For example, steep slopes and natural resource areas may not exceed a residential density of two dwelling units per acre.

     c.     The valuation date shall be within sixty (60) days of the date of the city’s final decision approving the development. Appraisals and appraisal reviews shall be completed in accordance with the most current Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisition.

     4.     The city in its sole discretion may accept other documents or evidence to determine the value of dedicated real property.

     B.     A request for PSDC credit shall be filed in writing no later than ninety (90) days after dedication of the subject real property or acceptance of the improvement by the city, if earlier.

     C.     The amount of the credit, if any, shall be determined by the city based on the subject improvement contract documents and other appropriate information provided by the permittee.

     D.    The permittee shall also document, with creditable evidence, the value of the improvement(s) for which credit is sought. If the city, in its sole discretion, determines that the improvement(s) meets the requirements of this section and agrees with the proposed value of the improvement(s), the city may issue a credit for the eligible amount.

     E.     The value of the credits under this section shall be determined by the city at its sole discretion based on the actual or projected cost of construction of any land valuation as verified by receipts and other credible evidence submitted by the permittee. Where a discrepancy exists in the evidence submitted by the permittee, the city may supplement the record upon which the value of the PSDC credit is determined.

     F.     The city shall respond to the permittee’s request in writing within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a technically complete request. The city shall provide a written explanation of the decision on the credit request.

     G.    Upon approval, the city shall provide the permittee with a credit voucher signed by the department director. The credit voucher shall state a dollar amount that may be applied against any PSDC imposed against the subject property. In no event shall a subject property be entitled to redeem credit vouchers exceeding the PSDC imposed on the subject property, except as provided for in subsection J of this section.

     H.    A PSDC credit has no cash or monetary value and a remaining balance on a voucher shall not be a basis for any refund. A credit shall only apply against the PSDC and its only value is to be used to reduce the PSDC otherwise due, subject to all conditions, limitations, and requirements of this chapter.

     I.      Prior to issuing a building other permit that requires payment of the PSDC, and upon written request to the city by the permittee, a credit may be applied to the PSDC due on the permit for development of the lot(s) or parcel(s).

     1.     In the case of multi-phase development, excess credit generated in one phase may be applied to reduce the PSDC in subsequent phases of the original development project.

     J.      A credit may be reassigned from the permittee to another person for use on a new development or property if all the following conditions are met:

     1.     A request for reassignment of a credit voucher must be made in writing with a notarized letter to the department signed by the person who owns the credit. The request for reassignment of a credit voucher shall contain all the information necessary to establish that such a reassignment is allowable under this subsection. The burden of proof that a reassignment is allowable is the responsibility of the permittee. The city shall respond in writing to the permittee’s request for reassignment within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request.

     2.     Credits may be reassigned if the city determines that either:

     a.     The lot or parcel that is to receive the credit is adjacent to and served by the park improvements that generated the credits; or

     b.     The park improvements that generated the original credits are located within the city limits of the city of Happy Valley.

     3.     When a credit voucher or portion of a credit voucher is reassigned, a notarized assignment of PSDC credits notice shall be sent from the city to both parties clarifying the reassignment. The amount reassigned shall be deducted from the transferor’s credit voucher balance and reassigned to the transferee:

     a.     The assignment shall reference the original credit voucher number, which is associated with the property to which the initial credit was assigned.

     b.     The assignment shall have the same expiration date as the initial credit voucher.

     c.     The credit shall be applied to the PSDC on a permit for development on a lot or parcel within the confines of the property eligible for assignment as described in subsection I of this section.

     4.     A reassigned credit voucher shall follow all rules regarding redemption of credits.

     5.     The city may charge a fee, as set by resolution, for administering the reassignment of credits.

     K.    The permittee is responsible for presenting a PSDC credit to the city prior to the issuance of the building permit or other development permit that requires payment of the PSDC. Except as provided in Section 3.05.140 (Refunds), under no circumstances shall any credit redemption be considered after issuance of building or development permit.

     L.     Credit vouchers shall expire on the date ten (10) years after the date the PSDC credit voucher was issued by the city. The expiration date may not be extended.

     M.    The department director can delegate signature authority for credit vouchers to a designee.

     N.    The city does not recognize and will not accept PSDC credit vouchers issued by another jurisdiction. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2019; Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.120 Notice.
     The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or modification of a methodology for any PSDC. Written notice will be mailed to persons on the list at least ninety (90) days prior to the first hearing to establish or modify a PSDC. The methodology supporting the PSDC shall be available at least sixty (60) days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend a PSDC. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the city.

     The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least thirty (30) days prior to removing a name from the list, the city must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.130 Segregation and use of revenue.
     All funds derived from the PSDC described in this chapter are to be segregated from all other funds of the city using standard accounting practices. PSDCs collected under this chapter will not be used for any purpose other than set forth in Section 3.05.050.

     The finance director shall provide the council with an annual accounting as provided in ORS 223.311. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.140 Refunds.
     A refund may be given by the finance director upon finding that there was an error in calculating a PSDC.

     A refund is not allowed due to a failure to timely claim credit or to timely seek an alternative method of system development charge calculation at the time of submission of an application for a development or building permit.

     The city may charge a fee (set by resolution) to refund a PSDC that was paid for development that did not commence. The fee may be paid in cash or the applicant can opt to reduce the amount of the refund to cover the cost of the fee. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.150 Appeal procedure.
     A.    A person may challenge the propriety of an expenditure of PSDC revenue by filing a written appeal with the finance director. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure. Upon receipt of an appeal, the director shall refer the matter to the city hearings officer.

     1.     The city hearings officer shall provide an opportunity for the appellant and the city to provide written evidence, testimony and argument regarding the expenditure. Within thirty (30) days of the date the appeal is referred by the director, the hearings officer shall issue a written decision whether the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.214. The hearings officer shall provide a copy of the decision to the appellant and the city. If the hearings officer determines that there has been an improper expenditure of PSDC revenues, the hearings officer shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.

     B.     A person may challenge any other decision required or permitted to be made by the city under this chapter by filing a written request and paying the appeals fee with the city manager within fourteen (14) days of the city’s decision, or payment of the assessment, whichever comes first. The city manager shall refer the appeal to the city hearings officer.

     1.     The city hearings officer shall provide an opportunity for the appellant and the city to provide written evidence, testimony and argument regarding the decision. Within thirty (30) days of the date the appeal is referred by the city manager, the hearings officer shall issue a written decision whether the decision is in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.214 and may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision.

     C.     The council may set an appeal fee by resolution.

     D.    The hearings officer’s decision under this section is subject to review solely under ORS 34.010 through 34.100 and not otherwise. The appellant shall be notified of the right to seek review of the decision.

     E.     Any legal claim or action challenging the methodology adopted by the council pursuant to Section 3.05.040 may not be filed more than sixty (60) days after the date the methodology is adopted. A person may seek review of a decision to adopt the methodology only as provided in ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100 and not otherwise. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.160 Severability.
     The provisions of this chapter are severable, and it is the intention to confer the whole or any part of the powers herein provided for. If any clause, section or provision of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason or cause, the remaining portion of this chapter shall be in full force and effect and be valid as if such invalid portion thereof had not been incorporated herein. It is hereby declared to be the council’s intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such an unconstitutional provision not been included herein. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

 

3.05.170 Classification.
     The council determines that any fee, rates or charges imposed by this chapter are not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 3.08 REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS
3.08.010 Definitions.
     The following terms are definitions for the purposes of this chapter.

     “Applicant” means a person who is required or chooses to finance some or all of the cost of a street, water or sanitary sewer or stormwater improvement, which improvement is also available to serve or benefit property other than that of the applicant, and who in turn applies to the city for reimbursement of the expense of the improvement.

     “City” means the city of Happy Valley.

     “City engineer” means the person holding the position of city engineer or such other officer, employee or agent designated by the city manager to perform the duties set out for the city engineer in this chapter.

     “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or any other legal entity, (including the city) be it public or private and/or any agent, employee or representative thereof.

     “Public improvement” means (as appropriate) water, sanitary sewer, stormwater, street (including bicycle lane), and/or sidewalk facilities, or the undergrounding of public utilities.

     “Reimbursement agreement” means the agreement between an applicant and the city (as authorized by the city council and executed by the city manager) providing for the installation of and payment for public improvements within a reimbursement district.

     “Reimbursement district” means the area determined by the city council to derive a benefit from the construction of public improvements financed in whole or in part by an applicant.

     “Reimbursement fee” means the fee established by resolution of the city council and required to be paid by persons within a reimbursement district once they utilize the public improvement.

     “Service district” means a unit of government that provides a utility service, such as water or sanitary sewer, that is not provided by the city.

     “Street improvement,” “water improvement,” “sewer improvement” and “stormwater improvement” mean the following improvements that comply with applicable city standards and specifications or applicable special district standards and specifications:

     1.     A street or street improvement, including, but not limited to, streets, storm drains, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike paths, traffic control devices, street trees, lights and signs and public rights-of-way;

     2.     A water or water line improvement, including, but not limited to, extending a water line to property (other than property owned by the applicant) so that water service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line;

     3.     A sanitary sewer or sewer line improvement, including, but not limited to, extending a sewer line to property (other than property owned by the applicant) so that sewer service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line; and

     4.     A stormwater improvement, including, but not limited to, extending a stormwater line to property (other than property owned by the applicant) so that stormwater disposal for such other property can be provided without further extension of the line; conforming with standards and specifications set by the city.

     “Utilize” means to use or benefit from a public improvement, to apply for a building or other permit which will allow for the use or increase in the use of a public improvement or to connect to a public improvement. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 540 § 1, 2018; Ord. 250 § 1, 2003; Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.020 Application for a reimbursement district.
     A.    Any applicant who finances some or all of the cost of a public improvement available to provide service or benefit to property other than property owned by that person may, by written application filed with the city engineer, request the city establish a reimbursement district. The improvement(s) must be available to provide service to property other than that owned by the applicant. Examples include (but are not limited to):

     1.     Full-street improvements instead of half-street improvements;

     2.     Off-site sidewalks;

     3.     Connection of street sections for continuity;

     4.     Extension of water lines; and

     5.     Extension of sewer lines.

     B.     All applications shall include the following:

     1.     A description of the location, type, size and cost of the public improvement eligible for reimbursement;

     2.     A map showing the properties to be included in a proposed reimbursement district;

     3.     The zoning for the properties;

     4.     The front or square footage of said properties (or similar data appropriate for calculating the apportionment of the cost of the improvement among the properties); and

     5.     A listing of the property(ies) owned by applicant.

     All applications shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of administrative review and notice required by this chapter as established by city council resolution.

 

     C.     In the event an application is submitted after the construction of the public improvement, the application shall also include information as to when the city accepted the public improvement as well as the actual cost of the improvements, evidenced by receipts, invoices or other similar documents. Until receipt of said information, the affected application will be deemed incomplete.

     D.    In the event an application is submitted prior to the construction of the improvements, the application shall be accompanied by an estimate of the cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids, projections, or similar data. The application shall also include the estimated date of completion of the public improvement(s). Until the receipt of said information, the affected application will be deemed incomplete.

     E.     An application may be submitted at any time prior to the installation of the public improvement but in no event later than one hundred eighty (180) days after acceptance of the improvement for which reimbursement is sought, unless the city engineer, in his or her sole discretion waives this requirement. (Ord. 332 § 1, 2006; Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.030 City engineer’s report.
     The city engineer shall review the application and other material submitted therewith and prepare a written report for the council which will address (to the extent relevant) the following factors:

     A.    Whether the public improvement for which reimbursement is sought has capacity sufficient to allow use thereof by property other than property owned by the applicant;

     B.     The area proposed to be included in the reimbursement district;

     C.     The actual or estimated cost of the improvements within the area of the proposed reimbursement district and the portion thereof for which the applicant should be reimbursed;

     D.    A methodology for allocating the cost among the parcels within the proposed district and, where appropriate, defining a “unit” for applying the reimbursement fee to property which may be partitioned, subdivided or otherwise modified at some future date. The methodology should include consideration of the cost of the improvement(s), prior contributions by property owners, the value of the unused capacity, rate-making principles associated with the financing of public improvements, and such other factors as deemed relevant by the city engineer;

     E.     The amount to be charged by the city for administering the agreement, to be fixed by city council and included in the resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district. The fee is due and payable to the city at the time the reimbursement agreement is signed;

     F.     The period of time that the right to reimbursement exists if that period is less than ten (10) years; and

     G.    Whether the street, water and sewer improvements will meet or have met city standards. (Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.040 Amount to be reimbursed.
     A.    The potential amount of the reimbursement is limited to the following:

     1.     The costs of construction;

     2.     Engineering (including surveying and inspection) costs in an amount not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of the construction costs;

     3.     Off-site right-of-way purchase costs, limited to the reasonable market value of land or easements purchased by the applicant from third parties to complete off-site improvements;

     4.     Financing costs associated with the improvement to the extent the financing costs are not attributable to the applicant’s property or project; and

     5.     Legal and other expenses incurred by the applicant to the extent said expenses relate to the preparation and filing of the application, the preparation of the report required by Section 3.08.030 and the hearing process set out in Sections 3.08.050 and 3.08.060.

     B.     Regardless of amount or category, costs reimbursable or eligible for traffic impact fee credits or systems development charge credits which cannot be clearly documented or which are attributable to the applicant’s property or project are not reimbursable.

     C.     By submitting an application that seeks reimbursement of legal expenses, the applicant thereby waives any attorney/client or attorney work product privilege that may exist in attorney billing statements or records in support thereof.

     D.    A reimbursement fee shall be determined for all properties which fall within the proposed reimbursement district, including applicant’s; however, the applicant shall not be reimbursed for that portion of the fee representing the benefit to the applicant’s property.

     E.     The applicant shall not be reimbursed for the portion of the reimbursement fee computed for property owned by the city or other governmental body. (Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.050 Public hearing.
     A.    Within a reasonable time after the city engineer has completed the report required in Section 3.08.030, the city council shall hold an informational public hearing in which persons impacted by the creation of the reimbursement district shall be given the opportunity to comment thereon.

     B.     Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) working days nor more than twenty (20) working days prior to the public hearing date. Notice shall be given to the applicant and all owners of property within the proposed district, with notification by certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service. Notice shall be deemed complete as of the date notice is mailed or served; failure to receive actual notice of the hearing shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any action of the city relative to the creation of the reimbursement district and/or the costs associated therewith.

     C.     Formation of a district does not result in an assessment or lien against property; as a result, the hearing is informational only and the district is not subject to termination as a result of remonstrances to the formation thereof. The city council has the sole discretion, after the public hearing, to decide whether the district is to be formed or not. If a district is to be formed, a resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district shall be adopted.

     D.    Once construction costs have been determined, a reimbursement district may be formed. (Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.060 City council action.
     At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall approve, reject or modify the recommendations contained in the city engineer’s report and manifest its action in a resolution. If a reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include a copy of the city engineer’s report as approved or modified and specify that payment of the appropriate fee as determined by the council for each parcel is a precondition to receipt of any city permit necessary for development of that parcel. If a reimbursement district is established it shall be deemed formed as of the date the council adopts the resolution referred to in Section 3.08.050 above. (Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.070 Reimbursement agreement.
     If the council approves the city engineer’s report and thereafter creates a district, the city manager shall cause the creation of an agreement between the applicant and city containing (at a minimum) provisions relating to the following:

     A.    That the public improvement(s) will or do meet all applicable city or service district standards;

     B.     The amount of the potential reimbursement the applicant can expect along with a caveat that the total amount of any reimbursement will not exceed the actual cost of the public improvement(s);

     C.     The annual fee adjustment, if any;

     D.    That the applicant will guarantee the quality of the public improvement(s) for a period of not less than twenty-four (24) months after the date of their installation;

     E.     That the applicant will defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments or other costs or expense arising as a result of or related to the city’s establishment of the district; and

     F.     That the applicant acknowledges the city is not obligated to collect the reimbursement fee from affected property owners.

     The city may include other provisions as the city council determines necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 540 § 1, 2018; Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.080 Annual fee adjustment.
     The city council may, in its discretion, grant an annual adjustment to the amounts established as the reimbursement fee at the time of the hearing on the engineer’s report. In the event such an adjustment is deemed appropriate, it shall be applicable to the fee beginning on the first anniversary of the date of the council’s approval of the application, be fixed and computed against the reimbursement fee as simple interest, and remain the same for each year the district exists. (Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.090 Notice of adoption of resolution.
     The city shall notify all property owners within the district (as well as the applicant) of the adoption of the resolution manifesting creation of the district. The notice shall include a copy of the resolution, the date of its adoption and a short explanation of when the property owner would be obligated to pay the reimbursement fee, the amount thereof as well as if there will be any adjustments thereto. (Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.100 Recording the resolution.
     The city recorder shall cause notice of the formation and nature of the reimbursement district to be filed in the office of the Clackamas County recorder in order to provide notice to potential purchasers of property within the district of its existence. Failure to make such recording shall affect neither the legality of the resolution nor the obligation to pay any fee. (Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.110 Contesting the reimbursement district.
     Any legal action intended to contest the formation of the reimbursement district or fee must be filed, within sixty (60) days of the council’s hearing on the application consistent with the terms of ORS 34.010 to 34.100 (Writ of Review). (Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.120 Obligation to pay reimbursement fee.
     A.    A person applying for a permit (as described below) related to property within a reimbursement district shall pay to the city, in addition to all other applicable fees and charges, the reimbursement fee established by the city council under the terms of this chapter if, within the time specified in the resolution establishing the district, the person applies for and receives approval from the city for any of the following activities:

     1.     A new single-family detached or attached home building permit that is larger than two thousand (2,000) square feet in size and all new construction requiring minor or major design review (i.e., multifamily, commercial, industrial, institutional, etc. development);

     2.     Approval of a final plat for a subdivision, replatting or partition;

     3.     Any alteration, modification or change in the use of real property, which increases the number of parking spaces required under this code in effect at the time of permit application;

     4.     Connection to or use of a water, sanitary sewer, stormwater or street improvement, if the district is based on that improvement.

     B.     The city council’s determination of which properties shall be liable for payment of the fee is final. Neither the city nor any officer or employee of the city shall be liable for payment of any reimbursement fee or portion thereof as a result of this determination.

     C.     A permit applicant whose property is subject to payment of a reimbursement fee related to the construction of street improvements is deemed to receive a benefit therefrom regardless of whether access is taken or provided directly onto such street at any time. Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or limit the authority of the city to provide or require access management.

     D.    No person shall be required to pay the reimbursement fee on an application or upon property for which the reimbursement fee has been previously paid, unless such payment was for a different type of improvement.

     E.     The right to reimbursement shall not extend beyond ten (10) years from the district’s formation date, subject to renewal at the option of the council for one additional ten (10) year period. (Ord. 551 § 1, 2020; Ord. 250 § 2, 2003; Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.130 Public improvements become property of the city.
     Public improvements installed pursuant to reimbursement district agreements shall become and remain the sole property of the city, or the service district, as applicable. More than one public improvement may be the subject of a reimbursement district. (Ord. 540 § 1, 2018; Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

 

3.08.140 Collection and payment—Other fees and charges.
     A.    Applicants shall receive all reimbursement monies collected by the city for the public improvements they install. Such reimbursement shall be delivered to the developer for as long as the reimbursement district agreement is in effect. Such payments shall be made by the city within ninety (90) days of receipt of the reimbursement monies.

     B.     The reimbursement fee is not intended to replace or limit any other existing fees or charges collected by the city. (Ord. 238 Exh. A, 2002)

Chapter 3.12 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
3.12.010 Definitions.
     Unless the context requires otherwise:

     “City” means the city of Happy Valley.

     “Director” means the director of the Happy Valley public works department or the director’s designate.

     “Local improvement” means any or all of the following:

     1.     The grading, graveling, paving, opening, laying out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or constructing of any right-of-way, including curbs and sidewalks and repair and reconstruction;

     2.     The installation of standard or ornamental street lights;

     3.     The installation or relocation of private or public utility facilities, including but not limited to electric power, telecommunications and natural gas;

     4.     The laying out, extending, altering, constructing and/or reconstruction/repair of any sanitary or storm sewer or water main;

     5.     The acquisition, establishment, construction, or reconstruction of any off-street motor vehicle parking facility;

     6.     The construction, reconstruction, or repair of any flood-control dike or dam, or any surface water detention or quality facility;

     7.     The construction, reconstruction, installation and equipping of a park, playground or city recreation facility;

     8.     Any other local improvement for which an assessment may be made on the property specially benefited.

     “Local improvement district” or LID means the area determined by the Happy Valley city council to be specially benefited by a local improvement, within which properties are assessed to pay for the cost of a local improvement.

     “Lot” means lot, block, or parcel of land.

     “Nonremonstrance agreement” is a written agreement executed by an owner or the owner’s predecessor in title waiving the right of an owner to file a remonstrance. Such agreements are typically entered into as a condition of development that impacts or connects to a substandard public facility in lieu of requiring immediate improvement of the substandard facility.

     “Owner” means either the owner of title to real property, or the contract purchaser of real property as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the Clackamas County assessor’s office.

     “Recorder” means the Happy Valley city recorder or the recorder’s designate.

     “Remonstrance” means a written objection to formation of an LID filed by an owner of property within a proposed LID pursuant to Section 3.12.050(A) of this ordinance that can, in conjunction with other formal written objections from the owner(s) of sixty (60) percent or more of the property (measured by area) within the proposed LID, delay its formation for a period of not less than six months. (Ord. 258 § 1, 2003; Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.020 Initiation of proceedings.
     A.    Whenever the city council deems it expedient or necessary to create or develop any local improvement for which it is anticipated that special assessments may be levied, it shall, by resolution, declare its intention to initiate such improvement and direct that an engineering study of the project be made and that a written project report containing the information specified in Section 3.12.030 be filed with the recorder.

     B.     Whenever the city has expended funds for the construction of any local improvement and the city council subsequently deems it expedient to initiate a local improvement district in order to levy special assessments against the property benefited by such local improvement, it shall, by resolution, declare its intention to initiate such improvement district and direct that the final plans of this public improvement as constructed, together with a written project report containing the information specified in Section 3.12.030 be filed with the recorder.

     C.     Whenever the owner(s) of at least fifty-one (51) percent of abutting property propose a local improvement over an area at least one hundred (100) yards in length and desire to form a local improvement district to accomplish such improvement, they may by written petition filed with the city, request the council to declare by resolution the initiation of such improvement and to direct that the study specified in subsection A of this section be prepared. The council, if satisfied that the petition is properly completed, shall then pass the resolution unless, by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the councilors present, the council deems the improvement not to be in the public interest. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.030 Written report—Content.
     The project report described in Section 3.12.020 shall contain (at a minimum) the following information:

     A.    A description of the project and its boundaries (project plans and specifications shall be prepared but need not be filed with the report);

     B.     An estimate of the probable costs associated with the proposed project (or a statement of the actual cost if the project has been completed) including (but not limited to) all legal, administrative, construction, engineering, interest or other financing costs attributable to the proposed local improvement district;

     C.     A map of the proposed local improvement district;

     D.    A proposed methodology allocating the categories of costs identified above among and between the specially benefited properties;

     E.     A description of each lot (or portion thereof) specially benefited by the project with the name and address of the owner(s) thereof, as shown by the last assessment roll in the Clackamas County assessor’s office; and

     F.     The assessed valuation and estimated amount of assessment of each lot or portion thereof specially benefited, together with any unpaid assessments against each lot. (Ord. 239 Exh. A (part))

 

3.12.040 Notice of hearing.
     Within ten (10) business days of the filing of the report required by Section 3.12.020, the recorder shall:

     A.    Cause a notice to be published twice (at least one week apart) in a newspaper of general circulation in the city setting out the following:

     1.     That a written project report for a proposed LID is on file and is available for examination at the recorder’s office at city hall,

     2.     The date said report was filed,

     3.     The estimated probable cost of the proposed local improvement or the actual cost of the improvement if it has been completed,

     4.     A description of the proposed improvement district and that a map of the proposed district is available for examination at city hall,

     5.     The time and place of the hearing required by Section 3.12.060,

     6.     A statement that written and oral testimony submitted by any person will be considered at such hearing but that said testimony will not be considered as a remonstrance, and

     7.     That property owners wishing to remonstrate against the formation of the proposed district should present their remonstrance(s) in writing at the time and in the manner set forth in Section 3.12.050;

     B.     Not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing required by Section 3.12.060, mail to each property owner designated in the written engineering report a notice stating:

     1.     The information set forth in subsection A of this section,

     2.     The proposed method of assessment,

     3.     The estimated amount of the assessment for each lot or portion thereof owned by the owner and whether the assessments are being levied prior to construction based upon estimates of project cost or after construction based upon known costs, and

     4.     The specific procedure for filing remonstrances provided by Section 3.12.050;

     C.     Post a copy of the preliminary map of the proposed improvement district at city hall. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.050 Filing of remonstrance—Defeat of proposal by remonstrance—Public testimony.
     A.    Remonstrances filed by owners of property within the proposed local improvement district must be filed with the recorder not later than 3:00 p.m. on the last business day preceding the hearing described in Section 3.12.060. The remonstrance of an owner who has either signed or is subject to a non-remonstrance agreement shall not be counted for the purposes of determining whether the proposed project is to be suspended pursuant to this subsection. Any proposal to form a local improvement district as a way of financing a local improvement under this ordinance shall be suspended for a period of not less than six months upon the city’s timely receipt of remonstrances by the owners of sixty (60) percent or more of the property (measured by area) to be assessed.

     B.     Oral and written testimony may be considered at the hearing described in Section 3.12.060; however, such testimony will not to be counted for purposes of suspending the proposed local improvement. Any person, including a property owner within the proposed district may appear and be heard regarding the proposed improvement district. (Ord. 258 § 2, 2003: Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.060 Hearing—Objections—Authorization to form district and construct project.
     A.    After the receipt of the engineering report described in Section 3.12.030 but not less than fifteen (15) days after the date of the second publication of notice pursuant to Section 3.12.040, the council shall hold a hearing to consider remonstrations and other objections to the proposed improvement district and, if it deems it appropriate, authorize by resolution the formation of the local improvement district and initiation of the project consistent with this section.

     B.     The city council may adopt, amend and adopt, or reject the project report. The council may also require a supplementary or further report from the director before proceeding with its decision on the formation of the local improvement district. If the council chooses to adopt, or amend and adopt the report; it shall do so by resolution, which shall at a minimum address the following:

     1.     Create the local improvement district and establish its boundaries;

     2.     Determine generally the time for commencing and the manner of construction;

     3.     Establish an account for the receipt and disbursal of monies relating to the project; and

     4.     Establish the method for allocating the costs associated with the project. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.070 Method of assessment—Authority of city to pay all or part of costs.
     The council may:

     A.    Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the special benefits derived;

     B.     Authorize payment by the city of all or any part of the cost of such improvement, provided the method selected reasonably correlates the special benefits derived by the property(ies) so benefited and the benefits derived by the city as a whole;

     C.     Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed among the properties determined to be specially benefited that is just and reasonable;

     D.    At any time prior to the effective date of the ordinance levying the assessments for any local improvement district, modify the method set out in the resolution creating the district if the council finds that a different method more justly and reasonably apportions the cost of the project to the properties specially benefited. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.080 Director’s assessment report—Proposed assessment and notice thereof.
     A.    As soon as the total cost of the project is ascertained, the director shall prepare an assessment report on the project including a recommendation on the fair apportionment of the total costs including legal, administrative, construction, financing and engineering attributable to the project, and a recommendation concerning the Bancroft installment financing rate applicable to the project.

     B.     A map of the local improvement district showing the proposed assessment(s) as to each lot (or portion thereof) shall be posted at city hall and a notice published in a newspaper of general circulation for not less than two successive weeks shall state that a map is posted at city hall, that proposed assessments are to be made, the amount thereof, and that information relating to the assessments and their calculation is available for inspection. The notice will further state that owners having objections to the proposed assessments present said objections in writing, setting out the reason(s) for the objection(s) and that the objections be delivered to the recorder not less than five business days prior to the council meeting held to consider them. The council meeting described above shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days after first publication of such notice.

     C.     It shall be the duty of the recorder to mail to each owner designated in the director’s report individualized notice with the information set out in subsection B of this section as well as the proposed Bancroft installment financing rate. The notices shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for the meeting of the council to hear objections to the proposed assessments. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.090 Hearing on proposed assessments—Levy of assessments.
     A.    The council shall review the objections timely received by the recorder and take both written and oral testimony from and on behalf of persons wishing to testify on the proposed assessments. After hearing the objections to the proposed assessments the council shall determine, consistent with the methodology and the terms of this chapter what it deems to be a fair, just and proper assessment of costs for the benefits to the property the council determines to be specially benefited. The council shall then within sixty (60) days of the date of their review, pass an ordinance specifying in detail such assessments and setting the Bancroft installment financing rate applicable to the local improvement district.

     B.     If the council deems it appropriate to increase the amount of any proposed assessment, it shall fix a time for a further hearing on said increase. The recorder shall send notice by mail to each owner shown on the director’s final report, stating the purpose of the further hearing and giving the date of the further hearing. After such hearing, the council may pass an ordinance assessing such increase, and if at the time of such further hearing the ordinance described in subsection A of this section has not yet been passed, the council shall pass such an ordinance.

     C.     Within five business days after passage of the ordinance levying the final assessments, the recorder shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city notice of the ordinance’s passage and notice that application(s) for bonding the assessments will be received for up to thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.100 Alternative methods of financing.
     A.    The council may, by reason of the topographic concerns, the physical layout of the improvement, unusual or excessive public use of the improvement, or as a result of some other characteristic, allocate a portion of the cost of such improvement from general funds of the city, and the amount assessed as against all property specially benefited shall be proportionately reduced.

     B.     Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the city, acting by and through the city council, from using other means to finance in whole or in part the improvements including but not limited to federal or state grants-in-aid, sewer or other types of service charges, revenue or general obligation bonds. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.110 Appeals.
     Owners of any property against which an assessment or reassessment for local improvements has been imposed may seek a review thereof under the provisions of ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.120 Recordation of liens—Priority—Collection of assessments.
     The council, after passing the ordinance levying the final assessment, shall direct the recorder to enter in the city lien docket and county property records all amount(s) assessed upon each tract or parcel of land along with the names of the record owners thereof. Upon such entry in the city lien docket and county property records, the amounts entered shall be immediately due and payable and shall be an assessment lien and charge upon the respective lots, tracts and parcels of land against which the same are placed. Such liens shall be first and prior to all other liens and encumbrances consistent with ORS 223.230(3) (2001). The Bancroft installment financing interest rate applicable to the assessments shall be charged on amounts not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of such entry provided the owner of the property so affected has signed an application consistent with the terms of ORS 223.210 to ORS 223.215 within ten (10) days after notice of final assessment is first published. After twelve (12) months from the date of entry in the lien docket, the city may proceed to foreclose as delinquent any lien which is unpaid or for which arrangements for payment have not been made. The delinquent assessment payment interest rate shall be charged to such sums due. Foreclosure may be in any manner authorized by state statutes for the foreclosure of assessment liens. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.130 Authority to abandon proceedings.
     The city council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for projects pursuant to this chapter at any time prior to the final consummation of such proceedings. (Ord. 239 Exh. A (part))

 

3.12.140 Validity of assessments.
     No assessment made pursuant to this chapter shall be invalid by reason of a failure to give, in any report, in the proposed assessment, in the ordinance making the assessment, in the lien docket or elsewhere in the proceedings, the name of the owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of land or the name of any person having a lien upon or interest therein, or by a mistake in the name of any such person, or the entry of a name other than the name of such owner or other person having a lien upon or interest therein, or by a mistake in the name of any such person or the entry of a name other than the name of such owner or other person having a lien upon or interest in such property, or by reason of any error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps herein before specified, unless it appears that reasonable notice has not been given of the hearing upon the proposed assessment or that the assessment as made, insofar as it affects the person complaining, is unfair and unjust, and the council shall have power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.150 Adoption of “Bancroft Bonding Act”.
     The provisions of ORS 223.205 to 223.314 (2001) commonly known as the “Bancroft Bonding Act,” are hereby adopted and made a part hereof by this reference. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.160 Reassessment.
     A.    Whenever all or part of an assessment or reassessment for any local improvement is declared void or set aside for any reason, or its enforcement refused by any court, whether directly or by any decision of such court; whenever the council shall be in doubt as to the validity of such assessment or reassessment, or if a district was preassessed and the council determines the assessments should be adjusted, the council may make a new assessment.

     B.     The reassessment procedures for making the new assessment shall insofar as possible follow the same procedures as provided for making an initial assessment as set forth in Sections 3.12.070 through 3.12.150. The new assessment shall not be limited to the amounts included in the original assessments nor shall it be limited to the property embraced in the original assessment if the council finds that additional property is specially benefited and subject to assessment.

     C.     Credit shall be allowed on the new assessment for any payments made on the original assessment, such payments to be credited as of the date of payment. Interest on the original assessments may be included in the new assessment to the extent that the new assessment includes amounts also included in the original assessment; or if the council deems it more equitable to do so, it may include as part of the overall assessable project cost, interest, not exceeding the construction financing interest rate in effect and applicable to the district at the time of the original proceedings in connection with the district, on monies paid by the city with the construction or financing of the project. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

 

3.12.170 Deferral of assessments.
     A.    The city shall allow for the deferral of assessments for local improvements imposed pursuant to the terms of this ordinance consistent with the terms and conditions set out in ORS 311.702 to ORS 311.735 (2001).

     B.     The city will, under the appropriate circumstances, apply for city participation in the state’s “Assessment Deferral Loan Program” established by the terms of ORS 454.430 to ORS 454.445 (2001) and maintained by the Department of Environmental Quality in order to allow eligible parties to obtain deferral of assessments related to the construction of treatment works. (Ord. 239 Exh. A)

Chapter 3.14 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
3.14.010 Establishment of urban renewal agency.
     Pursuant to ORS 457.035, the Happy Valley city council finds and declares that blighted areas, as defined in ORS 457.010, exist within the city. Given the blighted conditions, the city council declares and recognizes that there is a need for an urban renewal agency to function within the city of Happy Valley. The corporate name of the agency created by this chapter shall be known as the Happy Valley urban renewal agency (“agency”). (Ord. 542 § 2, 2019)

 

3.14.020 Membership of agency.
     Agency membership shall be the same as that of the city council. (Ord. 542 § 2, 2019)

 

3.14.030 Residency.
     The residency requirement for agency members shall be the same as for the city council. (Ord. 542 § 2, 2019)

 

3.14.040 Compensation.
     Agency members shall receive no compensation. (Ord. 542 § 2, 2019)

 

3.14.050 Terms of office and vacancy.
     The term of office of an agency member shall be the same as that of the city council. Appointments to fill vacancies shall conform to the Happy Valley City Charter and Chapter 4.04 of the Happy Valley Municipal Code. (Ord. 542 § 2, 2019)

 

3.14.060 Officers and duties.
     General Officers and Duties. The officers shall be a chairperson and vice chairperson.

     A.    Chairperson. The mayor of Happy Valley will serve as the chairperson for the agency. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the agency.

     B.     Vice Chairperson. The president of the Happy Valley city council will serve as the vice chairperson for the agency. The vice chairperson shall preside over meetings in the absence of the chairperson. (Ord. 542 § 2, 2019)

 

3.14.070 Powers and duties.
     Pursuant to ORS 457.045(3), all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities granted to and vested in an urban renewal agency by the laws of the state of Oregon shall be exercised by and vested in the agency; provided, however, that any act of the governing body acting as the urban renewal agency shall be the act of the agency only and not of the city council. (Ord. 542 § 2, 2019)

 

3.14.080 Meetings and quorum.
     A.    As necessary to conduct agency business, meetings shall occur on the regularly scheduled city council meeting dates unless a special meeting is required. All meetings of the agency shall be posted on the city’s website and shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with state law relating to public meetings. Special meetings may be held and will be scheduled and conducted in accordance with state law relating to public meetings.

     B.     Three members of the agency constitute a quorum to conduct agency business. (Ord. 542 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 3.16 EXEMPTIONS FROM COMPETITIVE BIDDING FOR PUBLIC CONTRACTS
3.16.010 Contracts exempt from competitive bidding requirements.
     A.    The following classes of contract identified as exempt from the competitive bidding requirements set out in Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR) Chapter 125, Divisions 310, 320 and 330 (2002) are hereby declared to be exempt from the public bidding requirements for the city of Happy Valley:

     1.     Advertising contracts;

     2.     Contract amendment(s) including change orders and extra work;

     3.     Contracts under certain dollar amounts;

     4.     Emergency contracts;

     5.     Equipment repair and overhaul;

     6.     Contracts for price regulated items;

     7.     Purchases under federal contracts;

     8.     Copyrighted materials;

     9.     Investment contracts;

     10.   Food contracts;

     11.   Product prequalification;

     12.   Requirements contracts;

     13.   Single seller of product required;

     14.   Purchase of used personal property;

     15.   Information technology contracts;

     16.   Telecommunications systems contracts;

     17.   Telecommunications services;

     18.   Hazardous material removal and oil cleanup; and

     19.   Employee benefit and insurance contracts.

     B.     The city shall, to the extent reasonably possible, employ the same practice, protocol and procedure(s) used by state agencies as set out in the Oregon Administrative Rule for each class of contract identified above. Copies of the rules setting out said practice, protocol and procedure shall be kept by the city and be available for inspection and purchase. When a rule uses a term that normally would be read as applying to a state agency, it shall be read so as to apply to the city. (Ord. 240 § 3, 2002)

Chapter 3.20 MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL TAX
3.20.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

     “City” means the city of Happy Valley, Oregon.

     “Dealer” means any person who:

     1.     Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution in the city, but not including anyone who imports motor vehicle fuel into the city in quantities of five hundred (500) gallons or less purchased from a dealer licensed under this chapter if the dealer assumes liability for payment of the license tax to the city; or

     2.     Acquires for sale, use or distribution in the city, motor vehicle fuels with respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred.

     “Distribution” means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer.

     “Motor vehicle” means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel.

     “Motor vehicle fuel” means and includes gasoline, diesel, and any other flammable or combustible gas or liquid, by whatever name such gas or liquid is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles, except gas or liquid for purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles.

     “Person” includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation.

     “Service station” means and includes any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.

     “Street” means every way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature, open for use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel within the jurisdiction of and under the authority of the city including the motor vehicle traveling lanes of all rights-of-way in the city, curbs, sidewalks and planting strips adjacent thereto. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.020 Tax imposed.
     A business license tax is imposed on every dealer. This business license tax is in addition to the business license fee required under Happy Valley Code Chapter 5.04. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.030 Amount and payment.
     A.    Every dealer in the city engaging in the sale, use or distribution of motor vehicle fuel whether in the dealer’s name, the name of another or the name of the dealer’s representative or agent is required to do the following:

     1.     Provide a statement (not later than the 25th of each month) to the city of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used or distributed by the dealer in the city as well as all such fuel sold, used or distributed in the city by a purchaser for which sale, use or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the applicable license tax during the preceding month.

     2.     Pay a license tax of two cents ($0.02) per gallon of such motor vehicle fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such statement in the manner and within the time provided in this chapter.

     B.     In lieu of claiming a refund of the tax as provided in Section 3.20.180 of this chapter or of any prior erroneous payment of the license tax made to the city by the dealer, the dealer may show such motor vehicle fuel tax as a credit or deduction on the monthly statement and payment of tax. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.040 License requirements.
     No dealer may sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until the dealer has secured a dealer’s license as required in this chapter. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.050 License applications and issuance.
     A.    Every person before becoming or remaining a dealer in motor vehicle fuel in the city must obtain a license authorizing that person to engage in business as a dealer.

     B.     Applications for the license must be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the city, including the following:

     1.     The business name under which the applicant transacts business;

     2.     The address of applicant’s principal place of business and location of distributing stations in the city;

     3.     The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the persons constituting the firm or partnership or, if a corporation, the name under which the corporation is authorized to transact business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent.

     C.     Once the application is complete and accepted for filing, the city will issue the dealer a license to transact business in the city. A license is not assignable and is valid only for the dealer in whose name it is issued.

     D.    The city will retain all completed applications together with a record of all licensed dealers for a minimum of five years. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.060 Failure to secure license.
     A.    If a dealer fails to secure a license prior to becoming or remaining a dealer in the city, the tax on all motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that dealer is immediately due and payable.

     B.     The city will determine from as many reliable and available sources as the city deems reasonable the amount of tax due, and assess the dealer for the amount found due, together with a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the tax. In legal action to collect the tax or penalty or both, the assessment is prima facie evidence that the dealer is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty stated. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.070 Cancellation of license.
     A.    The city may upon written request of a dealer, cancel a license issued to that dealer. Upon approving the dealer’s request for cancellation, the city will set a date not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request and then the license will be no longer effective.

     B.     The city may, after thirty (30) days’ notice has been mailed to the last known address of the dealer, cancel the license of the dealer upon finding that the dealer is no longer engaged in the business of a dealer. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.080 Payment of tax and delinquency penalties.
     A.    The license tax imposed by this chapter must be paid on or before the 25th day of each month.

     B.     Except as provided in subsections C and D of this section, if payment of the tax is not paid as required by subsection A of this section, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the license tax may be assessed by the city and is immediately due and payable.

     C.     Except as provided in subsection D of this section, if payment of the tax and penalty (if any) is not made on or before the 1st day of the next month following that month in which payment is due, the city may impose a further penalty of up to twenty-five (25) percent of the tax. This penalty is in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection B of this section and is immediately due and payable.

     D.    Penalties imposed by this section do not apply if a penalty is assessed under Section 3.20.060.

     E.     The city manager may waive any penalties assessed under this section and shall report to the city council on a regular basis. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.090 Failure to file monthly statement.
     If a dealer fails to file the statement required by Section 3.20.030, the city will determine from as many available sources as the city determines reasonable the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that dealer for the period unreported, and such determination is prima facie evidence of the amount of fuel sold, distributed or used. The city will immediately assess the dealer for the license tax upon the amount determined, adding thereto a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.100 Exemption of export fuel.
     A.    The license tax imposed by Section 3.20.020 of this chapter will not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel:

     1.     Exported from the city by a dealer; or

     2.     Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of five hundred (500) gallons or more for export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer is required to report such exports and sales to the city.

     B.     Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle will not be considered as exported from the city.

     C.     In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel in individual quantities of five hundred (500) gallons or more for export by the purchaser, the dealer must retain in the dealer’s files for at least two years an export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such information as required by the city. This certificate is prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which it applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.110 Sales to Armed Forces exempted.
     The license tax imposed by Sections 3.20.020 and 3.20.035 is exempted on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the Armed Forces of the United States, but every dealer is required to report such sales to the city. A certificate by an authorized Armed Forces officer will be accepted by the dealer as sufficient proof that the sale is for the purpose specified in the certificate. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.120 Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.
     Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the vehicle fuel tank motor vehicle fuel for the person’s own use only for the purpose of operating that motor vehicle without securing a license or paying the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.130 Fuel sold or delivered to dealers.
     A.    A dealer selling or delivering motor vehicle fuel to dealers is not required to pay a license tax unless the selling dealer has assumed liability for the payment of the applicable license tax to the city.

     B.     The dealer in making monthly statements to the city as required by Section 3.20.030, must show separately the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.140 Examinations and investigations.
     The city or its authorized agents may make an examination of accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel within the city. The city may make other investigations it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. If the examination discloses that reports of dealers or other persons have shown incorrectly the amount of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing, the city may make changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or other persons or may make refunds as necessary to correct the errors disclosed. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.150 Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.
     A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid filed by a dealer must be taken or filed within three years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the city.

     B.     Except in the case of a fraudulent report or failure to make a report, every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this chapter will be served on dealers within three years from the date any additional taxes become due, and is subject to penalty as provided in Section 3.20.100. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.160 Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.
     The city or its authorized agents may examine at any time during normal business hours the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the city for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.170 Records to be kept by dealers.
     Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel must keep a record in such form as required by the city of all purchases, invoices, bills of lading, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle fuel for a period of not less than three years. The records must include copies of all invoices or bills of all such sales and at all times during the business hours are subject to inspection by the city or its authorized agents. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

 

3.20.180 Use of tax revenues.
     A.    The city manager is responsible for the disposition of the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter.

     B.     For the purpose of this section, net revenue means the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter remaining after providing for the cost of administration and any refunds and credits authorized by this chapter.

     C.     The net revenue must be used for the planning, financing, design, construction, maintenance, repair, operation and the use of streets within the city. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 3.26 MARIJUANA TAX
3.26.010 Definitions.
     “Marijuana item” has the meaning given that term in ORS 475B.015(16).

     “Marijuana retailer” means a person who holds a license under ORS 475B.110 and sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state.

     “Retail sale price” means the price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item. (Ord. 496 § 1, 2016)

 

3.26.020 Tax imposed.
     As authorized by ORS 475B.345, the city of Happy Valley hereby imposes a tax of three percent, or up to the maximum allowed by state law, on the retail sale price of all marijuana items sold by a marijuana retailer in the city. (Ord. 496 § 1, 2016)

 

3.26.030 Collection.
     The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of a marijuana item by a marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted by each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items. (Ord. 515 § 1, 2017)

 

3.26.040 Interest and penalty.
     A.    Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate established under ORS 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from the time the return to the Oregon Department of Revenue was originally required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.

     B.     If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the Oregon Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under ORS 314.400.

     C.     Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and remitted to the Oregon Department of Revenue.

     D.    Taxes, interest and penalties transferred to the city of Happy Valley by the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the city’s general fund.

     E.     If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed in taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized to enforce collection on behalf of the city of the owed amount in accordance with ORS 475B.700 to 475B.755, any agreement between the Oregon Department of Revenue and the city of Happy Valley under ORS 305.620 and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. (Ord. 515 § 1, 2017)

Title 4 ELECTIONS
Chapter 4.01 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 4.02 CANDIDATES
Chapter 4.04 VACANCIES IN OFFICE
Chapter 4.06 INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND REFERRAL

Chapter 4.01 INTRODUCTION
4.01.010 State law applies.
     As provided by Section 28 of the city charter, state elections law relating to matters not regulated by this title apply to city elections. The provisions of the city charter and this title prevail over conflicting provisions of state law. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.01.020 Definitions.
     Words or phrases have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires a different meaning:

     “Candidate” means an individual whose name appears or is expected to appear on an official ballot.

     “Charter amendment” means the amendment, addition or repeal of one section of the city charter.

     “Charter revision” means the amendment, addition or repeal of more than one section of the city charter.

     “City legislation” means an ordinance or proposed ordinance, or a proposed amendment to the city charter.

     “Elective city position” means the office of mayor or city council position.

     “Elector” means an individual eligible under state and city law to vote in city elections.

     “Initiative” means proposed city legislation submitted to electors by a petition of qualified electors.

     “Measure” means city legislation or referral for city electors.

     “Prospective petition” means information required for a completed petition, except for signatures and other identification of petition signers.

     “Qualified elector” means an individual qualified to vote under Section 2, Article II, Oregon Constitution.

     “Recorder” means the city recorder or authorized representative.

     “Referendum” means city legislation submitted to electors by a petition of qualified electors, or a referral submitted to electors by the council.

     “Referral” means city legislation, charter amendment, revision, replacement or repeal, or proposition or question submitted to electors by the council.

     “Regular election” means a city election held at the same time as a November general election in an even number year.

     “Special election” means a city election held on a date other than a regular election.

     “Term of office” means the term of office of the last person elected to the office. (Ord. 538 § 1, 2018; Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 4.02 CANDIDATES
4.02.010 Eligibility.
     A qualified elector who has resided in the city during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the election may be a candidate for an elective city position. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.02.020 Nomination petition or declaration of candidacy.
     A.    An eligible elector may become a candidate for an elective city position by filing a nomination petition or a declaration of candidacy in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State and available from the recorder.

     B.     A declaration of candidacy must be accompanied by the filing fee established by council resolution.

     C.     A nomination petition must contain signatures of not fewer than twenty (20) city qualified electors as follows:

     1.     No elector may sign more than three petitions. If more than three are signed, the signature is valid only on the first three valid petitions filed.

     2.     The signatures need not all be attached to one paper, but each separate paper of the petition must be attached to an affidavit of the circulator showing the number of signers and stating that each signature is the genuine signature of the person.

     3.     Each signature must have next to it the signer’s place of residence, identified by its street and number or other description.

     4.     The recorder must certify the signatures in the nomination petition for genuineness by comparing them and the other required information with the elector registration cards on file with the county clerk.

     5.     After the petition is filed with the recorder, the recorder has fifteen (15) days to verify the signatures and attach to the petition a certificate stating the number of signatures believed genuine. (Ord. 546 § 1, 2019; Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.02.030 Petition or declaration contents.
     A.    A nomination petition or declaration of candidacy must contain:

     1.     The name by which the candidate is commonly known. A candidate may use a nickname in parentheses in addition to the candidate’s full name;

     2.     The residence address of the candidate;

     3.     The office or city council position number for which the candidate seeks nomination;

     4.     A statement that the candidate is willing to accept the office if elected;

     5.     A statement that the candidate will qualify if elected;

     6.     A statement of the candidate’s occupation, educational and occupational background, and prior governmental experience; and

     7.     The signature of the candidate.

     B.     A declaration of candidacy must include a statement that the required fee is included with the declaration. (Ord. 538 § 1, 2018; Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.02.040 Filing.
     A.    A nomination petition or declaration of candidacy must be filed with the recorder.

     B.     The recorder will date and time stamp immediately upon filing a nominating petition, declaration of candidacy, withdrawal or other document required to be filed.

     C.     A nomination petition or declaration of candidacy will be filed not sooner than one hundred twenty (120) days nor later than seventy (70) days before the date of the election. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.02.050 Deficient petitions.
     If a nomination petition is not signed by the required number of qualified electors or the declaration of candidacy is not complete, the recorder will notify the candidate within five business days after the filing. The recorder will return it immediately to the candidate, stating in writing how the petition is deficient. The deficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a substitute petition for the same candidate may be filed within the time requirements for filing petitions. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.02.060 Withdrawal of candidacy—Refund of filing fee.
     A.    A candidate who has filed a nomination petition or declaration of candidacy may withdraw not later than the 67th day before the date of the election by filing a statement of withdrawal with the recorder. The statement must be made under oath and state the reasons for the withdrawal.

     B.     Upon request received not later than the 67th day before the election date, the recorder will refund the filing fee of a candidate who dies, withdraws or becomes ineligible for the nomination. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.02.070 Certificate of nomination.
     The recorder will certify the nominations to the county clerk in accordance with the time requirements of state law stating the offices and the terms of office for which the candidates are nominated. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 4.04 VACANCIES IN OFFICE
4.04.010 Vacancy in office.
     A city elective office becomes vacant as provided by city Charter Section 19. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.04.020 Filling of vacancy.
     A.    Upon becoming aware of a vacancy in an elective office, the council must promptly determine and declare the date of vacancy.

     B.     A vacancy in an elective office will be filled as provided by City Charter Section 20. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.04.030 Appointment by council.
     A.    In filling a vacancy, the council may make such inquiries and hold interviews as it considers necessary to make the appointment. The appointment must be made at a regular or special council meeting.

     B.     The council will use the following procedures in the appointment process:

     1.     Public notice to appropriate neighborhood organizations, civic groups, a newspaper of general circulation and other recognized groups;

     2.     Deadline for submitting applications at least two weeks after such notice;

     3.     Appointment from those applicants nominated and seconded for consideration by members of the council. The recorder will announce the results of each ballot and will record each councilor’s vote. An applicant who receives a majority of the votes by the current council members will be appointed to the vacant position. If no applicant receives a majority vote on the first ballot, the council will continue to vote on the two applicants who receive the most votes until an applicant receives a majority of the councilors voting. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 4.06 INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND REFERRAL
4.06.010 Prospective petition.
     A.    Before circulating a petition proposing either an initiative or referendum for city legislation, the chief petitioners must file a prospective petition with the recorder. The recorder will provide the form showing:

     1.     The signatures, printed names and mailing addresses of at least two and not more than three chief petitioners, all of whom must be electors of the city;

     2.     For initiative petitions, the text of the city legislation proposed for adoption, and, where applicable, the title, ordinance number, and charter or code section number proposed for amendment;

     3.     For referendum petitions, the text of the city legislation proposed for referral, and the title, ordinance number or code section numbers of the subject city legislation; and

     4.     Whether one or more persons will be paid for obtaining signatures on the petition.

     B.     The recorder must date and time stamp any prospective petition.

     C.     After the recorder determines that the prospective petition complies with this section and state law, the recorder will certify to one of the chief petitioners that petitions may be circulated among the electors in accordance with Section 4.06.030. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.06.020 Ballot title—Appeal.
     A.    Prior to the end of the fifth business day after a prospective initiative petition is filed and complies with all legal requirements, the recorder will review the text of the proposed initiative to determine whether it complies with the single subject requirement and if the initiative proposes city legislation.

     B.     If the proposed text does not meet the requirements of subsection A of this section, the recorder will notify the chief petitioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the prospective petition does not meet the single subject or city legislation requirement.

     C.     Any elector who is dissatisfied with the recorder’s determination that the proposed initiative does not meet the requirements of subsection A may file a petition for review in circuit court. The petition for review must be filed not later than the seventh business day after the written determination by the recorder.

     D.    If the proposed initiative meets the requirements of subsection A or a referendum petition has been certified for circulation, the recorder will transmit a copy of the prospective petition to the city attorney. The city attorney has five business days after receiving the prospective petition to prepare a ballot title for the proposed measure. The ballot title must conform to the requirements of state law. The city attorney will immediately return the ballot title to the recorder.

     E.     After receiving a ballot title from the city attorney, the recorder must publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice of receipt of the ballot title. The notice must state that a city elector may file a petition for review of the ballot title not later than the date referred to in subsection F of this section.

     F.     After receiving the ballot title from the city attorney, the recorder must inscribe the date of receipt on it. Within seven business days after that date, any city elector may petition in circuit court to challenge the ballot title prepared by the city attorney. After the seven-day period, or following the final adjudication of any legal review, the recorder must certify the ballot title as prepared by the city attorney or as prescribed by the court to one of the chief petitioners.

     G.    Any city elector filing a petition of review with the circuit court must file a copy of the challenge with the recorder not later than the end of the business day next following the date the petition is filed with the circuit court. This requirement does not invalidate a petition that is timely filed with the circuit court.

     H.    The procedures set forth in subsections A through G of this section for preparation of, and challenges to, ballot titles for initiative measures also apply to referendum measures. However, the completion of these procedures is not a prerequisite to the circulation of petitions for referendum measures under Section 4.01.030. Ballot titles need not be stated on petitions circulated to propose referendum measures. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.06.030 Petition and circulation requirements.
     A.    After the requirements of Section 4.06.010(C) are met for referendum petitions, and after the requirements of Section 4.06.020(F) are met for initiative petitions, the chief petitioners may circulate a petition for the measure among city electors. The petition (cover sheet and signature sheet) must conform to the requirements of state law.

     B.     The petition identification number will be assigned by the recorder.

     C.     Each signature sheet of a referendum petition must contain the title, ordinance number or code section numbers of the city legislation proposed by referral and the date it was adopted by the council.

     D.    No signature sheet may be circulated by more than one person. Each signature sheet must contain a statement signed by the circulator that each elector who signed the sheet did so in the circulator’s presence, and, to the best of the circulator’s knowledge, each such elector is a legal elector of the city and that the information placed on the sheet by each such elector is correct. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.06.040 Filing and percentage requirements—Verification.
     A.    The recorder will accept for signature verification in accordance with this section only petitions that comply with the requirements of this section and other applicable law.

     B.     No petition may be accepted for filing unless it contains at least the required number of verified signatures to submit the measure to the electors, as prescribed by subsection G, H or I of this section.

     C.     No initiative petition will be accepted for signature verification more than six months after the date of the recorder’s certification under Section 4.06.020(F).

     D.    Any petition to refer legislation adopted by the council must be submitted for signature verification not more than thirty (30) days after the council’s adoption of such legislation.

     E.     An initiative or referendum petition may not be accepted for signature verification if it contains less than one hundred (100) percent of the required number of signatures.

     F.     Upon the acceptance of a petition, the recorder must verify the signatures. Such verification may be performed by random sampling in a manner approved by the Secretary of State. Within thirty (30) days after the recorder’s acceptance of a petition, the recorder must certify to the council whether the petition contains a sufficient number of qualified signatures to require the submission of the proposed measure to city electors. The recorder must state in the certificate the number of qualified signatures prescribed by subsections G, H or I of this section to require the proposed city legislation to be submitted to city electors. The petition is considered filed as of the date of the recorder’s certification.

     G.    An initiative measure proposing an amendment to the City Charter will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the electors registered in the city at the time the prospective petition is filed.

     H.    An initiative measure proposing the adoption, amendment or repeal of any other city legislation will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the total number of electors registered in the city at the time the prospective petition is filed.

     I.      A referendum measure will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds ten (10) percent of the total number of electors registered in the city at the time the prospective petition is filed. (Ord. 525 § 1, 2017; Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.06.050 Measure referred by council.
     A.    The council may directly refer to the electors any ordinance adopted by it or any proposed ordinance, property tax, bond or other proposition or question. It may also directly refer to the electors any proposed charter amendment, revision, replacement or repeal.

     B.     The city attorney will prepare a ballot title and explanatory statement that conforms to the requirements of state law. The council will certify and file the ballot title and explanatory statement with the recorder.

     C.     The recorder will publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice of receipt of the ballot title and explanatory statement including notice that an elector may file a petition for review of the ballot title or explanatory statement not later than the date set in subsection D of this section.

     D.    Any elector may petition the circuit court to challenge the ballot title certified by the council. Such petition must be filed with the circuit court within seven business days of council filing of the ballot title. Any person filing a petition of review with the circuit court must file a copy of the challenge with the recorder not later than the end of the business day next following the date the petition is filed with the circuit court. This requirement does not invalidate a petition that is timely filed with the circuit court.

     E.     A measure will be considered filed under this section as of the date the council delivers its certified ballot title to the recorder. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.06.060 Withdrawal, adoption or election.
     A.    The chief petitioners may withdraw a verified petition at any time before council action to adopt the proposed city legislation or submit it to the electors. Any withdrawal must be either by written or oral declaration made at a council meeting and entered in the minutes of that meeting,

     B.     Unless a petition is withdrawn, after receiving a certification from the recorder that a petition has sufficient qualified signatures to require the proposed city legislation to be submitted to the electors under Section 4.06.040(F), the council may either adopt the proposed legislation by ordinance, or call an election for submission of the legislation to the electors. The council may also call an election to submit matters to the electors upon referral under Section 4.06.050.

     C.     The council has the option to call the election on the next election date available under state law, or the first available regular election. For a council referral, the council may call the election on the referral on the next election date available under state law or first available regular election. The council may not call an election on an initiative or referendum sooner than the 90th day after the date the recorder delivers to the council a certificate of sufficient signatures.

     D.    The city attorney must prepare an explanatory statement for each city ballot measure. The explanatory statement must consist of an impartial, simple and understandable statement of not more than five hundred (500) words explaining the measure and its effect. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

 

4.06.070 Election notice and results.
     A.    Notice of elections on measures submitted to electors on regular or special election dates must be given in accordance with state law.

     B.     Measures referred by the council will be designated on the ballot: “Referred to the Voters by the City Council.”

     C.     Measures proposed by referendum petition will be designated on the ballot: “Referred by Petition of the Voters.”

     D.    Measures proposed by initiative petition will be designated on the ballot: “Proposed by Initiative Petition.”

     E.     The recorder must certify the election results to the council at the first council meeting after which the results are certified by the county clerk.

 

     F.     A measure adopted by the electors takes effect thirty (30) days after the election, unless such measure expressly provides a later effective date. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2011)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapter 5.08 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES
5.04.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide revenue for municipal purposes and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Happy Valley through regulation of businesses, occupations and trade. The entity need not be located within the city in order to be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The levy or collection of a license fee upon any business shall not be construed to be a license or permit by the city to the person engaged in such business to carry on business if such business is unlawful, illegal or prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States or ordinances of the city. It is noted that city residential zoning provides for home occupations, nonconforming uses, nursing homes and homes for the aged if certain standards and conditions are met. (Ord. 124 § 1.010, 1994)

 

5.04.020 Definitions.
     The following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall be defined as provided in this section:

     “Applicant” means agent or owner of the named business.

     “Business” means any enterprise, establishment, store, shop, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted for any reason regardless of profit or nonprofit motivation. “Business” means and includes the ownership, management or operation of rental property within the city limits. It also means the performance of activities within the city such as those involved in the construction of improvements on or to real property.

     “City” means the city of Happy Valley, Oregon.

     “City manager” means the city manager or his or her designee.

     “Daycare facility” means a public, private, or nonprofit facility for the day or evening (but not overnight) care of children outside of their homes. Examples include daycare centers, nursery schools, preschools and before-and-after school care programs. If a daycare facility qualifies for licensing by the state of Oregon, it must also obtain a city business license.

     “Doing, engaging in or transacting business” means any act or series of acts performed in the course of the pursuit of a business activity.

     “License” means the permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation within the city limits.

     “Licensee” means the business as specified and named by the applicant.

     “Nonprofit organization” means a religious, philanthropic, patriotic and/or charitable organization. An organization shall be considered to be nonprofit if it meets the tests of a tax exempt organization as specified by the Internal Revenue Service.

     “Peddler” means a person or persons, traveling from place to place, selling and delivering at the same time.

     “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, firm or corporation.

     “Rental property” means a building, portion of building, or group of buildings within the city which are rented, leased, let or made available for compensation for sleeping or living purposes.

     “Rental property” includes, but is not limited to, a residence, a hotel or motel, automobile or tourist court, roominghouse or lodging house, and mobilehome or trailer park. In case of mobilehome or trailer parks, the term “dwelling unit” means space or stall.

     “Solicitor” means one who travels from place to place, not carrying his or her goods with him or her, but taking orders for future deliveries. (Ord. 303 Att. A, 2005; Ord. 124 § 1.020, 1994)

 

5.04.030 License required.
     A.    No person shall establish, maintain, operate, engage, conduct or carry on any business within the city without first having obtained a business license.

     B.     It is the intention of this chapter to require a business license be obtained by the owner, partner or operator of the business and not by a person whose income consists of a salary or wage paid to such person by the owner, partner, operator or employer. However, the employees, agents or representatives of a person who has no regular place within the city but engages in business within the city shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the businesses they represent with this chapter. (Ord. 124 § 1.030, 1994)

 

5.04.040 Multiple business or premises.
     If a person is engaged in or doing business at more than one establishment, branch or location, each such establishment, branch or location shall be deemed a separate business and shall be required to obtain a business license. If two or more businesses are carried on at the same location, each shall be required to obtain a separate business license except in situations where it can be shown that the individual businesses are in fact one business. In determining whether different activities at the same location are in fact one business, normal and ordinary customs and usages of business shall be considered. (Ord. 124 § 1.040, 1994)

 

5.04.050 Business license application and term.
     A.    Application for a new or renewal business license shall be made at the offices of the city on forms provided by the city. The application process shall require evidence of satisfaction of state registration or licensing if applicable.

     B.     The business license term shall be July 1st to June 30th, renewable annually upon notice from the city. A temporary license for a period of ten (10) days can be issued to peddlers and solicitors. (Ord. 124 § 1.050, 1994)

 

5.04.060 Fee.
     All business license fees shall be determined by resolution of the city council. Applications received between January 1st and June 30th will be charged one-half the fee defined by city resolution. (Ord. 124 § 1.060, 1994)

 

5.04.070 Examination of premises.
     The city officials responsible for administration of this chapter are directed and empowered to investigate and examine all places of business licensed or subject to license under the terms of this chapter at any and all reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether such place of business is in compliance with all city codes and is safe, sanitary and suitable for the business so licensed or for which such application is made. In the event it is determined by such officers or their agents that such place of business is dangerous to public health or safety, likely to become a menace, or is in violation of city codes, a report of such determination and the reasons therefor shall be made in writing to the city manager, who shall take such action as he or she may deem necessary and advisable. (Ord. 124 § 1.070, 1994)

 

5.04.080 Transfer or assignment.
     No transfer or assignment of any license issued under this chapter shall be valid or permitted. Upon sale or other transfer of a business the new owners shall be liable for obtaining a new business license. (Ord. 124 § 1.080, 1994)

 

5.04.090 Issuance and display.
     Upon approval of the business license application an applicant shall be issued a business license by the city. The business license shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place on the business premises at all times. If there is no regular place of business in the city, the business license shall be in the possession of a representative of the business present within the city at all times during which the business is being transacted by an employee, agent or representative within the city. Relocation of the business to a new location shall constitute a new business and shall require the owner to obtain a business license for that new business. (Ord. 124 § 1.090, 1994)

 

5.04.100 Administration.
     A.    The city manager or his or her designee is responsible for the administration of this chapter. He or she may adopt reasonable rules and regulations necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter, including regulations providing for seasonal or temporary licenses. Variations of any rules and regulations adopted by the city manager pursuant to this section shall be subject to the penalties in Section 5.04.140.

     B.     No person shall violate or fail to comply with any rule or regulation adopted by the city manager or wilfully make any false or misleading statements to the city manager regarding information relevant to the issuance of a business license. (Ord. 124 § 1.100, 1994)

 

5.04.110 Revocation—Notice.
     A.    A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city manager, after notice, for any of the following causes:

     1.     Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a license;

     2.     Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the licensed activity;

     3.     A violation of this chapter;

     4.     Conviction of a felony;

     5.     Conducting the licensed activity in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public;

     6.     Failure to comply with requirements of federal, state, county or municipal law.

     B.     Notice of revocation of a license shall be given in writing to the licensee, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known address at least ten (10) days before the date of revocation. The last known address is deemed to be the address provided to the city by the applicant on the business license unless the applicant thereafter gives the city written notice of a different address. (Ord. 124 § 1.110, 1994)

 

5.04.120 Appeal procedure.
     Any person aggrieved by the action of the city manager in denying an application for a license as provided under this chapter, or in revoking a license as provided in Section 5.04.110 of this chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the council of the city. The applicant or licensee shall file with the council a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal within twenty (20) days after the day the notice indicating disapproval or revocation of a license is mailed. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant or licensee at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 124 § 1.120, 1994)

 

5.04.130 Exemptions.
     A.    The following situations are specifically exempt from the requirement of obtaining a business license:

     1.     Wholesalers selling or delivering goods to merchants of the city for the purpose of resale. This exemption pertains only if the wholesaler does not maintain a place of business within the city and also does not engage in retail trade within the city;

     2.     Persons engaged in delivery of goods or services from points outside the city, providing sales contacts and actual sales take place outside the city;

     3.     Newspaper carriers;

     4.     Representative of public utilities;

     5.     Any city, county, state agency, special district, school district or other municipality;

     6.     Garage sales, yard sales and other similar activities. Such exemption shall not apply, however, if either of the following conditions are met:

     a.     More than two such sales take place within any calendar year at the same location,

     b.     The sale has a duration of more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours;

     7.     The sale of personal assets such as a personal automobile, residence, appliance or other items, unless such sales are conducted on a regular and continuing basis as described in the preceding subsection (A)(6);

     8.     Any individual who rents or leases one living unit in his or her place of residence is exempt from this chapter provided such place of residence is a single-family dwelling or associated accessory dwelling unit (ADU);

     9.     Any business activity specifically exempt under Oregon state law.

     B.     Other exemptions shall be determined by the city manager on the basis of reasonableness on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 124 § 1.130, 1994)

 

5.04.140 Violation—Penalties.
     A.    A violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil violation of the laws of the city and shall be prosecuted by a complaint filed by the city, in the city municipal court or Oregon state court of proper jurisdiction. Any person found to have violated this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or the closing of the business.

     B.     Each violation of a separate provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.

     C.     The conviction of any person for violation of this chapter shall not act or relieve such person from the requirement to obtain a business license. The penalties imposed by this section are in addition to and not in-lieu-of any remedies available to the city under other sections of this chapter.

     D.    In the event any provision of this chapter is violated by a firm or corporation, the officer or officers or person or persons responsible for the violation shall be personally subject to the penalties imposed by this section. (Ord. 124 § 1.140, 1994)

Chapter 5.08 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
5.08.010 Permitted uses.
     A.    Commercial use of radio and television and communications facilities are permitted with “conditional approval” under the institutional and public use (IPU) development district of Section 16.12.090. Conditional approval is granted under Section 16.16.220 following the requirements of this chapter.

     B.     Private use of ham radio, amateur sole source emitters, citizen band transmitters, satellite television dish antennas, and structures to support them are permitted by right as an allowable use in any development district following the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 99 § 1, 1989)

 

5.08.020 Description and purpose.
     A.    Radio and television transmission installations facilitate the communication of sound and visual images across public airwaves. The primary types of transmission include AM, FM, two-way (land mobile) radio, television and fixed point microwave. Reasonable standards for structures and uses providing access to the public airwaves are necessary for the health, safety, enjoyment and economic well-being of the citizens of Happy Valley.

     B.     Nearly all radio frequencies require a line-of-sight pathway between transmitter and receiver; therefore, transmission facilities must be elevated sufficiently, either by placement on a tower or other structure, to beam signals over the surrounding terrain. Transmission facilities, such as FM radio, television and most two-way radio systems which serve the region, require a high elevation. A limited number of areas are of sufficient elevation, considering technical and regulatory factors. The city contains one of the six high elevation areas in the region that can provide such public service.

     C.     The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the opportunity for continued and growing service from the radio and television broadcast and other communications industries, to preserve the quality of living in residential areas in close proximity to radio and television broadcast facilities and to protect the health and safety of the citizens from adverse impacts of radio frequency (RF) emissions. (Ord. 296 Att. A; Ord. 99 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.030 Definitions.
     To promote understanding and accuracy and to promote ease of use of the regulations, the following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter.

     “Antenna height” means the vertical distance between the highest point of the antenna and the ground directly below this point.

     “Duty cycle” means the percentage of time that an emission source actually contributes radio frequency energy to the surrounding environment. (A twenty-four (24)-hour continuously broadcasting source has a duty cycle of one hundred (100) percent.)

     “Effective radiated power (ERP)” means the power input to the antenna, times the numerical power of gain of the antenna relative to the dipole or isotropic radiator, respectively.

     “Emergency services communications” means two-way radio communication, directly associated with the “911” emergency services, including fire, police and emergency medical aid or ambulance service.

     “Emission source” means any device, machine or facility producing nonionizing electromagnetic radiation between one hundred (100) KHz and three hundred (300) GHz in frequency, with an effective radiated power of one watt or greater.

     “Excessive emission level” means any measured or calculated emission level exceeding the levels allowed by the RF Emission Standards contained in Section 5.08.060.

     “Gigahertz (GHz)” means one billion (1,000,000,000) hertz. (See “hertz”)

     “Hand-held source” means an emission source (transmitter) normally held in the hand of, or on the person of, the person operating such source.

     “Hertz (Hz)” means cycles per second. The rate of oscillation of a sine wave from maximum amplitude through minimum amplitude and back to maximum amplitude.

     “Intermittent source” means a signal or emission that is not normally present for more than fifteen (15) minutes continuous operation, recurring at random times throughout the day.

     “Kilohertz (KHz)” means one thousand (1,000) hertz. (See “hertz”)

     “Megahertz (MHz)” means one million (1,000,000) hertz. (See “hertz”)

     “Microwatt (µW)” means one millionth (1/1,000,000) of one watt, a measure of electrical power.

     “Milliwatt (mW)” means one thousandth (1/1,000) of one watt, a measure of electrical power.

     “Mobile source” means transmitters and associated antennas attached to or installed in vehicles which normally move about (automobiles, watercraft, aircraft).

     “Mounting bracket” means any device or substance used to affix an antenna to a tower, pole, mast or other structure.

     “Point-to-point broadcast” means to send or transmit electromagnetic waves in a specified single direction, limiting the potential for reception (normally) to one receiving antenna. (Ord. 99 § 3, 1989)

 

5.08.040 Affected facilities.
     A.    The facilities affected by this chapter include:

     1.     Towers, masts, poles and other supporting structures for broadcast/emitting/ receiving antennas;

     2.     VHF and UHF television towers, FM radio towers, two-way radio, fixed point microwave towers; commercial satellite television dish antennas; radio frequency emitting devices, antennas, transmitters and commercial receivers for the five frequency ranges, referenced by the Emission Standards, Section 5.08.060 of this chapter:

 

 

100 KHz

—

3 MHz

3 MHz

—

30 MHz

30 MHz

—

300 MHz

300 MHz

—

1,500 MHz

1,500 MHz

—

300 GHz

     3.     Low-power television towers, satellite ground stations, AM radio towers, and building-mounted towers;

     4.     Ham radio, amateur sole source emitters, citizen band transmitters, satellite television dish antennas and structures to support them;

     5.     Accessory uses such as transmitter buildings.

     B.     Facilities not affected by the regulations of this chapter include:

     1.     Uses listed as accessory to the underlying development district which are permitted and including any restrictions or limitations imposed in that underlying development district;

     2.     Radio frequency machines which:

     a.     Have an effective radiated power (ERP) of seven watts or less,

     b.     Are designated and marketed as consumer products, such as microwave ovens and remote control toys.

     3.     Temporary facilities, operating with less than one thousand (1,000) watts ERP, for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days of consecutive operation, nor more than one hundred twenty (120) days of operation in total;

     4.     Military and civilian radars, operating within the regulated frequency ranges, for the purpose of defense or aircraft safety;

     5.     Hand-held, mobile and marine radio transmitters and receivers;

     6.     Two-way communication transmitters utilized on a temporary basis for emergency services communications;

     7.     Emergency or routine repairs, reconstruction or routine maintenance of previously approved facilities or replacement of transmitters, antennas or other components of previously approved facilities which does not create a significant change, as determined by the city, in visual impact or an increase in emission levels;

     8.     Wireless communication facilities subject to Section 16.44.020 (Wireless communications facilities) of this code. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 296 Att. A, 2004; Ord. 99 § 4, 1989)

 

5.08.050 Commercial facilities—Site development standards.
     A.    The intent of the site development standards for commercial facilities is to provide development in a manner resulting in an appearance compatible with the surrounding residential area; protect adjacent property from tower failure, falling ice and other safety hazards; and to protect adjacent areas of human habitation from excessive emission levels.

     B.     Site size and location for new applications:

     1.     Minimum Site Size. The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Facilities shall be located only in an institutional and public use (IPU) development district.

     2.     Site size shall be sufficient to:

     a.     Prevent excessive noise levels in excess of fifty (50) dba at the site property lines;

     b.     Protect adjacent areas of human habitation from excessive emission levels.

     C.     Tower, antenna and accessory uses placement for new applications.

     1.     Yards shall meet the following requirements:

     a.     Provide a setback from the base of the tower to the property line equal to the tower height where the property line abuts a residential district or public street;

     b.     Provide yards and setbacks to facilities and their accessory uses at least equal to the required yards of the adjoining development district;

     c.     To have the least impact on the surrounding residential properties. The setbacks and height of the proposed tower must be the minimum required to provide the appropriate and critical line-of-sight path with minimum fresnel clearance above all intervening obstructions that are not under the control of the applicant. Any obstructions that are under the control of the applicant must have documentation as to why they cannot be cleared to minimize line-of-sight obstruction and related reduction in height or setback requirements.

     D.    The tower site must be adequately fenced, gated and landscape buffered from outside trespass and from surrounding properties as follows:

     1.     The site shall have a six-foot high security fence with lockable gate, meeting the requirements of Section 16.20.110, Fencing and Screening, of this code;

     2.     The property lines adjoining residential property shall have a landscape minimum fifteen (15) foot wide buffer of evergreen plantings four feet minimum in height when planted that meet the requirements of Section 16.20.100, Landscaping, Street Trees and Buffering. The type of trees and shrubs to be planted shall provide a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two years. The landscape buffer shall provide the maximum screening height possible without impairing or limiting reception by obstructing antenna line of site or transmitting and receiving capability;

     3.     Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost;

     4.     A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided on each site; an additional parking space for each two employees shall be provided at facilities which require on-site personnel.

     E.     Any new tower application or major addition to an existing tower shall be subject to design review by the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 16.32 of this code. The tower and accessory buildings and equipment design shall be reviewed for size, scale and aesthetic appearance that will create the least visual impact on surrounding properties.

     1.     No “candelabra” type towers shall be permitted. No platforms larger than ten (10) feet on a side shall be permitted. Platforms shall not be permitted if mounting of required antennas can be accomplished without such platforms.

     2.     The tower height, size and scale shall be the minimum required to provide for the necessary structural capability and required use. Towers designed for greater height and more excessive loading requirements shall not be “scaled back” for use where height and loading capacity requirements are less.

     3.     Towers clustered on the same site shall be of similar height or lower and similar in design, whenever possible. Towers shall be freestanding unless it can be shown that a guyed tower will have less negative visual impact.

     4.     The exterior of any accessory building or equipment shall be painted in a neutral earthtone color to blend with the surroundings as approved by the city. Towers shall be painted silver. If there is heavy vegetation in the immediate area, such towers shall be painted green from the base to the tree line with the remainder painted silver. The tower shall be unlighted. (These requirements may be superceded by other regulatory agencies).

     F.     Plans and calculations must be submitted by an Oregon registered professional engineer to show the adequacy of the structure and foundation and soil conditions for the tower and accessory building or equipment for their intended use and a building permit obtained.

     G.    The tower installation shall be subject to an inspection at least every five years by independent qualified personnel at the owner’s expense to verify its structural safety and general maintenance condition. The city shall receive a copy of the report and the owner shall make any recommended corrections deemed necessary within thirty (30) days of the report. If the owner fails to provide the inspection, the city may do so at the owner’s expense.

     H.    The owner shall obtain liability insurance for the tower and building installation which names the city as a co-insured. Any and all liability remains with the tower owner and none with the city whatsoever. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the city shall be provided with a copy of the policy which shall state that there shall be no cancellation of the policy without at least thirty (30) days notice to the city.

     I.      The tower site must have adequate drainage facilities and comply with Section 16.20.160, Surface Water Runoff and Detention, of this code.

     J.      Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall include only such buildings and facilities necessary for transmission function and satellite ground stations associated with them, but shall not include broadcast studios, offices, vehicle storage areas, nor other similar uses not necessary for the transmission function.

     K.    New Towers. Any application for a new tower shall show the following:

     1.     Documentation of effort to locate on an existing tower and/or reasons why that is not possible. Failure to document a good faith effort to locate on an existing tower or a valid reason for not doing so are grounds for denial;

     2.     The new tower shall be designed to support additional transmitter/antenna systems of equal or greater power to that proposed by the applicant up to the interference and structural limits imposed by the proposed tower height. (Ord. 99 § 5, 1989)

 

 

5.08.060 RF emission standards.
 

 

Frequency Range

Mean Squared    2

Electric (E) Field Strength (V2/m2) 2.

Mean Squared     2

Magnetic (H) Field Strength (A2/m2) 3.

Equivalent Plane-Wave Power Density (mW/cm2) 4.

100 KHz - 3 MHz

80,000      2 5.

0.5              2

20      2

3 MHz - 30 MHz

4,000 (180/f)

0.025 (180/f)

180/f

30 MHz - 300 MHz

800

0.005

0.2

300 MHz - 1500 MHz

4,000 (f/1500)

0.025 (f/1500)

f/1500

1500 MHz - 300 GHz

4,000

0.025

1.0

 

1.   All standards refer to root mean square (rms) measurements gathered by an approved method.

2.   V2/m2 = Volts squared per meter squared.

3.   A2/m2 - Amperes squared per meter squared.

4.   mW/cm2 = Milliwatts per centimeter squared.

5.   f - Frequency in megahertz (MHz).

(Ord. 99 § 6, 1989)

 

5.08.070 Private UHF and VHF television, FM radio or ham and short-wave radio and satellite television dish facilities.
     A.    Private UHF and VHF television, FM radio or ham and short-wave radio and satellite television dish antenna use regulated by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) are permitted as an outright use in any development district. To balance the city’s concerns for an appearance compatible with the neighboring residential property and to protect adjacent property from tower or antenna failure and other safety hazards with the individual’s interest in receiving such radio and television signals, the following criteria shall apply to the placement and screening of exterior facilities and equipment for such use:

     1.     UHF and VHF television, FM radio or ham and short-wave radio antennas, towers and guy cables and satellite television dish antennas shall be located only in the rear yard area of a residence and shall be considered a “structure” subject to the setback requirements of the development district in which they are located;

     2.     Towers or antennas placed closer than thirty (30) feet from any adjoining property line shall be screened from the subject property line with evergreen plantings forming a hedge to a maximum height that will not impair or limit reception by obstructing the antenna’s line of sight or receiving capability;

     3.     Provide a setback from the base of any tower to the property line equal to the tower height from its base;

     4.     All towers and/or antennas mounted on a building or structure must meet all building code requirements for safety and wind resistance. The supporting structure must be designed by a professional engineer registered in Oregon. An application considered by the city to have possible aesthetic objections shall be subject to design review by the planning commission. (Ord. 99 § 7, 1989)

 

5.08.080 Registration of existing commercial facilities.
     A.    All commercial radio and television broadcast facilities, telephone and other communication facilities subject to this chapter and existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall furnish, on forms provided by the city for that information:

     1.     Name and address of the FCC licensee(s);

     2.     Name and address of owner of the property on which the transmitter, receiver and/or antenna is located;

     3.     Location of transmitter by legal description of the lot(s) or parcel(s) on which it is located and a site plan showing the location of facilities on the property with the existing setbacks from property lines;

     4.     Output frequency of transmitter;

     5.     Type of modulation and class of service;

     6.     Power output of transmitter;

     7.     Effective radiated power;

     8.     Manufacturer, type and model number of tower and antenna;

     9.     Height of antenna and tower above ground;

     10.   Elevation above sea level of ground at the antenna location;

     11.   The call letters assigned to the source, if applicable;

     12.   Date of installation of present transmitter or receiver, of the associated antenna and of the structure, if any, on which the antenna is located;

     13.   Authorizations for siting and operation;

     14.   The basic operating characteristics of the site shall be described such as staffing, time of operation, days of operation, need for sewage disposal facilities, parking facilities, traffic generation and other public facility requirements. (Ord. 99 § 8, 1989)

 

5.08.090 Registration of new or existing private facilities.
     A.    All private UHF and VHF television, FM radio or ham and short-wave radio and satellite television dish antenna facilities subject to this chapter shall furnish, on forms provided by the city for that information:

     1.     Name and address of the FCC licensee(s) and location of the facility if different;

     2.     Location of the exterior tower or antenna on the property with setbacks from the property lines;

     3.     The height of the tower or antenna above its base whether mounted on the ground or on a building and total height above the ground to the top of the tower or antenna;

     4.     Date of installation of the present facility;

     5.     Note any provisions for screening or buffering of facility from adjoining properties.

     B.     All new applications for private facilities subject to this chapter shall be reviewed for conformance to this chapter and approved by the city staff after payment of the applicable fees. (Ord. 99 § 9, 1989)

 

5.08.100 Commercial facilities application requirements.
     A.    All new applications for commercial television broadcast facilities and other communication facilities subject to this chapter shall be on forms provided by the city for that purpose and shall include:

     1.     Name and address of owner of transmitter and/or antenna of the FCC licensee(s);

     2.     Name and address of owner of property on which the transmitter and/or antenna is located;

     3.     Location of transmitter by legal description of the lot(s) or parcel(s) on which it is located and a site plan showing the location of facilities on the property with the existing setbacks from property lines;

     4.     Output frequency of transmitter;

     5.     Type of modulation and class of service;

     6.     Power output of transmitter;

     7.     Effective radiated power;

     8.     Manufacturer type, model number and design drawings of antenna and tower;

     9.     Height of antenna and tower  above ground;

     10.   Elevation above sea level of ground at the antenna location;

     11.   The call letters assigned to the source, if applicable;

     12.   Date of installation of present transmitter, and date of installation of the associated antenna, date of installation of the structure, if any, on which the antenna is located;

     13.   The measured existing cumulative radiation levels, by frequency range, at the point on the property line nearest the radiating source (as measured by radial distance from the antenna) and the point on the property line of the predicted maximum emission level from all effecting sources.

     a.     These measurements shall be made at the time of the expected highest emissions in accord with ANSI C95.3 measurement protocol and shall be made by a qualified licensed engineer with a Federal Communications Commission First Class or General Radio-Telephone License or under the supervision of a registered professional electrical engineer.

     b.     Alternatively, these measurements may be made by whatever means are determined best by a registered professional electrical engineer.

     c.     The effects of contributing sources of frequency below the lower frequency limit of broadband instruments may be appropriately shown by a separate single instant measurement.

     14.   The calculated average radiation levels at the points specified in subsection (A)(13) after installation of the new source, including both the background and the new source;

     15.   The calculated level at the predicted point of maximum radiation off of the property on which the new source is located caused by the new source along with the measured background radiation level at this point. This measurement shall meet the requirements of subsection (A)(13);

     16.   A scaled site plan shall identify the location of each point of measurement and/or calculation, in relation to the subject facility;

     17.   The formulas used for any and all calculations must be clearly described;

     18.   The basic operating characteristics of the site shall be described such as staffing, time of operation, days of operation, need for sewage disposal facilities, parking facilities, traffic generation and other public facility requirements.

     B.     Measurement Exemption. All commercial intermittent single-source facilities, with less than one thousand (1,000) watts ERP are exempt from the requirements of subsection (A)(13) of this section.

     C.     If the application includes the request for a new tower the following additional information shall be provided:

     1.     Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of tower(s), guy anchors (if any), transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas and adjacent land uses. Such plan shall also demonstrate compliance with other applicable city ordinances;

     2.     Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings;

     3.     Report from a professional engineer licensed in the state of Oregon, documenting the following:

     a.     Tower height and design, including technical, engineering, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross-section of the tower structure shall be included,

     b.     Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated,

     c.     Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure as required by the building official,

     d.     Failure characteristics of tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris,

     e.     Ice hazards and mitigation measures which have been employed, including increased setbacks and/or deicing equipment,

     f.      Specific design plans indicating the means by which the shared use provisions of this chapter will be met.

     4.     Documentation from Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that application has been reviewed pursuant to federal aviation regulations, if applicable;

     5.     Documentation from the Oregon state Aeronautics Division specifying painting and/or lighting requirements, if applicable;

     6.     Letter of intent to lease excess space on structure to other users.

     D.    All applications for commercial facilities shall be subject to Section 16.16.220 Conditional use, unless it is for an addition to an approved multi-purpose facility allowing staff approval. (Ord. 99 § 10, 1989)

 

5.08.110 Multi-purpose towers.
     A.    To reduce the negative aesthetic effects caused when towers proliferate, any new towers approved must be multi-purpose providing for shared use. New towers shall be designed to structurally accommodate the maximum number of additional users technically practicable for the tower height approved. The applicant shall provide documentation that shows compliance with this section.

     1.     Such requirements may be reduced if the increased size and scale of the proposed tower significantly exceeds that of existing towers in the area and therefore creates, in the city’s opinion, a more onerous visual impact on the surrounding area than the existing towers;

     2.     Consideration shall be given to the increase in size of accessory buildings and equipment to accommodate additional tower users.

     B.     Once a new tower is approved, additional antennas and accessory uses shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions of approval. The city shall be notified of each additional user per Section 5.08.100 of this chapter. Approval of such additional users shall be at the city staff level.

     C.     The owner of a new tower shall be required as a condition of approval to:

     1.     Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential shared use applicant per Section 5.08.050 of this chapter;

     2.     Negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties, and allow shared use where the third party seeking such use agrees to pay reasonable charges for sharing, and can meet whatever technical requirements are necessary to allow shared use without creating interference. (Ord. 99 § 11, 1989)

 

5.08.120 Nonconforming facilities.
     A.    Nonconforming to Site Development Standards. When an existing facility makes application for an addition (or change) to that facility, under the provisions of this chapter they shall comply with this chapter and the applicable requirements of Title 16.

     B.     Nonconforming to Emission Standards. No radio or television broadcast facility, as regulated by this chapter including existing facilities, shall be permitted to exceed the RF emission standards or cause some other facility to exceed the RF emission standards of Section 5.08.060 or any other applicable emission standard. (Ord. 99 § 12, 1989)

 

5.08.130 Variance.
     A variance from the provisions of this chapter may be granted per the requirements of Chapter 16.28. (Ord. 99 § 13, 1989)

 

5.08.140 Inventory and fees.
     A.    The city shall prepare an inventory of all facilities affected by this chapter and a plan or map locating such facilities. The inventory shall include those items as outlined in Sections 5.08.080, 5.08.090 and 5.08.100.

     B.     Application fees for new radio and television broadcast and communications facilities shall be those prescribed in city Resolution 87-9.

     C.     Existing facilities shall be notified in writing of the registration requirements of Sections 5.08.080 and 5.08.090 and shall return the completed form within ninety (90) days of the date of notice. (Ord. 99 § 14, 1989)

 

5.08.150 Violation and penalties.
     A.    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)

     B.     Each person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter, and any use, occupation, building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions hereof shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 228 § 1, 2001; Ord. 99 § 15, 1989)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS—GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.04.010 Definitions.
     As used in this section, unless the context requires otherwise the following terms have the following meanings:

     “Animal” means any non-human vertebrate.

     “Animal-at-large” means any animal, excluding cats, that are off the premises of the owner, or are not restrained by a leash tether or other physical control device not to exceed eight feet in length and under the physical control of a capable person.

     “Bodily injury” means any impairment of physical condition as evidenced by scrapes, cuts, punctures bruises or physical pain.

     “Community services/code enforcement officer” means any one or more of the city’s employees designated by the city manager or his or her designee as a code enforcement officer.

     “Costs” means any monetary assessment including fees and fines, restitution and monetary expenses related to veterinarian care.

     “Dangerous animal” means any animal which, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute an unreasonable threat or danger to human life or property if not kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner.

     This section shall not apply to a dog trained for law enforcement purposes and under the control of a police officer.

     “Dog” means the common dog (canis familiaris) and any animal claimed by its owner to be a wolf dog mix.

     “Domestic animal” any animal whose physiology has been determined to be manipulated through selective breeding and does not occur naturally in the wild, examples include, but not limited to dogs, cats and livestock.

     “Euthanize” means to be put to death in a humane manner.

     “Keeper” is any person or legal entity that harbors, cares for, exercises control over, or knowingly permits any animal to remain on the premises occupied by that person for a period of time not less than seventy-two (72) hours or someone who accepted the animal for the purposes of safe keeping.

     “Owner” is any person or legal entity, having a possessory property right to the animal and who has been a keeper of an animal for more than ninety (90) days.

     “Person” means any individual, association, partnership, firm, organization, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.

     “Unsecured” means not securely confined indoors, or not securely restrained by means of a collar and chain, pen, fence or similar physical device, and in such a manner which effectively prevents the animal from going beyond the premises of the owner. (Ord, 362 § 2, 2007: Ord. 107 § 3.1, 1991)

 

6.04.020 Removal of animal waste.
     Any owner or keeper of an animal or person in physical possession and control of any animal in a public place shall immediately remove excrement or other solid waste deposited by the animal in any public area, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parking strips and public parks. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007: Ord. 107 § 3.2, 1991)

 

6.04.030 Animal regulations.
     It is considered a violation of this chapter for any person to:

     A.    Permit an animal to run at-large;

     B.     Permit an animal to trespass upon property of another person;

     C.     Permit an animal to destroy of damage property of another person, other than the owner’s or keeper’s property;

     D.    Permit any animal unreasonably to cause annoyance, alarm or noise disturbance at any time of the day or night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which may be heard beyond the boundary of the animal owner’s property;

     E.     Leave an animal unattended for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours without adequate care;

     F.     Knowingly keep an unlicensed dog;

     G.    Permit an animal to cause bodily injury to a person or a domestic animal.

     1.     It is a defense of this section if the animal engages in such behavior as a result of a person wrongfully assaulting the animal or owner, or other similar provocation, or when the animal’s behavior was directed towards a trespasser or other extenuating circumstances that establishes that the animal does not constitute an unreasonable risk to life or property.

     H.    Permit an animal to be confined within a motor vehicle at any location under such conditions as it may endanger the health or well-being of the animal, including but not limited to dangerous temperature, lack of food, water or attention.

     I.      Permit a dog to be unrestrained in an open portion of a vehicle.

     J.      Fail to reclaim an impounded animal.

     K.    Fail to comply with any fine, fee, cost, expense, condition or restriction under this Chapter.

     L.     Fail to surrender an animal to a community services officer or designee when required by this chapter.

     M.    Fail to immediately notify community services when the owner’s animal has bitten a person or domestic animal.

     N.    Cause, instigate or encourage any dog fight within the city.

     O.    Willfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, heat, mutilate, burn, scald or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal, except that reasonable force that may be employed to drive off a dangerous or trespassing animal. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007: Ord. 107 § 3.3, 1991; Ord. 25 § 3, 1968)

 

6.04.031 Impound and seizure.
     A.    Any community services officer or designee may impound a dog that is in violation of this chapter, or when a community services officer or designee reasonably believe an animal requires medical assistance or care.

     B.     An animal shall be considered impounded or seized from the time the community service officer or designee takes physical custody of the animal.

     C.     If a person, refuses to allow a community services officer or designee to enter the premises to impound an animal as authorized by this chapter, the community services officer may request assistance from a police officer to execute a warrant authorized under state law or this code for the search and seizure of property.

     D.    Any community services officer or designee, is authorized to remove a dog from a motor vehicle and impound the animal when the officer reasonably believes it is confined in a manner that endangers its health or well-being, including but not limited to dangerous temperature, lack of food, water shelter or attention. A written notice of impoundment will be left on or in the vehicle along with information on how the animal may be reclaimed.

     E.     Any person may immediately apprehend and hold for impoundment any animal that has trespassed upon the property of that person or property of another in violation of this chapter, or has threatened or caused bodily injury to a person or a domestic animal.

     F.     Any animal may be seized or impounded when it requires protective custody or care because of mistreatment or neglect by its owner or keeper.

     G.    The animal’s owner or keeper shall be liable for all fees as a result of impounding, sheltering or medical treatment (by a licensed professional) rendered to the animal.

     H.    Animals subject to impound or seizure:

     1.     At large animals;

     2.     Unsecured animals;

     3.     Unlicensed dogs;

     4.     Nuisance animals;

     5.     Dangerous animals;

     6.     Animals trained, bred, or kept for the purpose of animal fighting;

     7.     Animals found in cruel, abusive or neglectful situations;

     8.     Diseased or injured animals. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007)

 

6.04.032 Failure to reclaim.
     A.    An owner that fails to reclaim an animal will be civilly liable to the city for any penalties, fines fees, costs and expenses authorized by the city and which may be collected in the same manner as any other debt allowed by law.

     B.     If an owner or keeper fails to reclaim an animal as provided in this chapter, the dog will be deemed surrendered to the, city without compensation paid to the owner. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007)

 

6.04.033 Diseased or injured animals.
     In the event any animal is impounded with symptoms of an infectious or contagious disease or injury the community services officer or designee, may hire a licensed veterinarian to treat the animal. The animal’s owner shall be liable to the city for the expenses of veterinarian care. In the event that a licensed veterinarian is of the opinion that animal cannot be treated or that the animal poses a threat to the public health or safety, the animal may be immediately euthanized without compensation paid to the owner. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007)

 

6.04.034 Officers powers and duties.
     Any animal which is found in violation of any of the acts set forth in Section 6.04.030 or has caused any bodily injury to any person within the city limits, may be seized or impounded by a community services officer of the city or designee. The seized or impounded animal shall be delivered to a shelter or impound facility designated by the city for boarding, impounding, or sheltering.

     The community services officer or designee, shall promptly notify a dog owner in writing, to the keeper’s or owners last known address that the do, has been impounded. Notice shall include a reason for the im pound or seizure the shelter contact information hours of operation and information that the animal must be reclaimed at the shelter/impound facility within five days following the date of the seizure or impoundment (not including Sundays or federal holidays). If there is no claim or payment of impound or shelter fees within five days following the date of the seizure or impound, the dog shall be deemed surrendered to the city and shall be humanely euthanized or made available for adoption.

     The code enforcement officer, or designee, shall have the ability to issue citations in violation of this chapter and to perform all other acts necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.

     It is unlawful for any person to in any way interfere with any person engaged in seizing or impounding an animal under the authority of this chapter.

     No person shall encourage any animal to bite or to threaten any person engaged in the performance of his or her duty under this Chapter.

     It is unlawful to knowingly provide false information to a community service officer or designee enforcing any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007)

 

6.04.035 Fees.
     The actual costs for impound, shelter or veterinarian fees shall be the responsibility of the owner. These fees will be the current rates established by the city and/or current fees established by the impound or shelter facility or licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007)

 

6.04.036 Dog licensing.
     A.    A person is required to purchase a dog license as follows:

     1.     Within thirty (30) days of the dog turning six months of age or has its permanent canine teeth, whichever comes first; or

     2.     Within thirty (30) days of becoming the dog’s owner or keeper; or

     3.     Within thirty (30) days of moving into the city.

     B.     Licenses shall be securely displayed on the animal at all times except when the animal is confined to the owner’s or keeper’s premises.

     C.     If the ownership or possession of a dog is changed, a new dog license must be obtained from the city per subsections (F)(1) through (5).

     D.    If a dog license is lost, the owner shall obtain a duplicate tag from the city upon payment of a fee.

     E.     Term of license. A license shall be valid for a period of one, two or three years from date of issue at option of the owner or keeper.

     F.     A dog license shall be issued after the following conditions have been met:

     1.     Completion of a city dog license application form;

     2.     Payment of the license fee;

     3.     Proof of inoculation against rabies from a licensed professional;

     4.     Proof of spay/neuter from a licensed professional (for a discounted fee).

     5.     Renewal of a license shall not be due until thirty (30) days after the expiration of the current license. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007)

 

6.04.037 Waiver of dog licensing fee.
     A waiver of the license fee shall be given as follows:

     A.    If the dog is an “assistance animal” the fee shall be waived providing that the owner or keeper tenders to the city a written statement from a health care professional confirming the dog’s owner or keeper’s medical need for such a dog.

     B.     If the dog is in training to be an assistance animal, in affiliation with a recognized organization for the training of assistance animals provided the trainer tenders to the city a written statement attesting to the status of such dogs. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007)

 

6.04.040 Communicable disease.
     No person may permit an animal or bird owned or controlled by him or her to be at-large within the city if the animal or bird is afflicted with a communicable disease. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007: Ord. 25 § 2, 1968)

 

6.04.050 Livestock and poultry.
     A.    No person may maintain a slaughterhouse, or tannery, or permit livestock or poultry owned by him or her to run at large within the city.

     B.     Livestock or poultry or other animals or fowls running at-large in the city may be taken up and impounded by a police officer and disposed of in accordance with proper procedures.

     C.     No person may keep cows, horses, sheep or goats on lots having an area of less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. The total number of such animals (other than their young under the age of six months) allowed on a lot shall be limited to the square footage of the lot divided by the total minimum areas required for each animal as listed below.

 

 

Horses

Gross Area Required

1 or 2

40,000 square feet

3

60,000 square feet

4

80,000 square feet

5 or more

95,000 square feet plus 15,000 square feet for each horse over 5

Goats/Sheep

 

1

10,000 square feet

 

     D.    No person may keep or raise swine for commercial or other purposes on lots less than five acres in area. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007; Ord. 80 § 1, 1981; Ord. 25 § 4, 1968)

 

6.04.060 Animal runs, pens, cages.
     A.    No person may construct, locate or maintain animal runs or barns or pens on the front half of a lot or closer than seventy (70) feet from the front property line, whichever is greater, or closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residence other than the residence of the owner. All other chicken or fowl raising shall be per the requirements of Section 16.44.070 (Agricultural use regulations) of this title.

     B.     Animals, chickens and/or fowl shall be properly caged or housed and proper sanitation maintained at all times. All animal or poultry food, except fodder, shall be stored in metal or other rodent-proof containers. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020; Ord. 362 § 2, 2007; Ord. 80 § 4.2, 1981)

 

6.04.070 Removal of carcasses.
     No person may permit any fowl or animal carcass owned by him or her or under his or her control to remain upon the public streets or places or to be exposed on private property, for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove or dispose of such carcass. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007; Ord. 25 § 5, 1968)

 

6.04.080 Penalties.
     Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007; Ord. 228 § 1, 2001; Ord. 107 § 2, 1991; Ord. 25 § 21, 1963)

 

6.04.090 Separate violations.
     A.    Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

     B.     The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance. (Ord. 362 § 2, 2007; Ord. 25 § 22, 1968)

Title 7 (Reserved)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Chapter 8.08 PUBLIC NUISANCES
Chapter 8.12 ALARM SYSTEMS REGULATIONS AND FEES

Chapter 8.04 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
8.04.010 Solid waste management program adopted.
     The city adopts the solid waste management ordinance which is in current use by the director of department of transportation and development for Clackamas County as the solid waste management ordinance for the city of Happy Valley. The Clackamas County solid waste management ordinance is incorporated by reference in this chapter. This chapter shall continue perpetually and incorporate any future amendments to the solid waste management ordinance by the Clackamas County board of commissioners at any time after its enactment. (Ord. 150 § 1, 1996)

 

8.04.020 Administration and enforcement of program.
     Pursuant to a written agreement entered into between the city and Clackamas County board of commissioners, dated the 16th day of January, 1996, the city delegates to the Clackamas County director of department of transportation and development its authority to administer and enforce the provisions of the solid waste management ordinance as incorporated in Section 8.04.010. (Ord. 150 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 8.08 PUBLIC NUISANCES
Article I. Nuisances
8.08.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, except where the context indicates otherwise, the following terms shall have the meaning given them in this section:

     “City” means Happy Valley.

     “Dilapidated/derelict structure” means a structure which through neglect or damage lacks necessary repairs or is otherwise in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the general public and surrounding property owners, is unfit for human occupancy and is considered uninhabitable. Dilapidated/derelict structures include dwellings and other structures not occupied by a legal or equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee, and into which there are one or more unsecured openings, including, but not limited to: broken windows; unlocked doors or doorways missing doors; holes in the exterior walls or roof; broken basement, foundation or cellar hatchways; or other similar unsecured openings which would facilitate an unauthorized entry into the structure.

     “Explosives” means chemical compounds, mixtures or devices, the primary purpose of which is to function by explosion including but not limited to such things as dynamite, nitroglycerin, black powder, blasting caps and fireworks as the latter are defined by Oregon law.

     “Graffiti” means any drawing, inscription, writing, figure or mark made upon an exposed surface including but not limited to any wall, rock, bridge, fence, tree, motor vehicle, sidewalk, street, whether publicly or privately owned with paint, chalk, dye, ink, pencil, wax or similar substance or by etching scratching, cutting, burning or carving without the express consent of the owner of said exposed surface.

     “Inoperable vehicle” means any vehicle which has no current valid state vehicle license and which cannot be moved without being repaired or dismantled or which is no longer usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured. This definition shall not include any vehicle kept in a enclosed building or any vehicle kept on the premises of a business lawfully engaged in wrecking, junking or repair of vehicles.

     “Junk” means and shall include used motors, motor parts, abandoned or unusable motor vehicles including trucks, tractors, trailers, parts removed from vehicles, household appliances, scrap iron, tin, plastic, glass and paper.

     “Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, or person, other than the owner, having possession or control of the property.

     “Public place” means a building, place, or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public. (Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.090 Dilapidated/derelict structures.
     A.    No owner or person in charge of property on which a dilapidated/derelict structure, as defined in Section 8.08.010, is located shall allow, permit or suffer any portion(s) of such structure to remain in a dilapidated/derelict condition for a period in excess of thirty (30) days.

     B.     In the event an owner or person in charge of property is found to have violated the terms of subsection A of this section, that person will be subject to the imposition of a civil penalty in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day of the first thirty (30) days of the violation. In the event the court finds the violation to have existed for a period in excess of thirty (30) days but less than ninety (90) days, the minimum civil penalty shall increase to not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per day for each day of violation between day thirty-one (31) and day ninety (90). In the event the violation has existed for a period in excess of ninety (90) days, the minimum civil penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day of the violation beyond day ninety (90). (Ord. 526 § 1, 2017)

 

8.08.095 Buildings with unfurnished exteriors.
     A.    No owner or person in charge of property on which a dwelling or other structure is located where an on-going construction project involving the exterior of the dwelling or structure (including, but not limited to, the roof, windows, doors, and exterior walls) is occurring shall allow, permit or suffer any exterior portion(s) thereof being affected by the construction activity to remain in a substantially uncompleted or unfinished state for a period in excess of one year.

     B.     In the event an owner or person in charge of property is found to have violated the terms of subsection A of this section, they will be subject to the imposition of a civil penalty in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day of the first thirty (30) days of the violation. In the event the court finds the violation to have existed for a period in excess of thirty (30) days but less than ninety (90) days, the minimum civil penalty shall increase to not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per day for each day of violation between day thirty-one (31) and day ninety (90). In the event the violation has existed for a period in excess of ninety (90) days, the minimum civil penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day of the violation beyond day ninety (90). (Ord. 287 § 2, 2004)

 

8.08.100 Nuisances affecting public health.
     No owner or person in charge of property may permit or cause a nuisance affecting public health. The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this chapter.

     A.    Privies. An open vault or privy constructed and maintained within the city, except those constructed and maintained in connection with construction projects consistent with state law.

     B.     Debris on Private Property. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse located on private property that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health, safety or welfare of the city.

     C.     Stagnant Water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

     D.    Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near such water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

     E.     Food. Decayed or unwholesome food offered for human consumption.

     F.     Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition.

     G.    Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises.

     H.    Dilapidated/Derelict Structures. Dilapidated/derelict structures as defined in Section 8.08.010. (Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.110 Outdoor burning ordinance.
     A.    Backyard burning of yard, tree, and garden debris is prohibited except as provided in subsection B of this section.

     B.     The following activities are exempted from the prohibition in subsection A of this section:

     1.     Outdoor fires used for pleasure, religious or cooking purposes when the fire is contained in a fireplace, barbecue grill or pit, or other enclosure intended for outdoor recreation or cooking. However, no outdoor fire is permitted in any type of burn barrel.

     2.     Outdoor fires when a person first obtains a burning permit from the city. All burning must be by permit and must comply with the requirements of the Office of the State Fire Marshals, Department of Environmental Quality and city council resolution. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2006)

 

Article II. Nuisances Affecting Public Safety
8.08.200 Abandoned iceboxes.
     No person may leave in a place accessible to children an abandoned, unattended or discarded refrigerator or similar container which has an airtight door with a snap lock or other mechanism which may not be released for opening from the inside, without first removing such lock or door from said container. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.205 Dilapidated/derelict structures.
     No person may maintain dilapidated/derelict structures as defined in Section 8.08.010. (Ord. 526 § 1, 2017)

 

8.08.210 Attractive nuisances.
     A.    No owner or person in charge of property may permit:

     1.     Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices on such property which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

     2.     Lumber, logs or piling placed or stored on such property in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

     3.     An open pit, quarry, cistern or other excavation without erecting adequate safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children.

     4.     All permanent outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence built consistent with state law. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be at least four feet in height (above grade) and shall be constructed of wire mesh or other material providing equivalent protection. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate, or key locks which may be located other than at the top of the gates. Fence posts shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases.

     5.     Dilapidated/derelict structures as defined in Section 8.08.010 on such property in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

     B.     This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects, if during the course of construction reasonable safeguards are maintained to prevent injury to children. (Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.220 Snow and ice removal.
     No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public sidewalk may permit:

     A.    Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first four hours of daylight after the snow has fallen;

     B.     Ice to cover or remain on a sidewalk, after the first four hours of daylight after the ice has formed. Such person shall remove ice accumulation on the sidewalk or cover the ice with sand, ashes or other suitable material to assure safe travel. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.230 Scattering rubbish.
     No person may throw, dump or deposit upon public or private property an injurious or offensive substance or any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench, detract from the cleanliness or safety of such property, or would be likely to injure an animal, vehicle or person traveling upon a public way. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.240 Junk.
     A.    It is determined and declared that the keeping of any junk as defined in this chapter on a lot or premises within the city, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed except doors for use for ingress and egress, is a nuisance and is unlawful.

     B.     It is unlawful for any owner or person in charge of property to keep or allow to be kept any junk out of doors on any street, or on any lot or premises within the city, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed except doors used for ingress and egress.

     C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed junkyard or automobile wrecking house. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.250 Maintaining inoperable vehicles on private property prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to maintain any inoperable vehicle on private property for a period of time in excess of one month.

     B.     Any owner of an inoperable vehicle or any person maintaining such a vehicle on premises under his or her control for a period of time

 

in excess of one month shall be subject to abatement proceedings by the city as maintaining a public nuisance. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.260 Logs, firewood and building materials.
     A.    Logs. Logs may be stored on the property for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days if said storage pile is not otherwise a public nuisance pursuant to Section 8.08.25.

     B.     Firewood. Firewood may be stored outdoors on any property so long as it is neatly stacked and is not a public nuisance pursuant to Section 8.08.110, nor offensive to the surrounding neighbors.

     C.     Building Material. Building material, including lumber, pipe, roofing material or other material required for an in-progress construction project, may be stored in a manner not offensive to surrounding neighbors for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days from the start of the project. Permits may be issued for longer periods if the size of the project requires it, there is a valid building permit for the project, and the project is under active construction. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.270 Garbage.
     All garbage shall be contained in a closed container stored in a manner not offensive to surrounding neighbors. Other trash and debris shall be removed within ten days from the date of deposit, except that leaves and trimmings may be stored in a manner not offensive to surrounding neighbors. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.280 Blocking public right-of-way prohibited.
     None of the items mentioned in Sections 8.08.200 to 8.08.270 shall be placed in the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the city. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.290 Noxious vegetation.
     No owner or person in charge of property may maintain or allow to exist the following things, practices or conditions on any property or within public road rights-of-way adjacent to that property:

     A.    The term “noxious vegetation” does not include vegetation that constitutes an agricultural crop, unless that vegetation is a fire, health or traffic hazard and is vegetation within the meaning of subsection B of this section. The term “noxious vegetation” does not include vegetation that is part of the natural topographic condition of city or state parks and greenway areas.

     B.     The term “noxious vegetation” includes:

     1.     Weeds more than ten (10) inches high;

     2.     Grass more than ten inches high and not within the exceptions stated in subsection (1) of this section;

     3.     Trees, bushes, roots, other natural growth, soil or solid waste that obstructs public sidewalks or roadways;

     4.     Dead or decaying trees or tree limbs, dead bushes, stumps and any other thing likely to cause a fire or that present a safety hazard to the public or to abutting property owners;

     5.     Uncontrolled or uncultivated growth of weeds, brush, berry vines, poison oak, poison ivy, tansy ragwort or grasses which offer vector or rodent harborage, contribute noxious pollens to the atmosphere, constitute a fire hazard or unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of abutting public or private property;

     6.     Vegetation that is a health hazard;

     7.     Trees, bushes, hedges, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstructions, weeds, grass or debris on property, or on the adjoining street or public right-of-way, which interfere with street or sidewalk traffic, impairs the view of a public thoroughfare, or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous. This includes:

     (i)     Trees and bushes on the property and on the adjoining right-of-way which are not trimmed to a height of not less than seven and one-half feet above the sidewalk level, over the street area at an elevation of not less than eleven (11) feet above the street level and to a height of not less than fourteen (14) feet above the street level on any street designated as an arterial or one-way street, and where parking has been prohibited.

     (ii)    Hedges, shrubs, etc., which are not trimmed to allow a minimum of three feet of horizontal clearance between the edge of pavement and the hedges, shrubs, or other vegetation. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.291 Drainage.
     A.    No owner or person in charge of any building or structure may suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from such building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk, or to flow across such sidewalk.

     B.     The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about such building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.292 Erosion.
     A.    No owner or person in charge of any project, building, structure, or parcel of land may intentionally or inadvertently allow any visible or measurable erosion which has entered, or is likely to enter, a public storm drainage facility or any surface water body as determined by the following criteria:

     1.     Deposition of soil, sand, dirt, dust, mud, rock, gravel, refuse, or any other organic or inorganic material exceeding one cubic foot in volume in a public right-of-way or public property, or into the city surface water drainage system either by direct deposit, dropping, discharge, or as a result of erosion; or

     2.     Flow of water over bare soils, turbid, or sediment laden flows, or bare soil slopes, where the flow of water is not filtered or captured on the property owner’s parcel of land; or

     3.     Earth slides, mud flows, land slumping, slope failure, or other earth movement that leaves, or is likely to leave, the property of origin.

     B.     Owners and persons in charge of any project, building, structure, or parcel of land shall be solely responsible for the cleanup of sidewalks, roadways, natural drainage ways, and adjacent properties of any debris, soil, dirt and foreign materials originating or derived from their building, structure or parcel of land.

     C.     Dust Control.

     1.     Dust and other particulate matters containing pollutants may settle on property and be carried to waters of the state through rainfall or other means.

     2.     Dust shall be minimized to the extent practicable, utilizing all measures necessary, including, but not limited to:

     a.     Sprinkling haul and access roads and other exposed dust producing areas with water.

     b.     Establishing temporary vegetative cover.

     c.     Placing wood chips or other effective mulches on vehicle and pedestrian use areas.

     d.     Maintaining the proper moisture condition on all fill surfaces.

     e.     Pre-wetting cut and borrow area surfaces.

     f.      Use of covered haul equipment. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

Article III. Nuisances Affecting the Public Peace
8.08.300 Radio and television interference.
     A.    No person may operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception; provided, that the radio or television receiver interfered with is of good engineering design.

     B.     This section does not apply to electrical and radio devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.310 Unnecessary noise.
     A.    No person may make, assist in making, continue or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety or peace of others.

     B.     Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     The keeping of any bird or animal which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity;

     2.     The attaching of a bell to an animal or allowing a bell to remain on an animal;

     3.     The use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorized vehicle, whether or not designated for use on public roads at any time or under any conditions of grade, load, acceleration, deceleration, movement, at rest, whether or not in repair or operated in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, motor winding, squealing, screeching, or other tire noise or any other unnecessary noise;

     4.     The sounding of a horn or signaling device on a vehicle on a street, public place or private place, except as a necessary warning of danger;

     5.     The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam, or otherwise, unless the noise thereby created is effectively muffled;

     6.     Any excavation or the construction, erection, repair, alteration or demolition of a building or structure other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. However, site clearing, earth moving, installation or construction of underground utilities, paving of streets and sidewalks, foundation framing and pouring, and structure framing shall be entirely prohibited on Sundays. Exceptions may be granted by the city manager in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of the public welfare and safety, by permit for a period not to exceed ten (10) days. Such permit may be renewed for periods of five days while such emergency continues to exist. Exceptions may also be granted by the city council, by application before or during the progress of the work, upon a determination by the council that the public health, safety and welfare will not be impaired and that loss or inconvenience would result to any person unless such exception were granted.

     7.     The use of a gong or siren upon a vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle;

     8.     The creation of excessive noise on a street adjacent to a school, institution of learning, church or court of justice, while the same are in use, or on a street adjacent to a hospital, nursing home or other institution for the care of the sick or infirm, which unreasonably interferes with the operation of such institution or disturbs or unduly annoys patients;

     9.     The discharge in the open air of the exhaust of a steam engine, internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises and the emission of annoying smoke;

     10.   The use or operation of an automatic or electric piano, phonograph, radio, television, loudspeaker, or any instrument for sound producing or any sound-amplifying device so loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof or in such a manner as renders the use thereof a nuisance. However, upon application to the council, permits may be granted to responsible persons or organizations for the broadcast or amplification of programs of music, news, speeches or general entertainment as a part of a national, state or city event, public festivals, or outstanding events of a noncommercial nature. The broadcast or amplification shall not be audible for a distance of more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the instrument, speaker or amplifier, and in no event shall a permit be granted where any obstruction to the free and uninterrupted traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, will result;

     11.   The making of a noise by mechanical, electric or electronic device for the purpose of advertising goods, wares or merchandise or attracting patronage of inviting patronage of a person to a business is allowed on public rights-of-way when:

     a.     The seller possesses a valid city business license;

     b.     The seller is operating within the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.;

     c.     The seller is operating on residential streets in such a fashion as to not place persons at risk of injury when responding to his or her vehicle.

     d.     The sound produced by the device must not duplicate or otherwise simulate any vehicle-warning device such as a horn, alarm or back-up alarm. The sound level must be regulated such that it does not become a nuisance to the community.

     12.   The conducting, operating or maintaining of a garage within one hundred (100) feet of a private residence, apartment, rooming house or hotel, in such manner as to cause loud or disturbing noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 321 § 1, 2005; Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.320 Notices and advertisements.
     A.    No person may affix or cause to be distributed any placard, bill, advertisement or poster upon real or personal property, public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in control of the property. This section shall not be construed as amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the use of and the location of signs and advertising.

     B.     No persons, whether as principal or agent, may scatter or distribute on public or private property any placards or advertisements or other similar material. This section does not prohibit the distribution of advertising material during a parade or approved public gathering. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.330 Graffiti.
     Any wall or exposed surface marked with graffiti as defined herein shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner of real or personal property marked with graffiti shall completely remove or permanently cover any and all graffiti placed on such real or personal property within seven days of the date the graffiti was placed upon the property. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.340 Blasting—Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person, company, or corporation to explode or cause to be exploded any explosive used or intended to be used for the purpose of blasting out rock, gravel, earth or other substance within the corporate limits of the city without having first received a permit from the city manager not less than three business days prior to the first use of the explosives. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

Article IV. Abatement Procedure
8.08.400 Infractions—Public nuisance declaration—Abatement.
     A.    The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in Sections 8.08.100 through 8.08.340 are declared to be public nuisances, and such acts, conditions or objects as a public nuisance may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in Section 8.08.420 through Section 8.08.480 of this chapter.

     B.     All violations of the Community Development Code and all violations of any order or condition of approval issued pursuant to the Community Development Code are declared to be public nuisances and may be abated as provided in Sections 8.08.410 to 8.08.480. All unresolved violations of the provisions specified in this chapter are deemed to be current and ongoing nuisances. A violation that involves a physical change to property is considered resolved only when the property is restored to its previous condition.

     C.     In addition to the nuisances listed in this chapter, all activities or man-made conditions on a property that have an unreasonable adverse effect on other properties may be declared a nuisance by the city council and abated as provided in this chapter. A declaration of a nuisance under this subsection shall be supported by findings relating to the nature of the nuisance, the effect on other properties, whether permits were necessary and were obtained, and the effect on the natural environment.

     D.    In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within this chapter, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the city council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.410 Notice—Posting and mailing—Contents.
     A.    Upon determination by the city manager that a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, a notice shall be posted on the premises where the nuisance exists, declaring and describing the nuisance, providing information regarding protest rights, and informing whether an opportunity to abate will be provided. The persons responsible for the nuisance include the owners of the property, any person in charge of the property, and any person who created the nuisance whether or not the person had the approval of the owner or person in charge of the property. A person who purchases real property from a person responsible for the nuisance shall also be considered a person responsible for the nuisance if:

     1.     The nuisance was in whole or in part on the property;

     2.     The nuisance was created to benefit the property being purchased; or

     3.     The new owner purchased with actual or implied knowledge that the seller was responsible for the nuisance.

     B.     At the time of posting, the city manager shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the owner, the person in charge of the property, any person with an ownership or security interest in the property, and any other person responsible for the nuisance at the last known address of the owner or other person. The city manager may cause a copy of the notice to be recorded with the county recorder in the property records of any real property owned by all persons responsible for the nuisance. Any person purchasing property for which a notice has been recorded shall be deemed to have knowledge that the seller was responsible for the nuisance. In determining in which property records, if any, the notice should be filed, the city manager shall consider the city’s needs to adequately secure any lien that may be filed if the city abates the nuisance.

     C.     The notice declaring the nuisance shall contain:

     1.     A description of the real property by street address or otherwise, on which such nuisance exists;

     2.     A description of the nuisance;

     3.     A statement that the owner, other person in charge of the property or other person responsible for the nuisance may protest the abatement by giving notice to the city manager within ten (10) days from the date of the notice;

     4.     A direction to the persons responsible for the nuisance to abate the nuisance within ten (10) days from the date of the notice; and

     5.     A statement that unless such nuisance is removed to the satisfaction of the city, the city may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the property and against property of any person responsible for the nuisance;

     D.    In the event that the city manager determines that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate the nuisance; the notice shall not include the statements required by subsections (C)(4) and (5) and shall instead include a statement that the city manager has determined that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate the nuisance and a statement that unless a protest is filed within ten (10) days from the date of the notice, the city shall abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the property and against property of any person responsible for the nuisance.

     E.     The notice may also contain conditions relating to the abatement, including conditions that the work be performed by qualified persons, conditions disqualifying certain individuals from performing the work, conditions that necessary permits be obtained, or other conditions intended to ensure that the nuisance will be properly abated.

     F.     Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing the notice shall execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of such mailing and posting.

     G.    An error in the name or address of any person entitled to notice shall not make the notice void and in such a case the posted notice shall be sufficient.

     H.    The city manager may determine that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate only if the city manager finds that the person responsible for the nuisance is unlikely to properly abate the nuisance. The determination that a person is unlikely to properly abate the nuisance shall be based on findings as to one of the following:

     1.     Whether the person acted intentionally and whether the nuisance is egregious; or

     2.     Whether the person had knowledge that the action was a violation of state law, or city code; or

     3.     Whether the person has the professional expertise to perform the abatement. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.420 Abatement—By owner or other person responsible for the nuisance.
     A.    Unless the city manager has determined that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate the nuisance, within ten (10) days after the posting and mailing of the notice as provided in Section 8.08.410, the owner, person in charge of the property or other person deemed by the city to be responsible for the nuisance shall remove the nuisance in accordance with the notice or show that no nuisance exists. Any person removing the nuisance shall notify the city before removing the notice and shall allow the city to inspect during and on completion of the removal. The notification shall state how the nuisance will be removed, when it will be removed, and who will be performing the removal.

     B.     A person protesting that no nuisance exists shall file with the city manager a written statement specifying the basis for the protest within ten (10) days of the posting of the notice.

     C.     The statement shall be referred to the city council as a part of its regular agenda at the council’s next regularly scheduled meeting. If the protest is received less than four days before the next regularly scheduled meeting, the city manager may schedule the protest to be heard at a subsequent council meeting. At the time set for consideration of the protest, the person protesting the notice of nuisance may appear and be heard by the council, and the council shall thereupon determine whether or not a nuisance in fact exists and whether a person other than the property owner is responsible for the nuisance. Such determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the council. The council may impose conditions relating to the abatement, including conditions that the work be performed by qualified persons, conditions disqualifying certain individuals from performing the work, conditions that necessary permits be obtained, or other conditions intended to ensure that the nuisance will be properly abated.

     D.    Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement of protest has been filed.

     E.     If the council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the person responsible for the nuisance shall, within ten (10) days after such council determination, abate such nuisance, unless the council determines that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate or unless the council decision allows a period of time greater than ten (10) days. The council may determine that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate only if the council finds that the person responsible for the nuisance is unlikely to properly abate the nuisance. The determination that a person is unlikely to properly abate the nuisance shall be based on findings as to one of the following:

     1.     Whether the person acted intentionally and whether the nuisance is egregious; or

     2.     Whether the person had knowledge that the action was a violation of state law or city code; or

     3.     Whether the person has the professional expertise to perform the abatement.

     F.     If no protest is filed with the city manager within the time allowed, a nuisance shall be deemed to exist and the city may proceed to abate said nuisance and collect the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance by the methods set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.430 Abatement—By city.
     A.    If the nuisance has not been abated within the time allowed or if it is determined that the persons responsible for the nuisance should not be afforded the opportunity to abate, the city manager may cause the nuisance to be abated.

     B.     The city officer charged with abatement of such nuisance shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance. However, before entering upon private property, the city officer shall obtain the consent of an occupant or a warrant of the municipal court authorizing entry for the purpose of inspection or removal, except when an emergency exists.

     C.     No warrant shall be issued under this chapter until an affidavit has been filed with the municipal court, showing probable cause for entry into or upon private property, by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed entry, citing appropriate chapter sections as the basis for the entry into or upon private property, and setting forth relevant facts to support the issuance of the warrant to enter, inspect and abate.

     D.    No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent a city officer from entering upon private premises and inspecting or removing any nuisance when an emergency exists or the city officer exhibits a warrant authorizing entry.

     E.     The city recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in declaring and abating the nuisance and shall include therein a charge of twenty (20) percent of the expense for administrative overhead. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.440 Abatement—Assessment of costs.
     A.    The city recorder by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to all persons responsible for the nuisance, a notice stating:

     1.     The total cost of declaring and abating the nuisance, including administrative overhead;

     2.     That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against property of persons responsible for the nuisance unless paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice;

     3.     That any person responsible for the costs may file a notice of objection to the costs with the city manager not more than ten (10) days from the date of the notice.

     B.     Upon the expiration of ten (10) days after the date of the notice, the city council in the regular course of business shall hear and determine the costs to be assessed. If no objections are received, the council shall adopt the city recorder’s statement of costs.

     C.     If the costs are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs as stated or as determined by the city council shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens and, upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated. The city council may, as part of its determination of the costs, order that the costs shall not become a lien on certain property if it finds that the property and the property owner should not be responsible for payment of the abatement costs.

     D.    The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year. Such interest shall commence to run from date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

     E.     An error in the name of any person to whom notice is sent shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.450 Summary abatement.
     The procedures provided by this chapter is not exclusive but is in addition to procedures provided by any other ordinance(s) and appropriate officers of the city or other governmental bodies may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which poses an imminent threat or danger to human or animal life or property. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.460 Remedies cumulative.
     The remedies and procedures for nuisances provided in this chapter are in addition to all other remedies and procedures provided by law. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or restrict in any way the city’s right to obtain any other remedy allowed it under law. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.470 Separate violations.
     The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this chapter but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.480 Judicial review.
     Judicial review of the decision of the city council declaring a nuisance shall be on the record by writ of review pursuant to ORS Chapter 34 and not otherwise. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

Article V. Chronic Nuisance
8.08.500 Adoption of “chronic nuisance” ordinance.
     The provisions of Clackamas County Code Chapter 6.08 (2002) commonly known as “chronic nuisances” is hereby adopted and made a part hereof by this reference. (Ord. 268 § 1, 2003)

 

8.08.600 Properties declared “unfit for use” due to illegal manufacturing contamination.
     A.    Property placed on the Oregon Health Division “unfit for use list” pursuant to ORS 453.879 because it has been used for the manufacture of illegal drugs shall be considered a nuisance ninety (90) days after it has been listed and shall remain a nuisance until such time as it is issued a “Certificate of Fitness” by the Oregon Health Division, and no responsible person shall cause or permit such conditions to exist.

     B.     A failure to comply with this section shall be cause for a responsible person to be subject to the enforcement procedures set forth in Chapter 1 of this Municipal Code, Penalty Provisions.

     C.     The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated in this section are declared to be public nuisances, and such acts, conditions or objects as a public nuisance may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in Sections 8.08.420 through 8.08.480 of this chapter. (Ord. 304 § 1, 2005)

 

8.08.700 Fireworks prohibited—Civil penalty.
     A.    Unless otherwise permitted by the terms of ORS 480.120 through ORS 480.124 (2008), it is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, possess, use, explode or have exploded any fireworks.

     B.     As used in subsection A of this section, the term “fireworks” shall mean as defined in ORS 480.110 (2008).

     C.     Any person found to have violated the prohibitions set out in subsection A, is subject to a civil penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, in the discretion of the municipal court. (Ord. 380 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.12 ALARM SYSTEMS REGULATIONS AND FEES
8.12.010 Purpose.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations applicable to alarm systems, including those systems utilizing automatic dialing devices, and to encourage alarm users to assume increased responsibility for maintaining the reliability and proper use of alarm systems to prevent unnecessary false alarms and thereby protect the emergency response capability of Happy Valley from misuse.

     B.     This chapter governs alarm systems, requires permits and fees, provides for allocation of revenues and deficits, provides for penalty assessments for excessive false alarms, provides for penalty assessments for delinquent accounts, provides for discontinuation of police response to alarms, provides for punishment of violators and establishes a system of administration. (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.020 Definitions.
     “Alarm business” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization which sells, leases or furnishes alarm systems for use in the city or which services alarm systems in the city.

     “Alarm permit” means the official document that is issued by the city and that is required to be on site and visible at an alarm location.

     “Alarm system” means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an unauthorized entry or activity requiring the urgent attention or emergency response by public resources to the presence of fire, smoke, or unauthorized or illegal activity.

     “Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, which owns, occupies or controls any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is operated for its intended use.

     “Automatic dialing device” means a device, which is interconnected to a telephone line, programmed to engage a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal a message indicating a need for emergency response. Such a device is an alarm system.

     “False alarm” means an alarm system signal to which public resources immediately respond with any personnel and/or equipment when a situation requiring such a response does not, in fact, exist, and which signal is caused by the inadvertence, negligence, intentional act or omission of any alarm user, or a malfunction of the alarm system.

     The following shall not be considered a false alarm:

     1.     Alarms caused by the testing, repair or malfunction of telephone or electrical equipment or lines not under the direct control of the alarm user if the malfunction is verified in writing within thirty (30) days of the occurrence by a knowledgeable representative of the utility or other line provider involved;

     2.     Alarms caused by an act of God, including earthquake, flood, and windstorm, thunder or lightning.

     “No response” means that emergency services personnel will not be dispatched to investigate a report of an alarm signal.

     “Public works director” means the public works director or an individual designated by the public works director to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

     “Revoked alarm permit” means a special alarm permit that may be issued by the city to an alarm user who has had excessive alarm activations within a permit period. (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.030 Operating instructions and service.
     A.    Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing an alarm system to any user and having the alarm system installed in the city, shall furnish that user with instructions that provide adequate information to enable persons using such a system to operate it properly and, if the alarm system is to be serviced or maintained by another alarm business, shall furnish that alarm business with a manual or other information necessary to enable it to service or properly maintain the alarm system.

     B.     Standard instructions shall be submitted by every alarm business to the city and if the city finds such information to be incomplete or unclear or inadequate to explain how the alarm system operates and is constructed, the city may require the alarm business to revise the information to meet the approval of the city and then to distribute the revised information to persons who have had such systems installed in their premises as well as to persons subsequently having such devices installed.

     C.     Each alarm business selling or leasing to any person or business, an alarm system which is installed on such person’s premises or business in the city, shall provide or make available at all times service to repair such device should it malfunction and shall furnish to the person buying or leasing such device written information concerning how service may be obtained at any time, including the phone number to call for service.

     D.    Each alarm business selling or leasing to any person an alarm system which is installed on such person’s premises or business in the city shall initiate activities of the alarm system only after the alarmed premises obtains a city alarm permit. (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.040 Permits and associated assessments.
     A.    Every alarm user shall obtain a city alarm permit for each system prior to use of an alarm system. Each permit shall be valid for a period of two years from date of issue of the permit. The alarm permit shall be physically displayed in a location upon the alarmed premises that is clearly visible for inspection purposes.

     B.     The fee and penalty assessment shall be as established by city council resolution.

     C.     If a residential alarm user is over the age of sixty-five (65) and is the primary resident of the residence and, if no business is conducted in the residence, an alarm permit shall be obtained without paying a permit fee.

     D.    A penalty assessment will be charged in addition to the alarm permit fee to a user who fails to renew a permit within thirty (30) days after the permit expires.

     E.     A penalty assessment will be charged to a user who fails to pay a false alarm activation assessment if the fines have not been received at the city within thirty (30) days of the day of “Notice of Penalty Assessment” was mailed via certified mail.

     F.     An alarm user, which is a governmental unit, shall be subject to this chapter, but a permit shall be issued without payment of a fee.

     G.    A revoked user permit application may be obtained by filing an application with the city and paying any or all penalty assessments.

     1.     Each revoked user’s permit shall bear the expiration date. The permit shall be physically displayed upon the premises and shall be visible for inspection. (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.050 False alarm assessments.
     A.    Governmental units shall not be subject to revocation due to false alarms, but shall be required to pay penalty assessments for such false alarms.

     B.     All other alarm permit users shall be subject to penalty assessments for any false alarm activations that occur after the first three emergency services responses to false alarms within a permit period. This period shall commence from the date of the first false alarm incurred by the alarm system user and continue for a twenty-four (24) month period thereafter. The city will send a “Notification of False Alarm” letter by regular mail to notify the alarm user of false alarm activation and to advise the user of the consequences of future false alarms. The city will also inform the alarm user of the right to appeal the validity of the false alarm to the public works director.

     C.     The penalty assessment for false alarm activations in excess of three within a permit period shall be established by city council resolution.

     D.    Any false alarm activations in excess of three in a permit period may subject the holder of the alarm permit to permit revocation and may necessitate further penalty assessments as established by city council resolution. This period shall commence from the date of the first false alarm incurred by the alarm system and shall continue for a twenty-four (24) month period thereafter.

     E.     If penalty assessments have not been received by the city within thirty (30) days of date the “Notice of Penalty Assessment” was mailed and there is no appeal pending on the validity of the false alarm, a second “Notice of Penalty Assessment” indicating the amount owed shall be sent via certified mail, along with a “Notice of Late Fine” assessment. If penalty assessments have not been received within ten (10) working days of the date the “Notice of Penalty Assessment” was mailed, the city shall initiate the “No Response Due to Outstanding Assessment.”

     F.     The payment of any penalty assessments provided for in this section shall not be deemed to extend the term of the permit. (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.060 False alarm permit revocation.
     Any alarm system, which has more than three false alarm activations within the permit period, shall be subject to permit revocation as provided in this section:

     A.    The city shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business providing the alarm service by certified mail that more than three false alarm activations have been received at an alarmed location within the alarm permit period. The city will direct that the alarm user submit a report describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of false alarm activations. This report shall be submitted to the public works director within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice.

     B.     If the alarm user submits the report as directed, the public works director shall determine if the actions taken or to be taken are likely to prevent the occurrences of false alarm activations. If the public works director determines that the action will likely prevent the occurrence of false activations, the alarm user and the alarm business shall be notified in writing that the permit will not be revoked at that time; but if one more false alarm activation occurs within the permit period, the permit will be summarily revoked without further action.

     C.     If no report is submitted, or if the city determines that the actions taken or to be taken are not likely to prevent the occurrence of false alarm activations, the coordinator shall send the “Revoked Alarm Permit” notice by certified mail to the alarm user and the alarm business providing the alarm service that the permit will be revoked and that emergency services personnel will not respond to the alarm activations at the alarmed premises beginning at the tenth day after the date of the revoked alarm permit notice. (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.070 No response due to outstanding assessments.
     A.    If fees or penalty assessments have not been received in city hall within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of penalty assessment was mailed, the city shall send a “Notice of Suspension of Emergency Services” via certified mail indicating that response by emergency services shall be suspended at the alarmed premises due to delinquent fines or fees. The certified letter shall be sent to the alarm user, the alarm business providing service to the alarm user and the city’s emergency response personnel.

     B.     The suspension of emergency services to alarm activations shall begin ten (10) days after the delivery date of “Notice of Suspension of Emergency Services” unless the alarm user pays all delinquent fines or fees in full. (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.080 Confidentiality.
     All information submitted in compliance with this chapter shall be held in strictest confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt from disclosure pursuant to ORS 192.502(3). (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.090 Allocation of revenues and expenses.
     All fees and penalty assessments collected pursuant to this chapter shall be allotted to public safety in the city. (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

8.12.100 Violation—Penalties.
     Violation of this chapter may be deemed a civil infraction and punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 209, 2001)

 

Alarm Fee Schedule

 

 

Permit Period:

2 years

Permit Fees:

$20 Residential (over age 65 fee waived)

$40 Commercial

$25 Late fee (if renewal 30 days late)

 

False Alarm Fees (clock starts from date of first false alarm and goes for the two year permit period:

 

 

False Alarms

Fee

1-3

free

4th

$40.00

5th

$100.00

6th

$180.00

 

Violations of alarm ordinance subject to fine of $500.00 due in Municipal Court.

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 EXCLUSIONARY (TRESPASS) POLICY ADOPTION
Chapter 9.06 CHRONIC NUISANCES
Chapter 9.08 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
Chapter 9.10 MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC SAFETY PROVISIONS

Chapter 9.04 EXCLUSIONARY (TRESPASS) POLICY ADOPTION
9.04.010 Exclusion.
     A.    Any person engaging in conduct as identified in subsection C or which conduct is in violation of any rule of conduct adopted by the city council relative to the use of a city facility, unless this code specifically provides differently elsewhere, is subject to exclusion from a city facility for periods of up to sixty (60) consecutive days.

     B.     As used in subsection A, “city facility” constitutes any improved or unimproved real property (including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parks and buildings) owned, controlled or maintained by the city and designated a “city facility” by the council via separate resolution.

     C.     The following conduct subjects a person to exclusion from a city facility:

     1.     Assault in any degree as defined by state law;

     2.     Criminal mischief, disorderly conduct and/or harassment (including aggravated harassment) as defined in state law;

     3.     Any graffiti-related offense as defined in state law;

     4.     Criminal trespass in the second degree as defined by state law;

     5.     Unlawful possession or delivery of a controlled substance as defined by state law;

     6.     Unlawful possession of firearms and the unlawful use of weapons as defined by state law;

     7.     Prostitution (including its promotion and compulsion) and patronizing a prostitute as defined by state law;

     8.     Harassment (including aggravated harassment) as defined by state law; and

     9.     Any rule of conduct adopted by the city council relative to the use of a city facility. (Ord. 486 § 1, 2016)

 

9.04.015 Authority to issue notice of exclusion—Contents of notice.
     A.    The director of community services and/or police chief (and such city staff as may be designated in writing by either of the person holding those positions) are authorized to issue exclusion notices to individuals for conduct identified in Section 9.04.010(C). In addition, the police chief has the ability to authorize law enforcement personnel other than those assigned to enforce the terms of this chapter.

     B.     The exclusion notice shall:

     1.     Succinctly describe the nature of the conduct giving rise to the exclusion;

     2.     Cite the appropriate provision of state law or city rule the conduct violates;

     3.     Indicate the duration of the exclusion; and

     4.     Indicate the date the exclusion commences.

     The notice shall also describe the right to appeal provided in Section 9.04.020. (Ord. 486 § 1, 2016)

 

9.04.020 Right to appeal.
     A.    The individual to whom an exclusion notice is issued has the right to appeal issuance of the exclusion notice. To be effective, the appeal shall be in writing and filed within five calendar days of the notice’s issuance. It shall be filed with the city recorder and contain the following information:

     1.     The appellant’s name;

     2.     The appellant’s address and a telephone number where he or she can be reached;

     3.     A concise statement as to why issuance of the exclusion notice was in error; and

     4.     Attach a copy of the notice of exclusion.

     B.     A hearing shall be held before the city manager or designee no more than ten (10) calendar days after the filing of the appeal except in the event the city manager or designee determines otherwise.

     C.     The city has the burden to show by a preponderance of evidence that the exclusion is based on conduct described in Section 9.04.010(C).

     D.    In the event no appeal is properly and timely filed, the exclusion shall continue for the period set out in the notice but shall not exceed sixty (60) consecutive days. In the event a person found in or on the property from which they were validly excluded, that person shall be subject to arrest for criminal trespass. (Ord. 486 § 1, 2016)

 

9.04.025 Variances.
     Variances from the exclusion may be granted at any time during the exclusion period by the community services director or police chief in the event the individual subject to the exclusion has a reason deemed acceptable either by the community services director or police chief for being on or in the city facility. The police chief or city manager may also limit access to the city facility to a specific time period and location. (Ord. 486 § 1, 2016)

 

9.04.030 Civil trespass.
     A.    For purposes of this section, the definitions found at ORS 164.205 (2016) are adopted and incorporated by reference.

     B.     A person commits civil trespasses if the person enters or remains unlawfully in or upon premises.

     C.     A person found to have violated subsection B above is subject to imposition of a civil penalty in an amount deemed by the court to be appropriate as provided for in Section 1.12.010.

     D.    The civil penalty provided for in subsection C above may be imposed in addition to such other remedy(ies) as the court in the exercise of its reasonable discretion believes appropriate. (Ord. 510 § 1, 2016)

 

9.04.040 Exclusion from library/loss of library privileges.
     A.    A person found engaging in any of the following while on city library property may be either excluded therefrom or have their library privileges suspended for up to ninety (90) days:

     1.     Sleeping. Sleeping using bedding, sleeping bag or other sleeping matter in the library unless such use has been approved in advance by the library director.

     2.     Unrelated Activities. Use of library facilities and/or equipment for activities unrelated to the purposes of the library, i.e., to foster an orderly and lawful atmosphere conducive to every patron’s exercise of their constitutionally protected interest in receiving and reading written communications.

     3.     Excessive Noise. Loud or excessive noise or use of amplified recording or sound production equipment, such that the sound can be heard five feet from the device unless such use has been approved in advance by the library director.

     4.     Children Required in School. Violating a statute or local regulation requiring children between the ages of seven and eighteen (18) years to attend a public full-time school unless the child is otherwise lawfully exempt from compulsory school attendance.

     5.     Disruptive Behavior. Disruptive behavior including, but is not limited to, the following:

     a.     Any activity made a crime under either Oregon or federal law;

     b.     Damaging library materials or equipment;

     c.     Smoking or using any electronic device creating a vapor (i.e., vaping);

     d.     Drinking alcoholic beverages;

     e.     Littering;

     f.      Running;

     g.     Harassing patrons and/or staff; or

     h.     Creating a public disturbance.

     6.     Interference with Use or Duties. Interfering with use of the library by other persons or interference with library employees’ performance of their duties.

     7.     Appropriate Clothing. Not wearing a shirt or other covering for their upper bodies, pants or other covering for their lower bodies or not wearing shoes or other suitable footwear.

     8.     Hygiene. Persons whose bodily hygiene is offensive so as to constitute a nuisance to other persons.

     9.     Weapons. Persons bringing a weapon into the library unless authorized under ORS 166.370.

     10.   Animals. Allowing a non-service animal not pre-approved by library staff into the library. A service dog annoying, molesting, barking continuously, attacking or injuring any person or animal on city library property or which is tied up and left unattended will no longer be deemed a service dog and not be permitted to remain on the city library property.

     Under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a “service animal” is defined as an individually trained dog to work or perform tasks for people with disabilities which work or task(s) must directly relate to the person’s disability. Service animals which solely provide comfort or emotional support do not qualify as “service animals” under the ADA.

 

     11.   Concessions and Solicitations. Persons engaging in any of the following on city library property:

     a.     Operating a concession (either fixed or mobile) without having obtained a permit or contract from the city;

     b.     Soliciting, selling or offering for sale, peddling, hawking or vending goods or services without having first obtained a permit or contract from the city; or

     c.     Advertising goods or services except as may be displayed on personal or commercial vehicles incidentally parked on city library property without having first obtained a permit from the city.

     B.     As used in subsection A above, the term “library privileges” is the ability to obtain and/or use printed materials, pictures, sound recordings or information kept in any form within the city library.

     C. 1. A person is subject to exclusion from the library of periods of a day or more by the library director or authorized designee if the person engages in any of the conduct listed in subsection A above.

     2.     In addition to exclusion, a person is subject to the loss of library privileges for conduct or activity described in subsections (A)(5)(a) and (b).

     3.     A person is subject to immediate exclusion from the library for a day or less if they engage in conduct described in subsection A which conduct is, in the library director’s or authorized designee’s discretion, correctable thereby. In such event, no warning notice or right of appeal to the city manager exist.

     D.    A person may obtain a permit to engage in concessions or solicitations, as referenced above in subsection (A)(11) by submitting a completed application to the office of the city manager. The city manager (or designee) will use a range of content-neutral factors to determine whether to issue a permit giving due consideration to the city library’s purpose as a place having an orderly atmosphere for receipt, reading and contemplation of written communication and materials. If a permit application is denied, the applicant may seek judicial review thereof by way of a writ of review (ORS 34.010 to 34.102) and not otherwise. Copies of all non-privileged/non-exempt documents used by the city manager in reaching his or her decision on the permit shall be available for the record and public inspection. (Ord. 514 § 1, 2017)

 

9.04.050 Persons authorized to issue exclusion or warning notices or eject individuals from property.
     The library director, director of public safety and/or police chief (and such city staff as may be designated in writing by either of the person holding those positions) are designated as the person-in-charge for purposes of excluding individuals and issuing exclusion or warning notices consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 514 § 1, 2017)

 

9.04.060 Issuance of warning or exclusion notices.
     A.    Warning Notice. Other than as described in Section 9.04.040(C)(3), if an individual engages in activity or conduct described in Section 9.04.040(A), the library director, director of public safety, police chief or designee may issue a written warning notice which notice shall specify that in the event a second notice is issued to the individual within a ninety (90) day period, that individual is subject to exclusion from the library and/or the loss of such library privileges as deemed appropriate for periods of up to ninety (90) days. The warning notice shall include information concerning the right to appeal said notice to the city manager.

     B.     Exclusion Notice.

     1.     The library director, director of public safety and/or police chief, or designee may issue an exclusion notice to an individual engaging in conduct described in Section 9.04.040(A).

     2.     The notice shall specify the individual to be excluded, the length of the exclusion period, the time for commencement thereof as well as information concerning the right to appeal said exclusion to the city manager. (Ord. 514 § 1, 2017)

 

9.04.070 Right to appeal.
     A.    An individual excluded or to whom a warning or exclusion notice is issued shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city manager.

     B.     An appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager within five business days of the notice’s issuance. The notice of appeal shall state the following:

     1.     The appellant’s name;

     2.     The appellant’s address and a telephone number where he or she can be reached;

     3.     A concise statement as to why the exclusion or issuance of the notice was in error; and

     4.     Attach a copy of the notice or letter of denial.

     C.     A hearing shall be held no more than thirty (30) calendar days after the filing of the appeal except in the event the city manager determines otherwise. The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for the appellant to present and rebut evidence that the warning, exclusion, or permit denial is invalid or otherwise unjustified. The decision of the city manager is final and shall be in writing. The written decision of the city manager may be appealed, if at all, by way of writ of review (ORS 34.010 to 34.102) and not otherwise.

     D.    The warning or exclusion shall remain in effect during the pendency of the appeal.

     E.     The city has the burden to show by a preponderance of evidence that the warning or exclusion is based on conduct described in Section 9.04.040.

     F.     Copies of any and all city documents used by the city at the hearing shall be made available to the appellant upon request. (Ord. 514 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 9.06 CHRONIC NUISANCES
9.06.010 Chronic nuisance property—Violations.
     A.    Any property within Happy Valley that becomes a chronic nuisance property (as the same is defined herein) is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.

     B.     Any person who permits property under his or her ownership or control in Happy Valley to be a chronic nuisance property (as the same is defined herein) shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.015 Definitions.
     A.    “Abatement” means affirmative action to remove, to stop, to prevent a nuisance including, but not limited to, any or all of the following:

     1.     Restricting or limiting use of the property, including posting the property with signs indicating such restrictions;

     2.     Limiting the hours of operation of a business;

     3.     Closing the property for not less than six months or more than one year;

     4.     Entering premises for purposes of removing, compelling the removal or destruction of the structure, thing, substance, condition or property constituting a nuisance; or

     5.     Filing a civil complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction.

     B.     “City council or council” means the Happy Valley city council.

     C.     Chronic Nuisance Property.

     1.     Property on which three or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any sixty (60) day period or on which twelve (12) or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any twelve (12) month period; or

     2.     Property within two hundred (200) feet of which three or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any sixty (60) day period or twelve (12) or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any twelve (12) month period, and the nuisance activities were engaged in by any person associated with the property.

     D.    “Control” means the authority to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property, or conduct that occurs on a property.

     E.     “Good cause” means circumstances beyond the ability of a person acting with reasonable care and diligence to control.

     F.     “Nuisance activities” means any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct which are either personally observed by a sheriff or which, although not personally observed by a sheriff, are reasonably believed by the sheriff to have occurred:

     1.     Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a);

     2.     Intimidation as defined in ORS 166.155 through 166.165;

     3.     Disorderly conduct as defined in ORS 166.025;

 

     4.     Rape, sodomy, unlawful sexual penetration, sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor or sexual misconduct as defined in ORS 163.160 through 163.445;

     5.     Public indecency as defined in ORS 163.465;

     6.     Endangering the welfare of a minor as defined in ORS 163.575;

     7.     Prostitution or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.007 through 167.017;

     8.     Alcoholic liquor violations as defined in ORS 471.105 through 471.482;

     9.     Criminal trespass as defined in ORS 164.243 through 164.265;

     10.   Theft or related offenses as defined in ORS 164.015 through 164.140, where the act or acts have negatively affected the surrounding neighborhood or caused a burden on the resources of the city;

     11.   Arson or related offenses as defined in ORS 164.315 through 164.335;

     12.   Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.222, ORS 167.262 and ORS 475.991 through 475.999, except acts which constitute violations under ORS 475.992(2)(b) and (4)(f);

     13.   Criminal mischief as defined in ORS 164.345 through 164.365;

     14.   Weapons related offenses as defined in ORS 166.180, ORS 166.190, ORS 166.220, ORS 166.384 through 166.410, and ORS 166.630;

     15.   Robbery as defined in ORS 164.395 through 164.415;

     16.   Kidnapping as defined in ORS 163.225 through 163.235; or

     17.   Criminal mistreatment as defined in ORS 163.200 through 163.206.

     G.    “Permit” means to suffer, allow, consent to, or acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.

     H.    “Person” means any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity capable of owning, occupying or using property.

     I.      “Person in charge” means any person with actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to an owner or occupant of property under his or her ownership or control.

     J.      “Property” means any real property (including improvements and fixtures located thereon) including but not limited to buildings, structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping or any separate unit or portion thereof or any business equipment whether or not permanent. For property consisting of more than one unit, property may be limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any nuisance activity has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used in common by all unit(s) of property including without limitation other structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading and landscaping.

     K.    “Sheriff” means Clackamas County sheriff including deputies. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.020 Procedure.
     A.    When the sheriff receives information documenting the existence of activities which qualify as nuisance activities:

     1.     The sheriff shall independently review such report(s) to determine whether a chronic nuisance property as defined above is established by the information.

     2.     In the event the sheriff determines that chronic nuisance property is established, the sheriff shall notify a person in charge in writing that the property has been so determined and request they provide him/her with an abatement plan.

     B.     The notice shall contain the following information:

     1.     The street address or a legal description sufficient to identify the property.

     2.     A statement that the sheriff has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of nuisance activities leading to this determination.

     3.     A request that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to the sheriff either by:

     (i)     Describing the actions the person in charge intends to take to abate the nuisance activities (Abatement Plan); or

     (ii)    Indicating good cause as to why the person in charge cannot abate the nuisance activities; or

     (iii) Contesting the determination of the sheriff to the city council.

     4.     That an abatement plan must be reached with the sheriff within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of determination of chronic nuisance property.

     5.     That if the nuisance activities are not abated or good cause shown for failing to abate, the matter may be referred by the sheriff to the city council with a recommendation that the council authorize the city attorney to file an action in Clackamas County Circuit Court to abate the nuisance activities.

     6.     That permitting chronic nuisance property is a violation of this chapter.

     7.     That the above remedies are in addition to those otherwise provided by law.

     C.     Notice may be given by personal service or certified mail (return receipt requested). Notice may be delivered to the property, to the mailing address of the owner of the property as listed on the Clackamas County tax roll or to any other address likely to afford the person in charge notice of the sheriff’s determination.

     D.    The failure of any person to receive notice described in this section shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any proceedings taken under this chapter.

     E.     The sheriff may refer the matter to the city council where:

     1.     The person in charge fails to respond within ten (10) days from the date of the notice of determination of chronic nuisance property by the sheriff; or

     2.     No written abatement plan is approved within thirty (30) days from the notice of determination of chronic nuisance property by the sheriff; or

     3.     The person in charge fails to abate the nuisance activities from the property as required by the abatement plan; or

     4.     The person in charge fails to comply with all conditions of the written abatement plan for one year.

     F.     When the person in charge includes both a person with actual or constructive possession of the property and a legal owner of the property, both must agree to any proposed abatement plan. Failure of both to agree to a proposed abatement plan shall result in a finding by the sheriff that the abatement plan is not approved under Subsection (E)(2) of this section.

     G.    The person in charge may also request a public hearing of the city council in writing no later than ten (10) days from the date of the notice of determination of chronic nuisance property by the sheriff.

     H.    Failure to respond, failure to abate nuisance activities or failure to propose an abatement plan shall be prima facie evidence of a lack of cooperativeness by the person in charge. Failure to execute or comply with any abatement plan shall be prima facie evidence of lack of good faith in mitigating or correcting the situation. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.025 City council hearing.
     A.    After receiving a referral from the sheriff or a request for a hearing from the person in charge contesting the sheriff’s determination that a chronic nuisance exists, the council shall give notice of the hearing to the person in charge and post notice of the hearing at the main entrance of the property.

     B.     At the time set for hearing, the person in charge may appear and be heard as well as other interested persons. The city council shall determine and make written findings on:

     1.     Whether the property is chronic nuisance property;

     2.     Whether the nuisance has been abated; and

     3.     Whether the owner has shown good cause or otherwise has a valid defense to the determination by the sheriff that the property is chronic nuisance property.

     C.     In the event the council determines that the property is a chronic nuisance property and makes the appropriate findings, it may then authorize the city attorney to commence legal proceedings in the Clackamas County Circuit Court seeking abatement, the imposition of civil penalties and other relief deemed appropriate. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.030 Court action.
     A.    The city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.

     B.     Evidence of a property’s general reputation and/or the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting it shall be admissible.

     C.     In the event the court determines a property to be chronic nuisance property, the city shall request that the court order the property closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than six months or more than one year. The court may require the person in charge or the city to effect the securing and closure of the property.

     D.    In addition, in the event the court determines property to be chronic nuisance property, it may impose a civil penalty either:

     1.     In an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day nuisance activities occurred on the property after the notice was given as provided in Section 9.06.020, or,

     2.     The cost to the city to abate the nuisance activities at the property, whichever is greater. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed against the person in charge and/or the property and may be included in the city’s money judgment.

     E.     In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider any of the following factors and shall cite those found applicable based on the evidence presented:

     1.     The actions taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activities at the property;

     2.     The financial condition of the person in charge;

     3.     Continuous or repeated nature of the problem;

     4.     The magnitude or gravity of the problem;

     5.     The cooperativeness of the person in charge with the city;

     6.     The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the nuisance activities;

     7.     The effect upon the surrounding neighborhood during the history of the nuisance activities;

     8.     The good faith of the person in charge in executing and complying with any abatement plan; and

     9.     Any other factor deemed relevant by the court.

     F.     The court shall retain jurisdiction over the matter during any period of closure and may modify any order or judgment during that period if the court believes that to be appropriate. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.035 Summary closure.
     Any summary closure proceeding shall be based on evidence showing that nuisance activities exist or have occurred on the property and that emergency action is necessary to avoid an imminent threat to public welfare and safety. Proceedings to obtain an order of summary closure shall be governed by the provisions of ORCP 79 for obtaining temporary restraining orders. In the event of summary closure, the city is not required to comply with the notification procedures set forth in Section 9.06.020 nor the city council hearing procedure provided by Section 9.06.025. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.040 Entering closed property.
     It is unlawful for any person to enter, use or remain in or on property that has been ordered closed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.045 City closure; relocation costs; lien.
     A.    In the event that the city is authorized to secure the property, the city shall recover all costs reasonably incurred by the city to physically secure the property. The city shall prepare and submit a statement of costs incurred in physically securing the property to the court for review as provided by ORCP 68.

     B.     The person in charge shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant as defined by ORS 90.100(28), if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after either:

     1.     A person in charge received notice of the determination of the sheriff pursuant to Section 6.08.030.A.3; or

     2.     A person in charge received notice of an action brought pursuant to Section 6.08.040 and 6.08.050.

     C.     A lien shall be created against the property for the amount of the city’s money judgment. In addition, any person who is assessed penalties under this chapter shall be personally liable for payment thereof to the city. Judgments imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at the statutory rate. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.050 Liability.
     Nothing herein shall be relied on or construed as establishing city responsibility, obligation or liability to any third party arising from the actions or inaction of the city in applying this chapter. Nothing herein lessens or otherwise alters the person in charge’s responsibility to third parties arising from use and condition of the property. (Ord. 272 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 9.08 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
9.08.010 Authority and references.
     A.    Authority. This chapter is issued in accordance with the provisions of the Oregon Civil Defense Act of 1989, Chapter 401 of the Oregon Revised Statutes, as amended, and by the resolution of the city council of Happy Valley.

     B.     References.

     1.     Civil Defense Act of 1950 (PL 81-920), as amended;

     2.     Disaster Relief Act of 1974 (PL 93-288) as amended;

     3.     Oregon Emergency Operations Plan (EOP). (Ord. 208 § 1, 2000)

 

9.08.020 Definitions of key terms.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:

     “Branch” means the organizational level having functional/geographic responsibility for major segments of incident operations. The branch level is organizationally between section and division/group.

     “Division” means the organizational level having responsibility of operations within a defined geographic area or with functional responsibility. The division level is organizationally between the team and the branch.      “Emergency Operations Center (EOC)” means the site from where local, state and federal agencies coordinate off-scene support to on-scene responders.

     “Fire Operations Center (EQQ)” means a location where fire resources for emergency response are directed.

     “Incident” means an occurrence or event that requires action by emergency service personnel to prevent or minimize loss of life or damage to property and/or natural resources.

     “Incident Command System (ICS)” means the combination of facilities, equipment, personnel, procedures and communications operating within a common organizational structure with responsibility for the management of assigned resources to effectively accomplish stated objectives pertaining to an incident. Reference: Section 2 of EOP “Manual of Incident Management.”

     “Incident Commander (IQ)” means the one individual in charge at any given time of an incident.

     “Incident Commander Post (CP)” means the location where field commands are given. The incident commander directs the on-scene response from this location.

     “On-Scene Coordinator (OSC)” means the individual on-scene responsible for coordinating the resources at each respective level of government. OSCs may include:

     1.     State On-Scene Coordinator (SOSC);

     2.     Federal On-Scene Coordinator (FOSC).

     “Public Information Officer (PIO)” means a person designated by the incident commander who provides information to the public and the media.

     “Section” means the organizational level having functional responsibility to primary segments of incident operations such as operations, planning, logistics and finance. The section level is organizationally between branch and incident commander.

     “Unified Command” means the method by which local, state and federal agencies will work with the incident commander to:

     1.     Determine roles and responsibilities for a given incident;

     2.     Determine their overall objectives for incident management;

     3.     Select a strategy to achieve agreed upon objectives;

     4.     Deploy resources to achieve agreed upon objectives. (Ord. 208 § 2, 2000)

 

9.08.030 Purpose.
     The purpose of the city emergency operations plan is to:

     A.    Establish responsibilities and operational requirements for city government during times of emergency;

     B.     Provide guidance for the emergency activities of city departments and the citizens within the city;

     C.     Minimize personal injury or property damage resulting from the occurrence of an emergency by outlining the emergency actions to be taken by city departments and other public and private agencies. (Ord. 208 § 3, 2000)

 

9.08.040 Assumptions.
     A.    General.

     1.     All areas of the city are subject to the effects of disaster.

     2.     Essential city services will be maintained as long as conditions permit.

     3.     A disaster occurrence will require prompt and effective emergency response and recovery operations by government agencies, volunteer organizations and the private sector.

     4.     Natural or man-caused emergencies may be of such magnitude and severity that county, state and federal assistance is required, however, such support will be available only after all local resources have been utilized.

     B.     Hazards. The city may be subject to the effects of natural and man-caused disasters including but not limited to:

     1.     Natural Disaster.

     a.     Weather emergencies may include floods, windstorms, drought, snow, ice, avalanche or tornado;

     b.     Geologic emergencies may include earthquake, landslide, volcanic eruption or subsidence;

     c.     Epidemiological emergencies may include industrial, structural or transportation incidents.

     2.     Man-Caused Disasters.

     a.     Fire and explosion emergencies may include industrial, structural or transportation incidents;

     b.     Transportation emergencies may include incidents involving aircraft, rail systems, watercraft or motor vehicles;

     c.     Hazardous materials emergencies may include explosives, gases, corrosives, flammable liquids and solids, oxidizers, poisons and radioactive materials involved in incidents at fixed sites or during transportation;

     d.     Civil disturbance may include terrorism, sabotage, unlawful demonstrations and riots;

     e.     Utility emergencies may include failure or disruption of electrical, telephone, water, gas, fuel oil, sewer and sanitation systems;

     f.      War related emergencies may include any overt acts of aggression on the United States, whether utilizing conventional or nuclear weapons. (Ord. 208 § 4, 2000)

 

9.08.050 Organization.
     A.    City of Happy Valley.

     1.     Under the provisions of ORS 401.305, the city shall establish an emergency management agency and appoint an emergency program manager. The city manager is designated as the emergency program manager.

     2.     City shall notify the county of the individual responsible for emergency management with the city. The city may choose not to establish an emergency management agency and may develop a cooperative work agreement with the county specifying the emergency management activities to be accomplished at each level.

     3.     If the city takes no action to maintain adequate emergency management capability, such areas will be considered in county planning, and county resources will be deployed under the direction of the county to respond should emergency conditions exist within the city.

     4.     The city manager of the city is responsible for the direction and control of local resources during emergencies.

     5.     The city manager is responsible for requesting additional resources not covered under mutual aid for emergency operations. Such requests shall be directed to the Clackamas County emergency management agency or other appropriate state or federal agencies.

     B.     County.

     1.     Under the provisions of ORS 401.305, county government is mandated to establish an emergency management agency which is directly responsible to the governing body of the county and shall appoint an emergency program manager who shall have responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of such agency. The county’s emergency management program shall be administered by the county sheriff.

     2.     Under emergency conditions, operational direction and control of the county’s emergency organization shall rest with the board of county commissioners.

     3.     All departments of the county, plus other agencies or individuals who may perform specialized emergency functions, shall be a party of the county’s emergency management activities including mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery planning.

     C.     Support Agencies.

     1.     Volunteer disaster relief organizations, private institutions and business and industry will be called upon to support the city emergency organization.

     2.     Use of private resources available to the city shall be coordinated by the city.

     D.    State Government.

     1.     Under the provisions of ORS 401, the governor has broad authority and responsibilities for the direction and control of all emergency activities in a state declared emergency.

     2.     Requests for state assistance shall be made by the city in which emergency conditions exist. Such requests shall be made to the Oregon Emergency Management Division.

     3.     State assistance may be requested whether or not a local emergency declaration has been or will be made, provided that all appropriate local resources have been utilized.

     E.     Federal Government.

     1.     Requests for federal disaster assistance shall be made by the city to the Oregon Emergency Management Division.

     2.     Federal resources may be requested whether or not a disaster has been formally declared. (Ord. 208 § 5, 2000)

 

9.08.060 Concept of operations.
     A.    General.

     1.     Emergency operations will be initiated and conducted by the city to the full extent of its resource capabilities including resources available through mutual aid agreements.

     2.     During emergency operations, the authority of the city will not be impaired or infringed upon by higher authority except in case of inability or incapacity to function or unless a request is made by the city manager that higher authority assume direction and control.

     3.     The governor shall have ultimate responsibility for the resolution of conflicts regarding the use of limited resources. In all cases, preservation of life shall take precedence over protection of property.

     B.     Types of Emergency.  Implementation of this chapter will be based on the following definitions of emergency occurrences:

     1.     Emergency. An incident which may be handled within the normal organization and procedures of the city will not require implementation of this chapter.

     2.     Special Emergency.

     a.     An incident that has special or unusual characteristics requiring resources outside the normal emergency response organization of the city may require partial implementation of this chapter;

     b.     Special emergency incidents shall be reported by the city to the Oregon Emergency Management Division under provisions of ORS 401 and the Oregon Emergency Response System (OERS).

     3.     Major Emergency.

     a.     An incident that requires the coordination response of all resources at all levels of government to save the lives and protect the property of a sizeable portion of population will require implementation of this chapter;

     b.     Major emergency incidents shall be reported by the city to the Oregon Emergency Management Division under the above listed provisions.

     C.     Readiness State. Special or major emergency situations may arise with advance notice or with no warning. As a result, the organization and operations procedures outlined in this chapter shall be maintained in a status appropriate for immediate implementation.

     D.    Coordination.

     1.     City Operations. The city’s response to an emergency shall be conducted from the local EOC located at 3200 SE Harrison Street (Public Safety Building). In those emergencies affecting multiple jurisdictions and in which the county EOC is activated, a representative from the city shall be present in the county EOC to coordinate local response. The county EOC may be activated in response to a city emergency on approval of the county emergency management agency and with concurrence by the board of county commissioners.

     2.     Clackamas Fire District-Fire Operations Center. Overall coordination of emergency operations will be exercised from the Fire District’s Fire Operations Center located at 15590 SE 30th Clackamas.

     3.     County Emergency Operations. Overall coordination of emergency operations will be exercised from the county emergency operations center located at 2200 South Kaen Road, Oregon City, Oregon. (Ord. 208 § 6, 2000)

 

9.08.070 Execution of operation.
     For purposes of implementation of this chapter, the activation of the city’s emergency operations organization will be based on the evolution of an emergency through a series of “time phases.” It is readily acknowledged that not all phases may be identifiable in an emergency occurrence (i.e., there may be no warning period; the recovery phase may not be required). Tasks assigned within a certain phase in this plan are not intended to be restrictive, but rather to provide guidance outlining required activities during the entire course of an emergency occurrence.

     A.    Normal Phase. That time phase during which organization, planning, training and exercising are carried out to develop an effective emergency management system. Tasks to be accomplished during this phase, which require the participation of all city agencies with emergency responsibilities include:

     1.     City Emergency Management Agency.

     a.     Coordinate development and maintenance of emergency operations plan;

     b.     Assist in review and update of departmental standard operating procedures, notification lists, and resource inventories, lines of succession, mutual aid agreements, etc.; coordinate preparedness activities on a citywide basis;

     c.     Implement citywide resources inventory system; assist in development of necessary agreements; and update information on at least an annual basis;

     d.     Develop procedures for use of city emergency operations center (EOC);

     e.     Coordinate city emergency management program and plans with county, private and volunteer agencies and other organizations involved in emergency management, taking into consideration all activities related to emergency mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery;

     f.      Facilitate training and exercising activities.

     2.     City Departments.

     a.     Develop or review and update emergency operating procedures;

     b.     Develop intradepartmental lines of succession of authority;

     c.     Develop and maintain updated notification lists and procedures for call-up of key officials and essential emergency workers;

     d.     Identify nonemergency workers and assign them, as appropriate, to support emergency operations;

     e.     Identify vital departmental records and develop a system for safeguarding them;

     f.      Identify city facilities vital for emergency operations, designate alternate sites, and develop procedures for use;

     g.     Analyze emergency communications needs and available backup systems; develop procedures for use;

     h.     Participate in training courses dealing with emergency management issues and assure appropriate training for response personnel;

     i.      Participate in simulated emergency exercises and critiques; complete recommended activities to correct noted deficiencies in the emergency management system, plans and procedures;

     j.      Assist in the development of a citywide emergency management system that includes mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery activities;

     k.     Develop a system for recording and documenting expenditures, which may be required during an emergency.

     B.     Preparation Phase. That time phase during which increased preparations are made for the probable impact of a special or major emergency. Tasks common to all emergency agencies to be accomplished in this phase include:

     1.     Evaluate available information and coordinate with other participants in the emergency management organization;

     2.     Notify key officials, as appropriate, in accordance with established procedures;

     3.     Activate EOC or departmental control points and recall essential personnel as directed by the city manager or department heads;

     4.     Coordinate with emergency program manager and city public information officer for release of emergency instructions or information to the public;

     5.     Review emergency operations plans and standard operating guidelines;

     6.     Assess communications capability;

     7.     Analyze probable resource needs and availability; review specific resource acquisition requirements and agreements.

     C.     Emergency Phase. That time phase, which may consist of three periods requiring varying types and levels of emergency response, during which the imminent occurrence of a special or major emergency becomes known. Emergency operations may be initiated during any of the following three time periods:

     1.     Warning Period. That period during which evaluation of all available information indicates that the impact of a special or major emergency is imminent. This period may be formally initiated over a period of time in slower developing emergencies (i.e., flood) or may not exist when the impact of the emergency occurs suddenly and without advance indication (i.e., earthquake). Tasks common to all emergency agencies to be accomplished in this period include:

     a.     Evaluate most probable consequences and resource requirements;

     b.     Coordinate with city emergency program manager or public information officer for dissemination of instruction or information to the public, including evacuation of hazard areas or other such lifesaving measures as may be required;

     c.     Recall essential response personnel;

     d.     Stage resources near hazard area if situation warrants and it can be done without further threat to resources;

     e.     Send representatives to EOC as required.

     2.     Impact Period. That period during which a special or major emergency is occurring. Impact may occur suddenly and be of limited duration or may follow a period of predictable buildup (warning) and last for an extended period. Tasks common to all emergency agencies to be accomplished in this period include:

     a.     Take immediately protective measures for emergency personnel and resources;

     b.     Coordinate damage information with emergency program manager or emergency operations center if activated;

     c.     If emergency conditions allow, initiate response activities.

     3.     Response Period. That period immediately following the impact of a special or major emergency during which all resources are committed to the protection of life and property. Tasks common to all emergency agencies to be accomplished in this period include:

     a.     Communicate with field personnel and EOC to determine scope of emergency;

     b.     Dispatch first responders to scene for victim care. Call in mutual aid assistance, if required;

     c.     Dispatch predesignated personnel to hazard areas to conduct preliminary damage analysis;

     d.     If emergency is of great magnitude with mass casualties or threatened populations, contact EOC and request activation of mass casualty incident procedures;

     e.     Maintain contact with EOC for situation analysis and coordination of public information;

     f.      Analyze resource needs; request additional support from EOC;

     g.     Complete response assignments as detailed in standard operating guidelines;

     h.     Maintain accurate records of all costs associated with emergency response including expenditures for personnel, supplies and equipment.

     4.     Recovery Time. That time phase following the response period during which activities are undertaken to effect long-term repair or recovery. Tasks common to all emergency agencies to be accomplished in this phase include:

     a.     Analyze long-term restoration/recovery options;

     b.     Report and document emergency related expenditures in accordance with procedures outlined in Annex 0 (Reports) of this plan;

     c.     Effect long-term repairs including demolition, reconstruction, etc. (Ord. 208 § 7, 2000)

 

9.08.080 Direction and control.
     A.    Executive Actions.

     1.     On notification of a threatened or actual special or major emergency, the mayor shall convene the city council to analyze data and determine whether an emergency exists. The city manager shall coordinate the activities of the council.

     2.     When, in the judgment of the city council, a state of emergency exists, they shall declare in writing and publicize the existence of it. If circumstances prohibit the timely action of the city council, the mayor may declare a state of emergency, provided that the approval of a majority of the council is sought and obtained at the first opportunity.

     3.     The declaration of a state of emergency shall specify the area(s) which warrant the exercise of emergency controls.

     4.     The mayor shall terminate the state of emergency when the emergency no longer exists or the threat of an emergency has passed.

     B.     Lines of Succession.

     1.     City Council. In the event that the mayor is unavailable or unable to perform his or her duties under this chapter, the duties shall be performed by:

     a.     President of the council;

     b.     The next senior member (in length of service) of the city council;

     c.     The city manager.

     2.     City Departments. The executive head of each city department shall establish, in writing, an ongoing line of succession of authority. (Ord. 208 § 8, 2000)

 

9.08.090 Task assignments.
     Since the normal organization and function of city government is the nucleus around which the emergency management system is developed, appropriate emergency functions are assigned within various departments of the city. It is recognized that responsibility for emergency related activities should remain with the department having such responsibility under normal conditions. However, it is also recognized that tasks unique to emergency situations must be assigned, thereby expanding the responsibilities of emergency agencies and their normal operational systems. Specific task assignments include:

     A.    Emergency Program Manager (City Manager).

     1.     Appoint an incident commander to coordinate operational response activities at the EOC. Assign personnel to fill the positions of operations, planning, logistics, finance, safety, liaison and PIO;

     2.     Provide policy decisions for direction and control of emergency operations to include:

     a.     Ordering activation of the emergency operations center,

     b.     Controlling the use of vital resources,

     c.     Ordering evacuation of hazard areas.

     3.     Ensure adequate authority is vested in city officials charged with emergency responsibilities;

     4.     Direct the dissemination of warning and public information and instructions as recommended by the incident commander;

     5.     Request assistance from state or federal government;

     6.     Advise and assist the city council;

     7.     Serve as liaison to the chief executive of other affected jurisdictions within the county;

     8.     Supervise emergency services provided by data processing.

     B.     Emergency Management Agency.

     1.     Advise and assist the city council in the performance of emergency duties;

     2.     Coordinate emergency operations on an interdepartmental basis;

     3.     Manage EOC functions to assure effective operations;

     4.     Develop and maintain an inventory of emergency resources and providers, and a system of acquisition of resources;

     5.     Coordinate with city public information officer for dissemination of emergency information or instructions;

     6.     Coordinate with department of community services and other public and private agencies for assistance to victims.

     C.     Police Department.

     1.     Assume responsibilities of or designate incident commander in all situations where the police department is the mitigating agency;

     2.     Maintain law and order, traffic and crowd control, security to vital facilities and supplies; and control access to hazardous or evacuated areas;

     3.     Assist in dissemination of warning to the public and notification of essential emergency response personnel;

     4.     Assist in the evacuation of threatened populations;

     5.     Collect damage information and report it to EOC.

     D.    Clackamas Fire District #1.

     1.     Assume responsibilities of or designate incident commander in all situations when fire department is the lead mitigating agency;

     2.     Provide fire suppression, rescue and emergency medical aid;

     3.     Assist in dissemination of warning to the public;

     4.     Develop and maintain an inventory of emergency resources and providers, and a system for acquisition of resources;

     5.     Coordinate with city public information officer for dissemination of emergency information or instructions;

     6.     Establish guidelines for body recovery, identification, storage and disposition.

     E.     Department of Community Development.

     1.     Coordinate city public works and engineering operations to include:

     a.     Repair of roads, bridges and public facilities,

     b.     Construction of temporary bridges or detours,

     c.     Clearance and disposal of debris from streets and roads,

     d.     Demolition of unsafe structures,

     e.     Assign building inspector to work with the fire department for structural safety.

     2.     Coordinate collection and analysis of information relating to damage of street systems, buildings, bridges and other structures;

     3.     Coordinate the acquisition of equipment and operators to assist in heavy rescue operations (i.e., collapsed buildings, bridges, etc.);

     4.     Assist in traffic control by providing signs, barriers, etc.;

     5.     Coordinate transportation of equipment, materials and supplies required for emergency operations;

     6.     Coordinate with city public information officer for dissemination of road or bridge closures, open evacuation routes, etc.;

     7.     Assess health hazards caused by damage to sewer, water or other utility systems;

     8.     Coordinate all sanitary sewerage operations for the city:

     a.     Collection and analysis of information relating to damage of sewerage facilities including collection systems, pumping stations and treatment plants,

     b.     Assessment of health hazards caused by damaged or destroyed sewerage facilities,

     c.     Repair station and collection systems.

     9.     Serve as a liaison between EOC and other public sewerage agencies within the county or metropolitan area;

     10.   Provide personnel, equipment and materials as may be necessary to assist in emergency operations.

     F.     Department of Community Services and Personnel.

     1.     Coordinate the delivery of essential health and welfare services available through government and private disaster agencies to include food, shelter, clothing, transportation, financial assistance, psychological counseling and victim registration and inquiry;

     2.     Function as city public information officer for dissemination of public information on casualties, health hazards and sanitation measures;

     3.     Coordinate with other departments for the preparation and dissemination of public warning information and instruction;

     4.     Recruit emergency personnel and coordinate temporary reassignments of city personnel to assist in emergency operations;

     5.     Maintain records on personnel volunteering services to the city.

     G.    City Attorney.

     1.     Advise city officials on legal matters relating to emergency operations;

     2.     Prepare ordinances and/or resolutions as necessary to assure emergency management organization operates on a sound legal basis.

     H.    Finance Department.

     1.     Maintain inventory of city-owned resources;

     2.     Provide personnel and special services to support EOC operations;

     3.     Coordinate with department of transportation and development to develop a system for assessing damaged property, both public and private;

     4.     Document financial damage to real property and if applicable work with federal assistance teams to obtain recovery funds;

     5.     Provide accounting procedures to document emergency expenditures;

 

     6.     Provide for curtailment of normal fiscal procedures to facilitate emergency expenditures;

     7.     Assure fiscal conformity to financial requirements when state or federal funds are involved;

     8.     Coordinate with other departments to develop a system for emergency appropriations, purchases, disbursements and accounting;

     9.     Advise city officials of liability exposure resulting from specific emergency actions or the lack of such actions;

     10.   Coordinate with personnel director to assure that volunteer emergency service workers are properly registered and insured.

     I.      Communications.

     1.     Existing communications systems available to each response agency will be used for emergency operation;

     2.     Procedures for activation and/or use of communication systems will be in accordance with Appendix B (Communications) of this plan;

     3.     The use of alternate communications systems located in the EOC is addressed in Appendix C-I (EOC Operating Guideline) of this plan;

     4.     Procedures for the provision of warning or public information and instruction will be in accordance with Appendix A (Emergency Information and Warning) of this plan;

     5.     Field sources shall assure that all pertinent information is relayed to the EOC, as appropriate. This information is to assist in determining the scope of the emergency, types of assistance required for response, protective actions which may be necessary, etc. Procedures for the provision of operational situation reports, records of actions taken, resources deployed, etc., shall be in accordance with Appendix P (Reports) of this plan.

     J.      Administration. To the extent possible, each agency or department shall maintain administrative control over its personnel and resources. Staff support for this function shall be pre-identified and the necessary internal procedures developed and updated as required. (Ord. 208 § 9, 2000)

Chapter 9.10 MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC SAFETY PROVISIONS
9.10.010 Unlawful exposure.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to expose his or her genitals while in a public place or place visible from a public place if the exposure reasonably would be expected to alarm or annoy another person. There is a presumption that such exposure would be expected to alarm or annoy another person under the age of thirteen (13) years.

     B.     Unlawful exposure is a violation that subjects a person to a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A person commits a separate violation for each unlawful exposure to another person. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2010; Ord. 364 § 1, 2007)

 

9.10.020 Camping in public places prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful to camp in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way, park or other publicly owned or operated place to which the public has access without the prior written consent of the public agency having ownership or control thereof.

     B.     “To camp” is defined as setting up or remaining at a campsite.

     C.     “Campsite” is any place for the purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live where sleeping bag(s), bedding material or other sleeping matter or stove, cooking apparatus or fire is placed, established or maintained regardless of whether there is use of a tent, lean-to, shack or any other structure or vehicle. (Ord. 399 §§ 1, 2, 2010)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.12 APPLICABILITY OF STATE TRAFFIC LAWS
Chapter 10.16 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.20 IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 10.24 ABANDONED VEHICLES
Chapter 10.28 VEHICLE PARKING AND TOWING

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.04.010 Definitions.
     In addition to the definitions contained in the Oregon Revised Statutes, including all amendments, the following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning (as used in this chapter, the words ordinance or title have the same meaning):

     “Highway,” as used in this chapter and in the sections of the state motor vehicle laws, means and includes all streets, roads and alleys in the city.

     “Loading zone” means that space adjacent to the curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

     “Parking” means to stop and stand, with or without a driver, or to leave a motor vehicle upon any street, alley or public place in the city.

(Ord. 115 § 2, 1993)

 

10.04.020 U-Turns.
     It is unlawful for any person to reverse the direction of any motor vehicle by making a U-turn upon any street in the city. (Ord. 115 § 3, 1993)

 

10.04.030 Sleds behind cars.
     It is unlawful for any person to tie to any motor vehicle for towing purposes which is operated on the streets of the city any sled, toboggan, or similar contrivance or thing; and it is unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to permit for towing purposes any sled, toboggan, or similar contrivance or thing to be attached or tied to any motor vehicle being driven by such operator; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to trailers, bus trailers, or pole or pipe dolly, nor to cars being towed, when such cars are attached or towed in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 115 § 4, 1993)

 

10.04.040 Removing glass and debris after accidents.
     Any party to a collision or other motor vehicle accident upon any street, alley or public place in this city shall immediately remove or cause to be removed from the street, alley or public place all glass and foreign substance resulting from such collision or accident, as well as the motor vehicle which such party was driving at the time of such collision or accident. (Ord. 115 § 5, 1993)

 

10.04.050 Parades and processions.
     During parades the police may clear the streets and prohibit vehicles and pedestrians from crossing the streets. No pedestrian or vehicle shall break through the line of a funeral procession. (Ord. 115 § 6, 1993)

Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.08.010 Citations.
     When any motor vehicle is operated or is found standing or parked in violation of, or contrary to, any provision of this title, the operator shall be issued a citation. If the operator is not present, a citation shall be issued to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle, with one copy to be left on the vehicle and one copy mailed to the registered owner or person entitled to possession. The registered owner or person entitled to possession shall be presumed to have been the operator at the time of the violation, but this presumption shall be rebuttable. The form for the citation to be issued under this title shall contain at least a description of the specific violation alleged, the time and place of its occurrence, the name and address of the office of the city, a form for admitting or denying the violation of this title, and a schedule of the forfeiture amounts for specific violations. (Ord. 115 § 13, 1993)

 

10.08.020 Response.
     A.    A person who receives a citation for violation of any provision of this title shall respond by mail or personal delivery within twenty (20) days (unless a shorter period is specified elsewhere in this title) of the issuance of the citation, or the person may be determined to be in default and shall forfeit the amount indicated for the violation on the schedule of forfeitures, plus an additional fifteen dollars ($15.00).

     B.     A person who receives a citation for violation of this title may admit the violation and avoid the need to personally appear by completing an appropriate form attached to the citation and mailing or delivering it, accompanied by a check or money order for the amount of the forfeiture, to the city’s office as indicated on the citation. A schedule of the forfeiture amounts for specific violations shall appear on the citation.

     C.     A person who receives a citation for violation of this title may deny all or part of the alleged violation by completing an appropriate form attached to the citation and mailing or delivering it to the city’s office as indicated on the citation. Upon receipt, the city shall forward the form to the office of the hearings officer, who shall establish a time for the hearing and provide notice of it to the person who received the citation. Notice shall be by mail. (Ord. 115 § 14, 1993)

 

10.08.030 Hearings officer.
     The city council shall appoint a quasi-judicial hearings officer or officers to hear and determine cases of alleged violation of this title. The hearings officer shall establish a schedule of the amounts of forfeiture for each specific violation with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 115 § 15, 1993)

 

10.08.040 Hearing.
     A.    Every hearing to determine whether this title has been violated shall be held before a hearings officer. The hearings officer may prescribe procedures for the conduct of such hearings.

     B.     Evidence, including rebuttal evidence, may be presented at the hearing and shall be limited to that which is relevant to the violation alleged.

     C.     The hearings officer has the authority to administer oaths and take the testimony of witnesses. The hearings officer may issue subpoenas in accordance with Oregon Rule of Civil Procedure 55, provided that if the person who receives a citation desires that witnesses be ordered to appear by subpoena, he or she must so request in writing either at the time response is made to the citation or subsequently by mail at any time before five days prior to the scheduled hearing. A ten dollar ($10.00) deposit for each witness shall accompany the request, such deposit to be refunded if no forfeiture is assessed or the total witness cost is less than the amount deposited. Witnesses appearing by subpoena shall be allowed the same fees and mileage as allowed in civil cases in district court. If a forfeiture is declared, the person ordered to forfeit shall also be ordered to pay all witness fees.

     D.    The parties shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses who testify.

     E.     The burden of proof shall be upon the city to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred, but a prima facie case may be established by a showing that the person who was issued the citation was the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle, and that the vehicle was parked in violation of this title. Such a prima facie case may be rebutted by the registered owner by evidence indicating the identity of the person to whom control of the vehicle had been relinquished.

     F.     After due consideration of the evidence and arguments, the hearings officer shall determine whether the violation as alleged in the complaint has been established. If a violation has been established, the hearings officer shall issue a decision including a brief statement of the findings of fact necessary to establish a violation and ordering the person to pay the appropriate forfeiture and witness costs, to be paid into the city general fund. The decision and order may be oral and issued at the conclusion of the hearing, but in all cases must be recorded in the record of the hearing. (Ord. 115 § 16, 1993)

 

10.08.050 Representation by counsel.
     A person who receives a citation may be represented by an attorney or other person at any hearing, provided that in the case of representation by an attorney the person gives one day of written notice to the hearings office so that the city may, at its option, arrange for representation by an attorney on its behalf. (Ord. 115 § 17, 1993)

 

10.08.060 Review.
     The determination of the hearings officer is final and there shall be no right of appeal therefrom. Each person assessed a forfeiture following a hearing shall be advised, however, that indirect judicial relief such as an action for a writ of review may be available. (Ord. 115 § 18, 1993)

 

10.08.070 Penalties.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this title.

     B.     Except as otherwise provided in this title, every person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this title shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). For a second or subsequent conviction within one year thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 115 § 19, 1993)

 

10.08.080 City manager or public works director—Authority over city streets.
     The city manager or, if they so delegate in writing, the city’s public works director, is hereby authorized, consistent with generally accepted traffic and vehicle standards adopted or used by recognized authorities such as (but not limited to) the Federal Highway Administration or the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, to:

     A.    Designate stop streets;

     B.     Designate one-way streets;

     C.     Designate crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes;

     D.    Designate areas in which no parking shall be permitted and areas in which the time of parking is to be limited;

     E.     Direct the placing and maintenance of such traffic signs, markers and signals or other traffic control devices as may be reasonably necessary to carry the above powers into effect and for the regulation and safety of traffic;

     F.     Exercise the city’s authority as a road authority under the terms of Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) Chapter 810, including but not limited to those described in ORS 810.030 and 810.040;

     G.    Exercise a general supervision over the administration and enforcement of all traffic ordinances and rules; and

     H.    Require the pruning or trimming of trees and shrubs along streets and highways so that they will not obstruct the view for traffic, and order the removal or alteration of any signs, fences or other objects along streets and highways that are an obstruction of the view for traffic. (Ord. 307 § 1, 2005; Ord. 115 § 20, 1993)

 

10.08.090 Existing signs.
     All official traffic signs, signals and markers existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be considered official under the provisions of this section; provided, however, that the city council may by resolution or motion at any time have such official traffic signs, signals or markers removed or changed; or the same may be done at the direction of the city manager; and provided further, that any additional official traffic signs, signals or markers erected, installed or painted shall first be authorized by resolution or motion of the city council or by order of the city manager. (Ord. 115 § 21, 1993)

Chapter 10.12 APPLICABILITY OF STATE TRAFFIC LAWS
10.12.010 Conformance to state standards.
     A.    Violations of provisions in Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapters 153 and 801 through 823 inclusive, as constituted on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, is an offense against the city.

     B.     If an ordinance or provision of such ordinance of the city is in conflict with the motor vehicle laws of the state, the motor vehicle laws of the state shall prevail.

     C.     Violation of a provision identical to a state statute is punishable by a fine or imprisonment not to exceed the penalty prescribed by the state statute. (Ord. 115 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 10.16 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.16.010 Method of parking.
     A.    No vehicle shall be parked upon any highway in a manner other than parallel to the highway and facing in the direction of travel of the nearest travel lane unless specifically designated by official signs and/or markings.

     B.     Where no mode of parking is indicated by a painted stripe or other marking, any and all vehicles parked in any unmarked area shall be parked parallel with the street curb and with the tires or wheels on the right-hand side of such vehicle within twelve (12) inches of the curb.

     C.     Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers that his or her vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department or ambulance service has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police, ambulance or fire officers. (Ord. 115 § 7, 1993)

 

10.16.020 Parking time limits.
     A.    1. The lawful time allowed for parking vehicles other than motor trucks engaged in the actual loading or unloading of freight or merchandise shall, in any section of any street, be as indicated by lettering upon the face of painted signs placed at the top of standards placed along the curb line of any section of any street or by parking meters. Such time limits and the indication of such time limits may be changed from time to time by the city.  The time limits shall mean the continuous aggregate of time of all parking of any one vehicle within any one block or any blocks adjacent thereto within the daily time limits.

     2.     This shall not prohibit removing a vehicle from the above designated area and returning the vehicle to such area after expiration of one hour.

     B.     Time limits shall be applicable between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Such time limits shall not apply on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas.

     C.     It is unlawful to erase, remove or obliterate any marking that has been placed on a vehicle for the purpose of monitoring parking time limits. (Ord. 115 § 8, 1993)

 

10.16.030 Storage of vehicles on streets.
     A.    No person, firm or corporation shall store or permit to be stored on a street or other public property without permission of the city, an inoperable or unlicensed vehicle (not lawfully equipped and capable of being driven) for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. It shall constitute prima facie evidence of storage of a vehicle if such vehicle is not moved for a period of twenty-four (24) hours. The continuity of the time shall not be deemed broken by movement of the vehicle elsewhere on the block unless the movement removes the vehicle from the block where it was located for not less than twenty-four (24) hours before it is returned.

     B.     When a vehicle is found in violation of subsection A of this section, the officer responsible for enforcement of this section shall:

     1.     Issue a citation for the violation;

     2.     Make routine investigation to discover the owner and request removal of the vehicle;

     3.     Failing to discover the owner, make a diligent inquiry with the Oregon Motor Vehicle Division as to the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and mail notice to the owner at the address shown on the Division’s records. Such notice shall be by certified mail;

     4.     Place a notice on the windshield, or if none exists, in another conspicuous place on the vehicle. If the vehicle does not have license plates or a current registration, then a warning sticker on the vehicle shall be the method of attempting to inform the owner of the necessity of removing the vehicle before it is towed;

     5.     Impound the vehicle and remove it from the public street or property as provided in this section after complying with the requirements of this section, and waiting not less than five days after the notice given in the preceding subsection (B)(4) of this section, and provide notice of impoundment as set forth in this section.

     C.     The notices required in subsection B of this section shall specify:

     1.     The name of the city person issuing the notice and how the person may be contacted;

     2.     That the vehicle will be impounded as an abandoned vehicle at the owner’s expense if not removed within five days;

     3.     That the owner’s expense may include, in addition to any bail or fine, the costs of towing and storing the vehicle which must be paid before the vehicle will be released, and that failure to redeem the vehicle will result in its sale;

     4.     That the owner of the vehicle may request, before the expiration of five days:

     a.     An extension of time in which to move the vehicle, not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours. The officer granting the request for an extension shall do so only if the owner has not requested a similar extension in the preceding six months,

     b.     A hearing before the hearings officer on the validity of the offense.

     5.     How and where the owner of the vehicle can get information about the opportunity for a hearing;

     6.     If any extension or hearing is requested and the owner fails to remove the vehicle or appear at the hearing, the vehicle will be impounded without another opportunity to be heard except for good cause shown.

     D.    If the owner of the vehicle requests a hearing before the vehicle is impounded and posts bail with the city within forty-eight (48) hours of the request for a hearing, the vehicle shall not be impounded until after the hearing.

     E.     The hearing requested by a vehicle owner shall be held as soon as the hearings officer allows and, if possible, written notice of such hearing shall be given to the owner at the time the request is received at the city.

     F.     l. This section shall not apply to vehicles impounded under the direction of a police officer or the city for:

     a.     Criminal investigative purposes; or

     b.     For safekeeping when the operator of the vehicle is unable to safely and lawfully park the vehicle;

     c.     Impeding the orderly flow of traffic or presenting a public safety hazard.

     2.     If the owner fails to claim the vehicle within five days after its impoundment or notice of its release from criminal investigations, it shall be impounded, redeemed or sold as provided by state law. (Ord. 115 § 9, 1993)

 

10.16.040 Prohibited stopping, standing and parking.
     A.    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in such a manner or location that it constitutes a hazard to public safety or an obstruction to vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian traffic on the street, which shall include but not be limited to stopping, standing or parking:

     1.     On any highway in any location prohibited by state motor vehicle law;

     2.     On any highway in a location within twelve (12) feet of any mailbox used for pickup or delivery of the United States mail;

     3.     On a sidewalk;

     4.     Within an intersection;

     5.     On a crosswalk;

     6.     Alongside or opposite a street excavation or construction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;

     7.     Upon a bridge or other elevated structure used as a street or within a street tunnel;

     8.     On any railroad tracks or within seven and one-half feet of the nearest rail at a time when the parking of vehicles would conflict with railroad operations or repair of the railroad tracks;

     9.     In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers;

     10.   In a bicycle lane, unless there is at least three and one-half feet of unobstructed bicycle lane between the standing or parked vehicle and the nearest vehicle lane;

     11.   Any place where official signs or marking prohibit stopping, standing or parking;

     12.   No trailer as defined by State Motor Vehicle Law shall be parked upon any highway unless it is attached to a motor vehicle by which it may be propelled or drawn. This subsection (A)(2) shall not apply to trailers which are disabled to such an extent that the driver cannot avoid temporarily leaving the disabled trailer on the highway, provided that the trailer must be removed promptly. This subsection (A)(2) also shall not apply to trailers owned or operated under authority of the state, county or city when necessary to perform work on the highway;

     13.   Upon any highway designated by official signs and markings which prohibit parking;

     14.   Upon any highway in a manner such that less than eighteen (18) feet of unobstructed highway width is left available for the passage of other vehicles;

     15.   Upon any roadway adjacent to any officially marked yellow curb or painted “no parking” marking;

     16.   Upon any highway in violation of any temporary “no parking” signs established or authorized by the state, county or city for maintenance or construction operations;

     17.   In any city park area after the daily closing time and before the daily opening time or in any “no parking” area as established by the park commission and duly posted;

     18.   In violation of disabled parking spaces as defined by State Motor Vehicle Law;

     19.   In or in blockage of bicycle trails as defined by State Motor Vehicle Law.

     B.     Except to momentarily pick up or discharge a passenger, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in such a manner or location that it constitutes a hazard to public safety or an obstruction to vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian traffic on the street, which shall include, but not be limited to, standing or parking:

 

     1.     On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;

     2.     In front of a public or private driveway;

     3.     Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant;

     4.     Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;

     5.     Within fifty (50) feet upon the approach to an official flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the street if the standing or parking of the vehicle obstructs the view of the official traffic control device located at the side of the street;

     6.     Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to the fire station;

     7.     Within an area marked by yellow paint on the street or on the curb;

     8.     On a street or portion of such street designated by official signs as a “Tow-Away Zone”;

     9.     Other than a motorbus in a bus stop which has been designated by official signs, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand which has been designated by official signs, or at any time in interference with any motorbus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the officially designated space;

     10.   A motorbus or taxicab on a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively.

     C.     In the event a vehicle has been found standing or parked in violation of subsections A and B of this section, in addition to and after issuance of a citation for violation, the vehicle may be removed immediately under the direction of a police officer or parking control officer and impounded according to the provisions herein for the impoundment of abandoned, illegally parked or stored vehicles.

     D.    Unlawful Transfer on a Highway.

     1.     A person shall not:

     a.     While either a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a highway, road or street within the city give or relinquish possession or control of any money or other tangible personal property to a pedestrian; or

     b.     While a pedestrian, accept, receive or retain possession or control of any money or other tangible personal property from a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a highway, road or street within the city.

     2.     The provisions of subsections (1)(a) and (b) above do not apply if the vehicle is lawfully parked or to persons participating in activity permitted by the applicable road authority consistent with ORS 814.072(2015).

     3.     A person in violation of this subsection is subject to a civil penalty not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 478 § 1, 2015; Ord. 115 § 10, 1993)

 

10.16.050 Clackamas County parking and towing ordinance adopted.
     A.    Law enforcement personnel are authorized to enforce the provisions of the Clackamas County vehicle parking and towing ordinance, Clackamas County Ordinance 4-97, (attached to the ordinance codified in this section and adopted by reference) within the city limits of Happy Valley.

     B.     Any reference to county streets, roadways or highways shall be interpreted to include both city and county streets, roadways or highways within the city limits of Happy Valley.

     C.     Any reference to county park areas shall be interpreted to include city park areas.

     D.    Any reference to signs or markings authorized by the director of the Clackamas County department of transportation and development, or designee, shall be interpreted to include any signs or markings within the city limits of Happy Valley authorized by the city public works department, or designee. (Ord. 180, 1998)

Chapter 10.20 IMPOUNDMENT
10.20.010 Impoundment of vehicles.
     A.    When this chapter or state law provides for impounding a vehicle, it shall be given a citation and may be removed by or under the direction of a police officer or parking control officer of the city; taken to the city facilities for storing vehicles or to some reputable vehicle storage facility; and kept there until it is redeemed or sold.

     B.     Within seventy-two (72) hours following the impoundment of a vehicle authorized by this chapter, the city shall notify the owner and other persons having an interest in the vehicle as shown on the records of the Motor Vehicles Division of its impoundment as provided in subsections C and D of this section.

     C.     Notice required with respect to storage of vehicles on street shall be:

     1.     Posted in a public place at or near the location of the vehicle when it was impounded and in a public place at or near the front doors of the Happy Valley City Hall; and

     2.     If the vehicle exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in value, published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a daily newspaper of general circulation, a summary description of the vehicle, its location at the time of impoundment and whom to contact for additional information.

     D.    The notice required shall specify:

     1.     The name of the city person issuing the notice and how the city person may be contacted;

     2.     The description of the vehicle and the reason it was impounded, including a reference to the sections of this title violated and authorizing the impoundment;

     3.     The place where the vehicle is stored and that the towing and storing of the vehicle is at the owner’s expense;

     4.     Where any person may assert his or her claim of financial interest in the vehicle so long as it is done within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, and that a failure to do so will constitute a waiver of any financial interest they may claim in the vehicle;

     5.     How any interested person may secure the release of the vehicle upon posting bail and paying outstanding fines and fees for parking offenses to the city and upon paying towing and storage fees to the person having custody of the vehicle;

     6.     That the vehicle may be sold or junked in accordance with state law if it is not redeemed;

     7.     That any person securing release of the vehicle may challenge the validity of the citation issued and the creation and amount of the towing and storage charges at the time and place set for the hearing appearance on the citation issued at impoundment, provided the person securing release of the vehicle had no notice of the opportunity for a hearing elsewhere within this title. (Ord. 115 § 11, 1993)

 

10.20.020 Impoundment—Owner’s responsibility.
     The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for the cost of towing and storage of the vehicle impounded plus the costs of notice and sale as provided in this section. (Ord. 115 § 12, 1993)

Chapter 10.24 ABANDONED VEHICLES
10.24.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

     “Abandoned” means left unoccupied and unclaimed or in a damaged or dismantled condition upon the streets of the city.

     “City” means the city of Happy Valley.

     “Costs” means the expense of removing, storing and selling an impounded vehicle.

     “Owner” means any individual, firm, corporation or unincorporated association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or an interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle.

     “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 66 § 1, 1976)

 

10.24.020 Notice of nuisance.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the city recorder, or such other person as designated by the city council, whenever a vehicle is reported abandoned upon the streets in the same position for a period of seven days, to:

     1.     Make a routine investigation to discover the owner and request removal of the vehicle; or

     2.     Failing to discover the owner by such a process, to make a diligent inquiry as to the name and address of the owner of the vehicle by examining such vehicle for license number, identification number, make, style and any other information which will aid in the identification of the ownership of the vehicle, and transmitting all available information pertaining to such vehicle to the Motor Vehicles Division of this state with an inquiry for the name and address of the owner, whenever such vehicle is required by law to be registered with that office;

     3.     If the owner is not identified, to place a notice upon the windshield, or some other part of the vehicle easily seen by the passing public.

     B.     The notice shall state that the city recorder will cause the removal and impounding of the vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, twenty-four (24) hours after the time of the posting, unless:

     1.     The owner removes the vehicle; or

     2.     Good cause is shown, satisfactory to the city recorder, why such vehicle should not be removed by the owner or removed and impounded by the city. (Ord. 66 § 2, 1976)

 

10.24.030 Impounding nuisance.
     A.    An abandoned vehicle which remains in the same position for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after an owner has been requested to remove it or after notice to remove has been posted upon the vehicle, and no person has appeared to show good cause why the vehicle should not be moved, shall constitute a nuisance.

     B.     It shall be the duty of the city recorder to cause the removal of a vehicle which shall constitute a nuisance, under the provisions of this chapter, store the vehicle upon city property, or store the vehicle in a private garage, and dispose of it pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     After impoundment the city recorder shall cause the vehicle to be appraised. (Ord. 66 § 3, 1976)

 

10.24.040 Notice of impoundment and sale.
     If the owner is identified, he or she shall be notified immediately by registered or certified mail that such vehicle is being held by the city. The notice to the owner shall also state:

     A.    The reason for impounding the vehicle;

     B.     The existing costs charged against the vehicle;

     C.     An estimate of future costs, including the cost of advertising the vehicle for sale;

     D.    That unless the owner redeems the vehicle within fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing the notice and pays all the costs, the vehicle will be sold. (Ord. 66 § 4, 1976)

 

10.24.050 Low value vehicle.
     A.    If the vehicle is appraised at one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less and the owner is identified, the city recorder shall file with the Motor Vehicles Division an affidavit describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle, and stating that the vehicle will be junked or dismantled. The city recorder shall state that the notice of intent to junk or dismantle the vehicle has been sent with notification of the location of the vehicle to the owner.

     B.     Failure of the owner to reclaim the vehicle within fifteen (15) days after the date of notification is mailed, shall constitute waiver of his or her interest in the vehicle.

     C.     Upon completion and forwarding of the affidavit and at expiration of the time period stated in subsection (2), the city recorder may, without notice and public auction, dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale.

     D.    The certificate of sale shall be substantially as follows:

 

CERTIFICATE OF SALE

 

        This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No. _____ entitled “An Ordinance for the Impounding and Disposition of Abandoned Vehicles,” I did on the ______ day of _________, 20___, sell to ________________________, for the sum of $___________ cash, the following described personal property, to-wit:

 

(brief description of the property)

 

        And in consideration of the payment of the said sum of $_____, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property.

 

        Dated this _____________ day of _______________, 20__.

________________________

 

        Note: The City of Happy Valley assumes no responsibility as to the condition of title of the above described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the city is limited to the return of the purchase price.

 

(Ord. 66 § 5, 1976)

 

10.24.060 Public sale notice.
     A.    If the vehicle is appraised over one hundred dollars ($100.00) and if no claim is made by the owner within the time specified by Section 10.24.040(D) of this chapter, or if the vehicle is valued under one hundred dollars ($100.00), but the owner cannot be identified after compliance with Section 10.24.020, the city recorder shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Clackamas County a notice of sale. The notice of sale shall state:

     1.     The sale is of abandoned property in the city’s possession;

     2.     A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, license number, I.D. number and any other information which will aid in accurately identifying the vehicle;

     3.     The terms of the sale;

     4.     The date, time and place of the sale.

     B.     The notice of sale shall be published two times. The first publication shall be made not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the proposed sale, and the second shall be made not less than three days prior to the date of the proposed sale. (Ord. 66 § 6, 1976)

 

10.24.070 Public sale.
     A.    If no claim shall have been made to redeem an impounded vehicle appraised over one hundred dollars ($100.00) or appraised under one hundred dollars ($100.00) but the owner cannot be identified before the time set for the sale of such vehicle, the city recorder shall cause a sale to be held at the time and place appointed within the view of the vehicle to be sold.

     B.     The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder, providing that if no bids are entered, or those bids which are entered are less than the costs incurred by the city, the city recorder may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to such costs.

     C.     At the time of the payment of the purchase price, the city recorder shall execute a certificate of sale, in duplicate, the original of which shall be delivered to the purchaser, and the copy of such certificate filed with the city recorder’s office.

     D.    The certificate of sale shall be substantially as follows:

 

CERTIFICATE OF SALE

 

This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No. ________ entitled, “An Ordinance for the Impounding and Disposition of Abandoned Vehicles” and pursuant to due notice of the time and place of sale, I did on the ______ day of ___________, 20___, sell at public auction to _______________________ for the sum of $___________ cash, he being the highest and best bidder, and that being the highest and best sum bid therefor, the following described personal property, to-wit:

 

(brief description of the property)

 

And in consideration of the payment of the said sum of $_____, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property.

 

Dated this ___ day of ___________, 20__.

_______________________

 

Note: The City of Happy Valley assumes no responsibility as to the condition of title of the above described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the City is limited to the return of the purchase price.

 

(Ord. 66 § 7, 1976)

 

10.24.080 Redemption before sale.
     A.    An owner may redeem a vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter, before a sale or disposition has taken place, by applying to the city recorder, whereupon he or she shall:

     1.     Submit evidence of his or her ownership or interest in the vehicle, satisfactory to the city recorder, that such claim is rightful; and

     2.     Pay the costs due and owing at the time the application to redeem is made.

     B.     Upon compliance with subsection A of this section, the city recorder shall execute a receipt for the owner and cause the vehicle to be returned to him or her. (Ord. 66 § 8, 1976)

 

10.24.090 Sale and proceeds.
     A.    Upon a sale being consummated, the city recorder shall deliver the vehicle and the certificate of sale to the purchaser. The sale and conveyance shall be without redemption.

     B.     The proceeds of sale shall be applied:

     1.     To the payment of costs incurred by the city; and

     2.     Then, for such services as may be rendered by a private garage, and the balance, if any, shall be transferred to the city recorder of the city to be credited to the general fund. (Ord. 66 § 9, 1976)

 

10.24.100 Charges.
     Where a private garage is utilized, the city council shall establish reasonable fees for such services by resolution, with the following conditions:

     A.    The city shall not be liable for services rendered by a private garage from any source other than such amounts as may be collected from the owner on redemption, or from a purchaser upon sale, after the city shall have deducted its expenses, unless the city shall be the purchaser of the vehicle;

     B.     No lien shall be created by this chapter in favor of the private garage upon the vehicle for such services;

     C.     The vehicle shall not be released from the private garage except upon a receipt, signed by the city recorder, proffered by the purchaser. (Ord. 66 § 10, 1976)

Chapter 10.28 VEHICLE PARKING AND TOWING
10.28.010 Definitions.
     This chapter incorporates the definitions set out in the Oregon Vehicle Chapter (ORS Chapters 801 to 822), or elsewhere in Oregon statutes, except:

     “Authorized officer” means the sheriff, any sheriff’s deputy, or any other person expressly authorized by the Clackamas County sheriff to issue parking citations or order vehicles towed under this chapter.

     “Boot” means a device placed over the wheel of a vehicle which prevents the vehicle from being moved.

     “Hearings officer” means the parking and towing hearings officer designated to hold hearings, make decisions and act on behalf of the board of county commissioners in accordance with this chapter.

     “Law enforcement officer” means any police officer, sheriff, sheriff’s deputy, medical examiner, deputy medical examiner, or probation officer.

     “The sheriff” means the Clackamas County sheriff, or any of the sheriff’s deputies or any person appointed by the sheriff pursuant to ORS 204.635.

     “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or may be, transported or drawn upon any street or highway, and includes any hulk or component thereof, including, but not limited to campers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, pickup trucks, pickup truck canopies, and trailers, except devices:

     Designed to be moved exclusively by human power; or

     Designed to be used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.020 Parking restrictions enforceable by citation and fine.
     A.    No vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or left standing in violation of ORS 811.550 to 811.560, or 811.570 to 811.575.

     B.     No vehicle shall be parked upon any county roadway in a location within twelve (12) feet of any mailbox used for pickup or delivery of the United States mail.

     C.     No trailer shall be parked upon any county highway unless it is attached to a motor vehicle by which it may be propelled or drawn. This subsection shall not apply to trailers which are disabled to such an extent that the driver cannot avoid temporarily leaving the disabled trailer on the highway, provided that the trailer must be removed within seven days. This subsection also shall not apply to trailers owned or operated under authority of the state or county when necessary to perform work on the roadway.

     D.    No vehicle shall be parked upon any county highway in violation of “no parking” signs or markings, where the director of the Clackamas County department of transportation and development, or designee, authorizes such signs or markings.

     E.     No vehicle shall be parked upon any county roadway adjacent to any yellow curb, where the director of the Clackamas County department of transportation and development, or designee, authorizes such curb.

     F.     No vehicle shall be parked upon any county roadway in a manner such that less than eighteen (18) feet of unobstructed roadway width is left available for the passage of other vehicles.

     G.    No vehicle shall be parked upon any county highway in a manner other than parallel to the roadway and facing in the direction of travel of the nearest travel lane unless specifically designated by signs or markings which are authorized by the director of the Clackamas County department of transportation and development, or designee.

     H.    No vehicle shall be parked in violation of ORS 811.615 (failure to display disabled parking permit), ORS 811.625 or 811.630 (unlawful use of disabled parking permit).

     I.      No vehicle shall be parked on any county highway for more than seventy-two (72) hours without moving at least three vehicle lengths away.

     J.      No vehicle shall be parked where it is impeding or likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic; where it is a hazard or is likely to be a hazard to vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic; or where it is obstructing the required width of a fire apparatus access road.

     K.    No vehicle shall be parked or operated on a highway when the vehicle registration as indicated by registration stickers or registration card has been expired for ninety (90) days or more, the vehicle is required to be registered when operated on a highway, and the vehicle is parked or being operated on a county highway. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.030 Person in violation, affirmative defense.
     A.    A person commits the violation of illegal parking, stopping, or standing if:

     1.     The person parks, stops, or leaves standing a vehicle in a place where such action is prohibited by this chapter; or

     The person is the owner of an unattended vehicle parked in a place where such parking is prohibited by this chapter.

     B.     An authorized officer who finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of this chapter may move the vehicle, cause it to be moved, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move it. The authority to take such action under this section is in addition to the authority granted under Section 10.28.080.

     C.     It is an affirmative defense to the prosecution of the owner of a vehicle under subsection (A)(2) of this section, that the owner did not authorize the use of the vehicle, either expressly or by implication. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.040 Citation.
     A.    When any authorized officer finds a vehicle parked in violation of this chapter, the authorized officer may issue a citation to the owner or operator of the vehicle. The authorized officer issuing a citation shall:

     1.     If the operator is present, issue the citation to the operator; or

     If the operator is not present, affix one copy of the citation to the vehicle and mail another copy to the owner(s) or other person(s) who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle within seventy-two (72) hours, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excluded. Additional citations shall not be issued for the same violation on the same vehicle unless at least twenty-four (24) hours have passed since the previous citation.

     B.     The citation shall contain the following information:

     1.     A description of the specific violation alleged;

     The date, time and location of its occurrence;

     The amount of the fine for the violation alleged;

     That the fine must be paid or a hearing requested within fourteen (14) days, and that upon failure to do so within fourteen (14) days, opportunity for a hearing is forfeited, and the fine doubles;

     A form for either admitting the violation alleged and paying the fine, or denying the violation alleged, paying the equivalent bail, and requesting a hearing;

     The address to which the form should be sent; and

     The telephone number of the person or facility which may be contacted for information. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.050 Fines.
     A.    Fines in an amount set by resolution of the board of county commissioners shall be assessed for each violation of Section 10.28.020.

     B.     Each fine or the equivalent bail must be paid within fourteen (14) days of the date the citation is issued or the fine shall be doubled. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.060 Response to citations.
     Upon receiving a citation under this chapter, the vehicle owner(s) or operator may:

     A.    Within fourteen (14) days, deliver to the sheriff the form provided with the citation, admitting the violation(s), forfeiting and paying the amount of the fine(s) indicated on the citation; forfeiture may be made by mail but must be actually received by the sheriff within fourteen (14) days from the date of the citation; or

     B.     Within fourteen (14) days, deliver to the sheriff the form provided with the citation, denying all or part of the violation(s), and posting bail by paying a refundable deposit equivalent to the amount of fine(s) indicated on the citation; response may be made by mail, but must be actually received by the sheriff within fourteen (14) days from the date of the citation.

     Upon receipt of a denial, the sheriff’s department shall inform the hearings officer, who shall set a hearing within thirty (30) days of the sheriff’s receipt of the denial and bail, and shall notify the vehicle owner(s) and any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the vehicle; notification of the hearing date, time and place shall be mailed within fifteen (15) days of the sheriff’s receipt of the denial and bail.

     C.     Failure to perform any part of either subsection A or B of this section, including failure to respond within fourteen (14) days, shall be presumed an admission of the violation(s) cited, and the fine(s) shall be doubled. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.070 Violation hearing procedure.
     A.    The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for the person(s) requesting it to present evidence that the citation was invalid or unjustified.

     B.     The hearings officer may administer oaths and take the testimony of witnesses. The hearings officer may issue subpoenas in accordance with Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure 55, provided that subpoena requests be received in writing no later than five days before the scheduled hearing. If the person charged with the violation(s) requests a subpoena, the person shall pay a deposit for each witness in an amount set by resolution of the board of county commissioners. Witnesses appearing by subpoena shall be allowed the same fees and mileage as allowed in civil cases in district court, to be paid by the person requesting the subpoena.

     C.     A person who receives a citation may be represented by an attorney or other person at any hearing, provided that in the case of representation by an attorney, the person gives written notice to the hearings officer two days prior to the hearing so that the county may, at its discretion, arrange for representation by an attorney on its behalf.

     D.    If the hearings officer, after due consideration, determines that the violation(s) alleged has been established, then the hearings officer shall issue a decision that the citation is valid and make brief findings of fact, and shall order the person cited to pay the appropriate fine to the county general fund. The decision and order may be oral and issued at the conclusion of the hearing, but in all cases must be recorded in the record of the hearing. The hearings officer will also determine the amount of witness fees to be paid out of any deposit, or refunded.

     E.     The decision of the hearings officer is final. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.080 Towing without prior notice.
     The sheriff may, without prior notice, order a vehicle towed when:

     A.    Three or more parking citations have been issued for violations of Sections 10.28.020 or 6.06.11, which have not been paid or contested within the time allowed by law;

     B.     The sheriff has probable cause to believe that the vehicle operator is driving uninsured in violation of ORS 806.010;

     C.     The vehicle registration as indicated by registration stickers or registration card has been expired for ninety (90) days or more, the vehicle is required to be registered when operated on a highway, and the vehicle is parked or being operated on a county highway;

     D.    The vehicle is parked on property owned, operated, or occupied by the county, other than highways or clearly designated public parking spaces, without express county permission;

     E.     A boot has been affixed to the vehicle for more than ten (10) days; fines, boot fee, or bail have not been fully paid, and a hearing has not been requested pursuant to Section 10.28.160;

     F.     The sheriff has probable cause to believe the vehicle is stolen;

     G.    The sheriff has probable cause to believe that the vehicle or its contents constitute evidence of any offense, if such towing is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve such evidence;

     H.    The vehicle was in possession of a person taken into custody by any law enforcement officer, and towing of the vehicle appears to the officer to be the most reasonable disposition of the vehicle which is available;

     I.      The vehicle alarm system disturbs, injures, or endangers the peace, quiet, comfort, repose, health or safety of the public or any person, if no other reasonable disposition of the vehicle can be made and the owner cannot be contacted by reasonable efforts;

     J.      The vehicle is impeding, or likely to impede, the normal flow of vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic; the vehicle or is a hazard or is likely to be a hazard to vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic; or the vehicle is obstructing the required width of a fire apparatus access road;

     K.    The vehicle is illegally parked in a conspicuously posted restricted space, zone, or traffic lane where parking is limited to designated classes of vehicles, or is prohibited in excess of a designated time period, or during certain hours, or on designated days, or is prohibited during a construction project defined by designated hours or days;

     L.     The sheriff has probable cause to believe that the vehicle operator is driving while suspended or revoked in violation of ORS 811.175 or 811.182;

     M.    The sheriff has probable cause to believe that the vehicle operator is operating a vehicle without driving privileges, or in violation of license restrictions, in violation of ORS 807.010;

     N.    The sheriff has probable cause to believe that the vehicle operator, at or just prior to the time the sheriff stops him or her, is driving under the influence of intoxicants in violation of ORS 813.010;

     O.    The sheriff has probable cause to believe that the vehicle operator, at or just prior to the time the sheriff stops him or her, is speed racing on a county highway, in violation of ORS 811.125;

     P.     The vehicle is parked, stopped, or left standing in any county park area after the daily closing time and before the daily opening time, or in violation of any “no parking” signs or markings authorized by the park supervisor, or otherwise in violation of the Clackamas County park rules chapter;

     Q.    The sheriff has probable cause to believe the driver of the vehicle has been fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer (ORS 811.540), and the vehicle is abandoned by the driver; or

     R.     The sheriff has probable cause to believe the driver of the vehicle has failed to perform the duties of a driver when property damaged or persons injured (ORS 811.700 or 811.705), and the vehicle is abandoned by the driver. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.090 Reserved.
(Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.100 Reserved.
(Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.110 Notice after tow.
     After a vehicle has been towed under this chapter, notice shall be provided as set forth in ORS 819.180, which provides as follows:

 

     ORS 819.180 Notice after removal; method; contents. (1) If an authority takes custody of a vehicle under ORS 819.120, the authority shall provide, by certified mail within 48 hours of the removal, written notice with an explanation of procedures available for obtaining a hearing under ORS 819.190 to the owners of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation. The notice shall state that the vehicle has been taken into custody and shall give the location of the vehicle and describe procedures for the release of the vehicle and for obtaining a hearing under ORS 819.190. The 48-hour period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

     (2) Any notice given under this section after a vehicle is taken into custody and removed shall state all of the following:

     (a) That the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed, the identity of the appropriate authority that took the vehicle into custody and removed the vehicle and the statute, ordinance or rule under which the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed.

     (b) The location of the vehicle or the telephone number and address of the appropriate authority that will provide the information.

     (c) That the vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges, the amount of charges that have accrued to the date of the notice and the daily storage charges.

     (d) That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for payment of the towing and storage charges and that the vehicle and its contents will be sold to cover the charges if the charges are not paid by a date specified by the appropriate authority.

     (e) That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to contest the validity of taking the vehicle into custody and removing it and to contest the reasonableness of the charges for towing and storage if a hearing is timely requested.

     (f) The time within which a hearing must be requested and the method for requesting a hearing.

     (g) That the vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed by presentation to the appropriate authority of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and either payment of the towing and storage charges or the deposit of cash security or a bond equal to the charges with the appropriate authority.

 

(Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.120 Vehicle inventory and report.
     When the sheriff orders a vehicle to be towed, the sheriff shall:

     A.    Search and inventory the contents of the vehicle, including the contents of closed, unlocked containers, and including the contents of closed, locked containers, if the keys to the lock are readily available;

     B.     Complete and sign a property evidence/vehicle inventory report (PE/VI Report), which shall include:

     1.     The reason for the tow;

     The name of the company towing the vehicle;

     The name of the company or agency having custody of the vehicle for storage; and

     A list of the contents of the vehicle, including the contents of closed, unlocked containers, and including the contents of closed, locked containers if the keys to the lock are readily available;

     C.     Provide a copy of the PE/VI Report to the registered owner(s) and to any other person(s) who reasonably appear(s) to have an interest in the vehicle; these copy(ies) shall be mailed within forty-eight (48) hours of the tow (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded); if copy(ies) are provided at the time of the tow, or provided when the vehicle is reclaimed within forty-eight (48) hours of the tow, then no mailing of these copy(ies) is required; and

     D.    If the vehicle is towed to and stored at a county-owned facility, it shall be searched and inventoried pursuant to this section, and detachable items which reasonably appear to be of value shall be removed from the vehicle and placed in the property control room of the sheriff’s department. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.130 Affixing boot without prior notice.
     The sheriff may, without prior notice, order a boot placed on a vehicle when:

     A.    Three or more parking citations have been issued for violations of Sections 10.28.020 or 6.06.11, which have not been paid or contested within the time allowed by law;

     B.     The sheriff has probable cause to believe that the vehicle operator is driving uninsured in violation of ORS 806.010;

     C.     The vehicle registration as indicated by registration stickers or registration card has been expired for ninety (90) days or more, the vehicle is required to be registered when operated on a highway, and the vehicle is parked or being operated on a county highway;

     D.    The vehicle is parked on property owned, operated or occupied by the county, other than highways or clearly designated public parking spaces, without express county permission;

     E.     The sheriff has probable cause to believe the vehicle is stolen;

     F.     The vehicle is parked on any county highway for more than seventy-two (72) hours without being moved at least three vehicle lengths away;

     G.    The vehicle is illegally parked in a conspicuously posted restricted space, zone, or traffic lane where parking is limited to designated classes of vehicles or is prohibited in excess of a designated time period, or during certain hours, or on designated days, or is prohibited during a construction project defined by designated hours or days;

     H.    The sheriff has probable cause to believe that the vehicle operator, at or just prior to the time the sheriff stops him or her, is speed racing on a highway, in violation of ORS 811.125;

     I.      The vehicle is parked, stopped, or left standing in any county park area after the daily closing time and before the daily opening time, or in violation of any “no parking” signs or markings authorized by the park supervisor, or otherwise in violation of the Clackamas County park rules chapter;

     J.      The vehicle is parked in violation of ORS 811.615 (failure to display disabled parking permit), ORS 811.625 or 811.630 (unlawful use of disabled parking permit);

     K.    The sheriff has probable cause to believe the driver of the vehicle has been fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer (ORS 811.540), and the vehicle is abandoned by the driver; or

     L.     The sheriff has probable cause to believe the driver of the vehicle has failed to perform the duties of a driver when property damaged or persons injured (ORS 811.700 or 811.705), and the vehicle is abandoned by the driver. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.140 Notice after affixing boot.
     A.    After a boot has been affixed to a vehicle pursuant to this chapter, notice will be provided to the registered owner(s) and any other person(s) who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle. Notice shall be provided by:

     1.     Affixing a notice to the vehicle; and

     Mailing a notice to the registered owner(s) and any other person(s) who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle within seventy-two (72) hours (Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excluded) after the boot is affixed.

     B.     The affixed notice and mailed notice shall state:

     1.     That a boot has been affixed to the vehicle;

     The address and telephone number of the person or facility that may be contacted for information on the fines and fees that must be paid before the boot will be removed and the procedures for obtaining the removal of the boot;

     That the boot will not be removed until payment of a fee in an amount set by the board of county commissioners to offset the county’s costs in applying the boot (“boot fee”) plus any unpaid, outstanding fines (or the equivalent bail);

     That a hearing may be requested to contest the validity of the placement of the boot; and the method of requesting a hearing, including the time within which a hearing must be requested; and

     That all fines and fees, or bail, must be paid, or a hearing requested, within nine days after the boot is affixed, or the vehicle will be subject to tow. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.150 Unidentifiable vehicle.
     A notice otherwise required by this chapter is not required when:

     A.    A vehicle required by law to display license plates does not display license plates, or displays plates registered to a vehicle not matching the subject vehicle, and the vehicle identification number is not visible or does not indicate the ownership of the vehicle after inquiry to the Oregon Motor Vehicles Division records; or

     B.     The owner of the vehicle, or other person(s) with an interest in the vehicle, cannot be determined after inquiry to the licensing and registration agency of the state from which the license plates originate. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.160 Request for hearing.
     A.    Any person who has an interest in a vehicle subject to towing or booting under this chapter may request a hearing to contest the validity of the towing or booting. Any such person may also request a hearing to contest the reasonableness of the towing or storage charges, unless the person, or the owner, specifically requested the tow or storage company used.

     B.     The request for hearing must be in writing and must state the grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes the tow (or boot) to be invalid. The request for hearing must also contain such other information relating to the purposes of this chapter as the hearings officer may require.

     C.     Such a request for hearing must be received by the sheriff’s department within the following number of days:

     1.     If the hearing is to contest a citation, within fourteen (14) days from the issuance of the citation;

     2.     If the hearing is to contest a tow without prior notice, within fourteen (14) days of the tow;

     3.     If the vehicle has been booted, within nine days of the date the vehicle was booted.

     D.    The hearings officer will set and conduct an administrative hearing on the matter within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of a timely request for hearing (not including Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays), except in cases where the vehicle is not in custody because it has not yet been towed or has been reclaimed from the tow company. In such cases, the hearing will be set and conducted within fourteen (14) days of the date request for hearing is received (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays). (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.170 Hearing.
     A.    Tow hearings shall afford a reasonable opportunity for the person(s) requesting them to demonstrate, by the statements of witnesses and other evidence, that the tow or placement of a boot is invalid, or that the towing or storage charges are unreasonable where the company was not specifically requested by the person or the owner.

     B.     The towing and storage charges shall be presumed reasonable.

     C.     The county shall have the burden of showing that the tow, or proposed tow, or the placement of the boot, was or would be, valid.

     D.    The office of the parking and towing hearings officer is hereby established. The hearings officer shall hold hearings on cases of disputed citations and tows, and act on behalf of the board of county commissioners in accordance with this chapter. The hearings officer shall be appointed by the board of county commissioners and serve at its pleasure. The hearings officer may establish necessary rules and regulations regarding the conduct of such hearings, consistent with this section.

     E.     The decision of the hearings officer is the county’s final decision.

     F.     The owner(s) and any other person(s) who have an interest in the vehicle are entitled to only one hearing for each seizure of that vehicle.

     G.    If the person requesting a hearing fails to appear at the hearing, the hearings officer may enter an order finding the tow or boot to be valid, and assessing towing and storage charges against the owner. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.180 When tow or boot found invalid.
     If the hearings officer finds the tow or boot was, or would be invalid, the hearings officer shall order:

     A.    That the vehicle immediately be released if already towed, and any money paid by the person requesting the hearing for tow and storage charges to be returned to that person;

     B.     That the vehicle not be towed if it has not yet been towed; or

     C.     That the boot be removed from the vehicle if a boot has been affixed, and the boot fee waived; and

     D.    That appropriate disposition is made of any bail, which has been posted. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.190 Reserved.
(Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.200 When tow or boot found valid.
     If the hearings officer finds the tow or boot to be valid, the hearings officer shall:

     A.    Assess the amount of the fine under this chapter;

     B.     If the vehicle is still booted or held, order that it continue to be booted or towed to storage or held until all charges, fines, and fees have been paid, or until county ordinances or state statutes allow for further disposition or sale;

     C.     If the vehicle is subject to towing after prior notice, order the vehicle to be towed and impounded until all fines, fees and charges have been paid, or until ordinances and statutes allow for other disposition; and

     D.    Order appropriate disposition of any bail, which has been posted. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.210 Payment of towing charges—Reasonableness.
     A.    If the hearings officer finds the towing or booting was valid, or if the validity of the tow cannot be challenged because prior notice was given and no hearing was requested in a timely manner, s/he shall determine whether the towing and storage charges are reasonable, and order that the towing and storage charges be paid:

     1.     By the person requesting a hearing, or other person claiming possession of the vehicle, to the extent the charges are reasonable; and

     By the county or the tow company to the extent the charges are unreasonable.

     B.     If the hearings officer finds the towing or booting was invalid, s/he shall determine whether the towing and storage charges are reasonable, and order that the towing and storage charges be paid by the county or the towing company.

     C.     The hearings officer shall not order that the towing or storage charges be paid by the county in any case where the state police have ordered the vehicle towed and then transferred authority over the vehicle to the county under ORS 819.140(1)(a).

     D.    Payments already made to tow or to storage companies may be offset or reimbursed in appropriate cases. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.220 Lien for towing charges—Release of vehicle.
     A.    Any person who tows or stores any vehicle pursuant to this chapter shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents, in accordance with ORS 87.152, for the just and reasonable charges for the tow and storage services performed. The person may retain possession of the vehicle, consistent with law, until towing and storage charges have been paid.

     B.     A towed or booted vehicle and its contents must be immediately released to the person(s) entitled to lawful possession once the following obligations are satisfied:

     1.     Payment of towing and storage charges;

     2.     Payment of outstanding fees, fines or the equivalent bail (including, but not limited to, fines under Chapter 6.06 and 10.28);

     3.     Proof of liability insurance covering the vehicle, if the vehicle was towed for the operator’s failure to have liability insurance;

     Proof of registration, if the vehicle was towed for expired registration;

     Proof of ownership, a valid driver’s license, and liability insurance covering the vehicle, if the vehicle is towed for any of the following:

     a.     Driving while suspended or revoked;

     b.     Driving without driving privileges or in violation of license restrictions;

     c.     Driving under the influence of intoxicants;

     d.     Speed racing on highway;

     e.     Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer; or

     f.      Failure to perform the duties of a driver; and

     A release by the responsible officials of the sheriff’s office or district attorney’s office of a vehicle impounded as evidence, when it is no longer needed as evidence.

     C.     If towing and storage charges and outstanding fees, fines, or the equivalent bail have not been paid, a vehicle will not be released, except upon order of the hearings officer.

     D.    A vehicle towed or booted pursuant to this chapter may only be released to the owner, or to the person who was lawfully in possession or control of the vehicle at the time it was towed or booted, or to a person who purchased it from the owner and who produces written proof of ownership. In all cases, adequate evidence of the right to possession of the vehicle must be presented prior to release.

     E.     If a vehicle has been towed by order of the sheriff, or if authority over a towed vehicle has been transferred to the sheriff, the person claiming the vehicle shall pay to the sheriff’s department an administrative fee in an amount set by resolution of the board of county commissioners in order to obtain release of the vehicle. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

 

10.28.230 Sale of vehicle.
     A.    Any vehicle that is not reclaimed within the time allowed by law may be sold, provided however that if a hearing or decision of the hearings officer is pending, the vehicle shall not be sold until seven days after a decision is rendered. The contents of any vehicle are subject to the same conditions of sale as the vehicle in which they were found. A vehicle is not “reclaimed” until the owner(s) or other person(s) entitled to possession of the vehicle has fully paid all required fines, fees, and charges, and provided such other documentation as is required under this chapter.

     B.     Vehicles to be sold shall be sold:

     1.     At public auction in the manner provided in ORS 87.172 to 87.206 (sixty (60) days to reclaim); or

     Vehicles appraised at a value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, may be sold under the provisions of ORS 819.220 (fifteen (15) days to reclaim); or

     Abandoned vehicles appraised at a value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, may be disposed of as provided in ORS 819.215 (fifteen (15) days to reclaim).

     C.     The proceeds of such sale or disposition will be first applied to payment of the cost of such sale and expense incurred in the preservation and custody of such vehicles and the balance, if any, will be credited to the general fund of the county. (Ord. 260 § 1, 2003)

Title 11 (Reserved)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 ROAD STANDARDS
Chapter 12.05 UTILITY FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 12.06 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 12.08 ROAD NAMES AND STREET ADDRESSES
Chapter 12.16 PARKS

Chapter 12.04 ROAD STANDARDS
12.04.010 Purpose.
     This chapter governs right-of-way impediments, entrances and other activities within the right-of-way not including utility work. Work in the right-of-way by utilities is governed by the provisions of Chapter 12.05. (Ord. 489 § 2, 2016; Ord. 352 § 3, 2007; Ord. 213, 2000)

 

12.04.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter the following words have the following meanings:

     “Applicant/owner” means a corporation, cooperative, company, firm, business, partnership, individual(s) whose name(s) and signature(s) appear on a permit and to whom the permit is issued.

     “City engineer” means the Happy Valley city engineer, or other officer designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereunder.

     “Council” means the Happy Valley city council.

     “Department” means the Happy Valley public works department.

     “Design manual” or “manual” means the Happy Valley engineering design and standard details manual as may be adopted by council and thereafter updated or modified from time to time by the public works director or city engineer.

     “Fixed object” means any natural or manmade object (including vegetation) that could potentially cause harm to a vehicle or its occupants. “Vegetation” specifically includes trees greater than six inches in diameter.

     “Person” means and includes individuals, cooperatives, corporations, associations, firms, partnerships, joint stock companies, trusts and estates, municipalities and any other legal entities whatsoever.

     “Public works director” means the person holding the position of public works director or such other officer, employee or agent designated by the city manager to perform the duties of the public works director in this chapter.

     “Road/roadway” means and includes the entire right-of-way, along with any improvements, including (but not limited to) the paved surface, shoulders, driveway entrances, ditches, culverts and other drainage features, bridges and other structures, guard rails, curbs, sidewalks, and traffic controls.

     “Right-of-way” means and includes the space in, upon, above, along, across, over or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, bridges, trails, paths, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, public utility easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but does not include parks, parkland, or other city property not generally open to the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest and authority to grant a license to occupy and use such areas for utility facilities. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 489 § 2, 2016; Ord. 352 § 3, 2007; Ord. 213, 2000)

 

12.04.030 Compliance.
     Every person shall comply with the requirements of the design manual and this chapter in the location, construction, alteration, maintenance and repair of any portion of the right-of-way within the city; provided, however, that work in the right-of-way by utility operators is governed by the provisions of Chapter 12.05. (Ord. 489 § 2, 2016; Ord. 352 § 3, 2007; Ord. 213, 2000)

 

12.04.090 Road use impediments—Prohibited activity and uses.
     A.    Potential Hazards. No person shall allow any of the following on any portion of the right-of-way abutting property he/she owns or occupies or upon any public easement:

     1.     Earth;

     2.     Rock;

     3.     Vegetation;

     4.     Structures;

     5.     Objects;

     6.     Debris;

     7.     Disabled vehicles;

     8.     Anything that may cause a potential hazard to the public in their use of a sidewalk, including vertical displacements on the surface or cracks or other evidence of disrepair.

     B.     Visual Impediments to Safe Road Use.

     1.     No person shall allow any of the following on or in the right-of-way abutting property he or she owns/occupies if it obstructs the view necessary for safe operation of motor vehicles:

     a.     Trees;

     b.     Shrubs;

     c.     Hedges;

     d.     Any vegetation;

     e.     Projecting overhanging limbs of vegetation;

     f.      Temporary or permanent structures;

     g.     Fences;

     h.     Berms;

     i.      Disabled vehicles; or

     j.      Natural or manmade objects.

     2.     No person shall allow any fixed object to exist within the right-of-way if it compromises the intersection sight distance set out in the manual.

     C.     Obstruction of Official Traffic Control Device. No person shall allow anything to exist or remain within the right-of-way or clear vision area inconsistent with the requirements imposed by the manual.

     D.    Regulations for Mailboxes, Newspaper Boxes, Other Receptacles. No person shall allow any mailbox, newspaper box or other receptacle to exist on the road right-of-way unless it conforms to the safety standards outlined in the manual or as authorized by the United States Postal Service. (Ord. 489 § 2, 2016; Ord. 352 § 5, 2007; Ord. 213, 2000)

 

12.04.100 Right-of-way permits.
     A.    Application Requirements. Applications for a permit to construct or reconstruct entrances, driveway approaches or sidewalks or to make other changes or improvements within the right-of-way shall be made on an official permit application, available from the department. The following items must be submitted along with any application(s), unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the department:

     1.     Verification of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the city;

     2.     Performance bond equal to not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of the utility placement as the same is determined by the city engineer or their designate;

     3.     Any drawings requested by the city engineer to illustrate the work described in the application;

     4.     A drawing clearly depicting protection devices, such as guardrails or bollards, for supplemental review by the city engineer to ensure compliance with the manual;

     5.     A fee to compensate city for staff and related costs associated with review of the application;

     6.     Any additional information or items the department determines are necessary in the interest of public safety and welfare.

     B.     The permit holder shall be responsible for providing correct and complete information. If the city engineer believes the holder misrepresented, misstated or omitted any material fact(s), denial or revocation of the permit may occur. The city engineer may at any time require the permit holder take additional measures to protect or promote the convenience of the public. The permit holder shall be responsible for and pay all costs for such measures.

     C.     Rules Regarding Commencement of Installation. If the applicant/owner fails to commence installation by the date specified, the permit shall be deemed void and all privileges thereunder shall be forfeited, unless a notice and acknowledgment of a different start date is confirmed with the city engineer or public works director.

     D.    Commencement of Surety Repair Period. Upon initial completion of the installation and/or restoration repairs, the applicant/owner shall notify the city engineer who shall cause an inspection of the installation or repair to be performed. Following the inspection and finding the installation and/or repaired right-of-way to be consistent with the standards set out in the manual, a three-year surety repair period shall begin. (Ord. 489 § 2, 2016; Ord. 352 § 5, 2007; Ord. 213, 2000)

 

12.04.120 Liability, control and responsibility for utilities.
     A.    Restoration or Repair of Roadway. If the public works director or city engineer reasonably believe the physical character of the right-of-way has been changed, degraded and/or damaged by the applicant/owner, the applicant/owner shall restore or repair the damage or degradation in compliance with the manual regardless of whether the damage is discovered at the time of installation or later. If the applicant/owner fails to restore or repair the right-of-way to the satisfaction of the public works director or city engineer, the city may then make the necessary restoration or repairs using either a private contractor or city employees and impose the costs incurred by the city on the applicant/owner.

     B.     Inspections and Compliance Checks. To insure compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit, the city may cause random inspections of the work to be done, check compliance with the terms of the permit, and require the applicant/owner to correct all deviations from those terms and conditions.

     C.     City Supervision Shall Not Impact Liability of Applicant/Owner. Any supervision or control exercised by the city shall not relieve applicant/owner of any duty to the general public nor shall such supervision or control relieve applicant/owner from any liability for loss, damage or injury to persons or property. (Ord. 489 § 2, 2016; Ord. 352 § 5, 2007; Ord. 213, 2000)

 

12.04.140 Traffic control.
     A.    Required Safety Devices and Protections for the Public. During the installation, construction, or performance of any work connected with the permit, the applicant/ owner shall at all times ensure the presence of such workers, tools and materials, flaggers, barricades and other safety devices as may be necessary to properly protect bicyclists, pedestrians, construction personnel and vehicular traffic upon the roadway, and to warn and safeguard the public against injury or damage resulting from the applicant’s/owner’s work.

     B.     Minimizing Interference and Interruption of Traffic. The applicant/owner shall conduct all work in a manner that minimizes interference and interruption of traffic upon and along the impacted roadways and the city may require special conditions in connection with the handling of traffic to ensure traffic safety or convenience. (Ord. 489 § 2, 2016; Ord. 352 § 5, 2007; Ord. 213, 2000)

 

12.04.210 Protection of survey monuments in the vicinity of utilities.
     A.    Location and Protection of Monuments as Responsibility of Applicant/Owner. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant/
owner to determine the location of and to protect all survey monuments in the vicinity of the installation, construction or work connected with the permit.

     B.     Removal, Disturbance or Destruction of Survey Monuments. Should it become necessary to remove, disturb or destroy any survey monument(s) of record in the course of the applicant’s/owner’s work, the applicant/owner shall cause a registered professional land surveyor to preserve the monument(s), doing so in the manner described in ORS Sections 209.140 and 209.150. The costs of referencing and replacing the survey monuments shall be paid by the applicant/owner. (Ord. 489 § 2, 2016; Ord. 352 § 7, 2007; Ord. 213, 2000)

Chapter 12.05 UTILITY FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
12.05.010 Title.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referenced as the “utility facilities in public rights-of-way ordinance.” (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.020 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

     A.    Permit and manage reasonable access to the rights-of-way of the city for utility purposes and conserve the limited physical capacity of those rights-of-way held in trust by the city consistent with applicable state and federal law;

     B.     Assure that the city’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating access to and the use of the rights-of-way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;

     C.     Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and its residents for permitting use of the rights-of-way;

     D.    Assure that all utility companies, persons and other entities owning or operating facilities and/or providing services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;

     E.     Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;

     F.     Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive utility services on the widest possible basis to businesses and residents of the city; and

     G.    Comply with applicable provisions of state and federal law. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.030 Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.
     A.    The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all rights-of-way within the city under authority of the city charter and state law.

     B.     The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way, and whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

     C.     The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

     D.    The provisions of this chapter are subject to and will be applied consistent with applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, and, to the extent possible, shall be interpreted to be consistent with such laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.040 Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.
     A.    The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all other federal, state, local, and city charges as may be levied, imposed, or due from a utility operator, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of utility services.

     B.     The city has determined that any fee or tax provided for by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees or taxes are not imposed on property or property owners.

     C.     The fees and costs provided for in this chapter are subject to applicable federal and state laws. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.050 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive.

     “Cable service” is to be defined consistent with federal laws and means the one-way transmission to subscribers of: (1) video programming; or (2) other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

     “City” means the city of Happy Valley, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.

     “City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Happy Valley, Oregon.

     “City design manual” means the Happy Valley Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual as may be adopted by the city council and thereafter updated or modified from time to time by the public works director or city engineer.

     “City facilities” means city or publicly-owned structures or equipment located within the right-of-way or public easement used for governmental purposes.

     “Communications services” means any service provided for the purpose of transmission of information including, but not limited to, voice, video, or data, without regard to the transmission protocol employed, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself. Communications service includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video, data or information transport, but does not include: (1) cable service; (2) open video system service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. 76; (3) private communications system services provided without using the public rights-of-way; (4) over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public-at-large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; (5) direct-to-home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act; and (6) public communications systems.

     “License” means the authorization granted by the city to a utility operator pursuant to this chapter.

     “Person” means and includes any individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, company, partnership, co-partnership, joint-stock company, trust, limited liability company, association, municipality, special district, government entity or other organization, including any natural person or any other legal entity.

     “Private communications system” means a system, including the construction, maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person for their use and not for sale or resale, including trade, barter or other exchange of value, directly or indirectly, to any person.

     “Public communications system” means any system owned or operated by a government entity or entities for its exclusive use for internal communications or communications with other government entities, and includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 283.140. “Public communications system” does not include any system used for sale or resale, including trade, barter or other exchange of value, of communications services or capacity on the system, directly or indirectly, to any person.

     “Public utility easement” means the space in, upon, above, along, across, over or under an easement for the constructing, reconstructing, operating, maintaining, inspecting, and repairing of utilities facilities. “Public utility easement” does not include an easement: (1) that has been privately acquired by a utility operator; (2) solely for the constructing, reconstructing, operating, maintaining, inspecting, and repairing of city facilities; or (3) where the proposed use by the utility operator is inconsistent with the terms of any easement granted to the city.

     “Right-of-way” means and includes, but is not limited to, the space in, upon, above, along, across, over or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, bridges, trails, paths, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, public utility easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but does not include parks, parkland, or other city property not generally open to the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest and authority to grant a license to occupy and use such areas for utility facilities.

     “State” means the state of Oregon.

     “Utility facility” or “facility” means any physical component of a system, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, transmitters, plant, equipment and other facilities, located within, under or above the rights-of-way, any portion of which is used or designed to be used to deliver, transmit or otherwise provide utility service.

     “Utility operator” or “operator” means any person who owns, places, operates or maintains a utility facility within the city.

     “Utility service” means the provision, by means of utility facilities permanently located within, under or above the rights-of-way, whether or not such facilities are owned by the service provider, of electricity, natural gas, communications services, cable services, water, sewer, and/or storm sewer to or from customers within the corporate boundaries of the city, and/or the transmission or provision of any of these services through the city whether or not customers within the city are served.

     “Work” means the construction, demolition, installation, replacement, repair, maintenance or relocation of any utility facility, including, but not limited to, any excavation and restoration required in association with such construction, demolition, installation, replacement, repair, maintenance or relocation. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.060 Registration.
     A.    Registration Required. Every person that desires to provide utility services to customers within the city shall register with the city prior to providing any utility services to any customer in the city. Every person providing utility services to customers within the city as of the effective date of this chapter shall register no later than July 1, 2016.

     B.     Annual Registration. After registering with the city pursuant to subsection A of this section, the registrant shall, by December 31st of each year, file with the city a new registration form if it intends to provide utility service at any time in the following calendar year. Registrants that file an initial registration pursuant to subsection A on or after September 30th shall not be required to file an annual registration until December 31st of the following year.

     C.     Registration Application. The registration shall be on a form provided by the city, and shall be accompanied by any additional documents required by the city to identify the registrant and its legal status, describe the type of utility services provided or to be provided by the registrant and a description of the facilities over which the utility services will be provided.

     D.    Registration Fee. Each application for registration shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council.

     E.     Exception. A person with a valid franchise agreement or license from the city shall not be required to register to provide the utility services expressly permitted by the franchise agreement or license. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.070 Licenses.
     A.    License Required.

     1.     Except those utility operators with a valid franchise agreement from the city, every person shall obtain a license from the city prior to conducting any work in the rights-of- way.

     2.     Every person that owns or controls utility facilities in the rights-of-way as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply for a license from the city by the later of: (a) July 1, 2016; or (b) the expiration of a valid franchise granted by the city, unless a new franchise is granted by the city pursuant to subsection E of this section.

     B.     License Application. The license application shall be on a form provided by the city, and shall be accompanied by any additional documents required by the application to identify the applicant, its legal status, including its authorization to do business in Oregon, a description of the type of utility service provided or to be provided by the applicant, a description of the facilities over which the utility service will be provided, and other information reasonably necessary to determine the applicant’s ability to comply with the terms of this chapter.

     C.     License Application Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee or deposit set by resolution of the city council in an amount sufficient to fully recover all of the city’s costs related to processing the application for the license.

     D.    Determination by City. The city shall issue, within a reasonable period of time, a written determination granting or denying the license in whole or in part. If the license is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The license shall be evaluated based upon the provisions of this chapter, the continuing capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed utility facilities and the applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and policies.

     E.     Franchise Agreements. If the public interest warrants, as determined by the city, the city and utility operator may enter into a written franchise agreement that includes terms that clarify, enhance, expand, waive or vary the provisions of this chapter, consistent with applicable state and federal law. The franchise may conflict with the terms of this chapter with the review and approval of city council. The franchisee shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter to the extent such provisions are not in conflict with the express provisions of any such franchise. In the event of a conflict between the express provisions of a franchise and this chapter, the franchise shall control.

     F.     Rights Granted.

     1.     The license granted hereunder shall authorize and permit the licensee, subject to the provisions of the city code and other applicable provisions of state or federal law, to construct, place, maintain, upgrade, repair and operate utility facilities in the rights-of-way for the term of the license.

     2.     Any license granted pursuant to this chapter shall not convey equitable or legal title in the rights-of-way, and may not be assigned or transferred except as permitted in subsection K of this section.

     3.     Neither the issuance of the license nor any provisions contained therein shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power, police power or regulatory power of the city as may exist at the time the license is issued or thereafter obtained.

     G.    Term. Subject to the termination provisions in subsection M of this section, the license granted pursuant to this chapter will remain in effect for a term of five years.

     H.    License Nonexclusive. No license granted pursuant to this section shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the rights-of-way for delivery of utility services or any other purpose. The city expressly reserves the right to grant licenses, franchises or other rights to other persons, as well as the city’s right to use the rights-of-way, for similar or different purposes. The license is subject to all recorded deeds, easements, dedications, conditions, covenants, restrictions, encumbrances, and claims of title of record that may affect the rights-of-way. Nothing in the license shall be deemed to grant, convey, create, or vest in licensee a real property interest in land, including any fee, leasehold interest or easement.

     I.      Reservation of City Rights. Nothing in the license shall be construed to prevent the city from grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any rights-of-way, constructing, laying down, repairing, relocating or removing city facilities or establishing any other public work, utility or improvement of any kind, including repairs, replacement or removal of any city facilities. If any of licensee’s utility facilities interfere with the construction, repair, replacement, alteration or removal of any rights-of-way, public work, city utility, city improvement or city facility, except those providing utility services in competition with a licensee, licensee’s facilities shall be removed or relocated as provided in subsections C, D and E of Section 12.05.090, in a manner acceptable to the city and consistent with industry standard engineering and safety codes.

     J.      Multiple Services.

     1.     A utility operator that provides or transmits or allows the provision or transmission of utility services and other services over its facilities is subject to the license and right-of-way use fee requirements of this chapter for the portion of the facilities and extent of utility services delivered over those facilities. Nothing in this subsection (J)(1) requires a utility operator to pay the right-of-way use fee, if any, owed to the city by a third party using the utility operator’s facilities.

     2.     A utility operator that provides or transmits more than one utility service over its facilities is not required to obtain a separate license or franchise for each utility service, provided that it gives notice to the city of each utility service provided or transmitted and pays the applicable right-of-way use fee for each utility service.

     K.    Transfer or Assignment. To the extent permitted by applicable state and federal laws, the licensee shall obtain the written consent of the city prior to the transfer or assignment of the license. The license shall not be transferred or assigned unless the proposed transferee or assignee is authorized under all applicable laws to own or operate the utility system and the transfer or assignment is approved by all agencies or organizations required or authorized under federal and state laws to approve such transfer or assignment. If a license is transferred or assigned, the transferee or assignee shall become responsible for fulfilling all of the obligations under the license with respect to all facilities of the licensee at the time of transfer or assignment. A transfer or assignment of a license does not extend the term of the license.

     L.     Renewal. At least ninety (90), but no more than one hundred eighty (180), days prior to the expiration of a license granted pursuant to this section, a licensee seeking renewal of its license shall submit a license application to the city, including all information required in subsection B of this section and the application fee required in subsection C of this section. The city shall review the application as required by subsection D of this section and grant or deny the license within ninety (90) days of submission of the application. If the city determines that the licensee is in violation of the terms of this chapter at the time it submits its application, the city may require that the licensee cure the violation or submit a detailed plan to cure the violation within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the city, before the city will consider the application and/or grant the license. If the city requires the licensee to cure or submit a plan to cure a violation, the city will grant or deny the license application within ninety (90) days of confirming that the violation has been cured or of accepting the licensee’s plan to cure the violation.

     M.    Termination.

     1.     Revocation or Termination of a License. The city council may terminate or revoke the license granted pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons:

     a.     Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;

     b.     Violation of any provision of the license;

     c.     Misrepresentation in a license application;

     d.     Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs due the city after final determination of the taxes, compensation, fees or costs;

     e.     Failure to restore the rights-of-way after construction as required by this chapter or other applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations;

     f.      Failure to comply with technical, safety and engineering standards related to work in the rights-of-way; or

     g.     Failure to obtain or maintain any and all licenses, permits, certifications and other authorizations required by state or federal law for the placement, maintenance and/or operation of the utility facilities.

     2.     Standards for Revocation or Termination. In determining whether termination, revocation or some other sanction is appropriate, the following factors shall be considered:

     a.     The egregiousness of the misconduct;

     b.     The harm that resulted;

     c.     Whether the violation was intentional;

     d.     The utility operator’s history of compliance; and/or

     e.     The utility operator’s cooperation in discovering, admitting and/or curing the violation.

     3.     Notice and Cure. The city shall give the utility operator written notice of any apparent violations before terminating a license. The notice shall include a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance and provide a reasonable time (no less than twenty (20) and no more than forty (40) days) for the utility operator to demonstrate that the utility operator has remained in compliance, that the utility operator has cured or is in the process of curing any violation or noncompliance, or that it would be in the public interest to impose a penalty or sanction less than termination or revocation. If the utility operator is in the process of curing a violation or noncompliance, the utility operator must demonstrate that it acted promptly and continues to actively work on compliance. If the utility operator does not respond or if the city manager or designee determines that the utility operator’s response is inadequate, the city manager or designee shall refer the matter to the city council, which shall provide a duly noticed public hearing to determine whether the license shall be terminated or revoked. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.080 Construction and restoration.
     A.    Construction Codes. Utility facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated, repaired and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations, including the city design manual, the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code. When a utility operator, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting the rights-of-way, the utility operator shall, at its own expense, promptly restore the rights-of-way as directed by the city consistent with applicable city codes, rules and regulations, and the city design manual.

     B.     Construction Permits.

     1.     No person shall perform any work on utility facilities within the rights-of-way without first obtaining all required permits. The city shall not issue a permit for the construction, installation, maintenance or repair of utility facilities unless the utility operator of the facilities has applied for and received the license required by this chapter, or has a current franchise with the city, and all applicable fees have been paid.

     2.     In the event of an emergency, a utility operator with a license pursuant to this chapter or its contractor may perform work on its utility facilities without first obtaining a permit from the city, provided that, to the extent reasonably feasible, it attempts to notify the city prior to commencing the emergency work and in any event applies for a permit from the city as soon as reasonably practicable, but not more than forty-eight (48) hours after commencing the emergency work. As used in this subsection, “emergency” means a circumstance in which immediate work on facilities is necessary to restore lost service or prevent immediate harm to persons or property.

     3.     Applications for permits to construct utility facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

     a.     That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

     b.     The location and route of all utility facilities to be installed aboveground or on existing utility poles.

     c.     The location and route of all utility facilities on or in the rights-of-way to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route that are within the rights-of-way. Applicant’s existing utility facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction. A cross section shall be provided showing applicant’s new or existing utility facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way.

     d.     The construction methods to be employed for work within or adjacent to the rights-of-way, and description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

     e.     The permittee has an adequate traffic control plan.

     4.     All permit applications shall be accompanied by the verification of a qualified and duly authorized representative of the applicant that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. The city engineer or designee may, in his or her sole discretion, require the verification of a registered professional engineer.

     5.     All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include an estimated start date and a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by city engineer or designee.

     6.     Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council.

     7.     If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this chapter, the city engineer or designee shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the utility facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.

     8.     Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the city engineer or designee not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or construction in the rights-of-way.

     9.     All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the utility facilities. The city engineer or designee and their representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.

     10.   All work which does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed or corrected at the sole expense of the permittee. The city is authorized to stop work in order to assure compliance with the provision of this chapter. If the permittee fails to remove or correct work as required in this subsection, the city may remove or correct the work at the expense of the permittee, after notice and opportunity to cure, using qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations.

     11.   The permittee shall be responsible for providing correct and complete information. If the city engineer or designee believes the permittee misrepresented, misstated or omitted any material fact(s) in its permit application, the city engineer or designee may deny or revoke the permit. The city engineer or designee may at any time require the permit holder to take additional measures to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The permit holder shall be responsible for and pay all costs for such measures.

     12.   The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within the rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been approved by the city engineer or designee.

     13.   Traffic Control Plan. The permittee shall protect the work area with sufficient traffic controls reviewed and approved by the city engineer or designee before work begins. The permittee shall at all times ensure the presence of such workers, tools and materials, flaggers, barricades and other safety devices as may be necessary to properly protect bicyclists, pedestrians, construction personnel and vehicular traffic upon the roadway, and to warn and safeguard the public against injury or damage resulting from the work.

     13.   Any supervision or control exercised by the city shall not relieve the permittee or utility operator of any duty to the general public nor shall such supervision or control relieve the permittee or utility operator from any liability for loss, damage or injury to persons or property.

     14.   The privileges and obligations created by the permit are binding upon the permittee and any successor(s) and/or assign(s) thereof. The permittee shall give the city engineer or designee written notice of any assignment or transfer.

     C.     Performance Surety.

     1.     The city may require a performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the city equal to at least one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated cost of the work within the rights-of-way of the city, which bond shall be provided before construction is commenced.

     2.     If required, the performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the city shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.

     3.     If required, the performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the city shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

     a.     Timely completion of the work;

     b.     That the work is performed in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

     c.     Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;

     d.     Restoration of the rights-of-way and other property affected by the work; and

     e.     Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material, or services provided in connection with the work.

     4.     The release of the performance bond or other surety pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the utility operator from its obligation to restore rights-of-way or other property as required in subsection E of this section regardless of when the failure to restore rights-of-way or other property as required by this chapter occurs or is discovered.

     D.    Injury to Persons or Property. A utility operator, or any person acting on its behalf, shall preserve and protect from injury or damage other utility operators’ facilities in the rights-of-way, the public using the rights-of-way and any adjoining property, and take other necessary measures to protect life and property, including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, trees or facilities that may be subject to damage from the permitted work. A utility operator shall be responsible for all injury to persons or damage to public or private property resulting from its failure to properly protect people and property and to carry out the work in the rights-of-way.

     E.     Restoration.

     1.     When a utility operator, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any rights-of-way, it shall, at its own expense, promptly restore such rights-of-way to the same or better condition as existed before the work was undertaken, in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, unless otherwise directed by the city and as determined by the city engineer or designee.

     2.     If weather or other conditions beyond the utility operator’s control do not permit the complete restoration required by the city, the utility operator shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way. Such temporary restoration shall be at the utility operator’s sole expense and the utility operator shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule may be subject to approval by the city.

     3.     If the utility operator fails to restore rights-of-way as required in this chapter, the city shall give the utility operator written notice and provide the utility operator a reasonable period of time not less than ten (10) days, unless an emergency or threat to public safety is deemed to exist, and not exceeding thirty (30) days to restore the rights-of-way. If, after said notice, the utility operator fails to restore the rights-of-way as required in this chapter, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the utility operator.

     F.     Inspection. Every utility operator’s facilities shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable state and city codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. Every utility operator shall cooperate with the city in permitting the inspection of utility facilities upon request of the city. The utility operator shall perform all testing, or permit the city to perform any testing at the utility operator’s expense, required by the city to determine that the installation of the utility operator’s facilities and the restoration of the right-of-way comply with the terms of this chapter and applicable state and city codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.

     G.    Coordination of Construction. All utility operators are required to make a good faith effort to both cooperate with and coordinate their construction schedules with those of the city and other users of the rights-of-way.

     1.     Upon request by the city, not more than once per year, utility operators shall meet with the city to discuss, or provide the city with, a schedule of known proposed construction activities for that year in, around or that may affect the rights-of-way.

     2.     Utility operators shall meet with the city annually, or as determined by the city, to schedule and coordinate construction in the rights-of-way.

     3.     All construction locations, activities and schedules within the rights-of-way shall be coordinated as ordered by the city engineer or designee, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption, or damages.

     H.    Contractors. A utility operator may authorize a qualified contractor to perform any of the work authorized or required in this chapter on the utility operator’s behalf. Any contractor performing work on behalf of a utility operator shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. In the event a utility operator authorizes a contractor to perform work on its behalf, the utility operator shall remain responsible and liable for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.090 Location of facilities.
     A.    Location of Facilities. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city, whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or communications facilities are located underground within a right-of-way of the city, the utility operator with permission to occupy the same right- of-way shall install all new facilities underground at no cost to the city. This requirement shall not apply to facilities used for transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-five thousand (35,000) volts or to pedestals, cabinets or other above-ground equipment of any utility operator. The city reserves the right to require written approval of the location of any such above-ground equipment in the right-of-way.

     B.     Interference with the Rights-of-Way. No utility operator or other person may locate or maintain its facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the rights-of-way. Utility facilities shall not be located in areas of restricted sight distance nor interfere with the proper function of traffic control signs, signals, lighting or other devices that affect traffic operation. All use of the rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.

     C.     Relocation of Utility Facilities.

     1.     A utility operator shall, at no cost to the city, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facility within a right-of-way, including relocation of aerial facilities underground, when requested to do so in writing by the city.

     2.     Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the utility operator from requesting reimbursement or compensation from a third party, pursuant to applicable laws, regulations, tariffs or agreements, provided that the utility operator shall timely comply with the requirements of this section regardless of whether or not it has requested or received such reimbursement or compensation.

     3.     The city shall provide written notice of the time by which the utility operator must remove, relocate, change, alter or underground its facilities. If a utility operator fails to remove, relocate, alter or underground any utility facility as requested by the city and by the date reasonably established by the city, the utility operator shall pay all costs incurred by the city due to such failure, including, but not limited to, costs related to project delays, and the city may cause, using qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations, the utility facility to be removed, relocated, altered or undergrounded at the utility operator’s sole expense. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the city, the utility operator shall reimburse the city for the costs the city incurred within thirty (30) days.

     D.    Removal of Unauthorized Facilities.

     1.     Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city engineer or designee, within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city or such other time agreed to in writing by the city, a utility operator and any other person that owns, controls, or maintains any abandoned or unauthorized utility facility within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove the facility and restore the rights-of-way.

     2.     A utility system or facility is unauthorized under any of the following circumstances:

     a.     The utility facility is outside the scope of authority granted by the city under the license, franchise or other written agreement. This includes facilities that were never licensed or franchised and facilities that were once licensed or franchised but for which the license or franchise has expired or been terminated. This does not include any facility for which the city has provided written authorization for abandonment in place.

     b.     The facility has been abandoned and the city has not provided written authorization for abandonment in place. A facility is abandoned if it is not in use and is not planned for further use. A facility will be presumed abandoned if it is not used for a period of one year. A utility operator may overcome this presumption by presenting plans for future use of the facility.

     c.     The utility facility is improperly constructed or installed or is in a location not permitted by the construction permit, license, franchise or this chapter.

     d.     The utility operator is in violation of a material provision of this chapter and fails to cure such violation within thirty (30) days of the city sending written notice of such violation, unless the city extends such time period in writing.

     E.     Removal by City.

     1.     The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move the facilities of any utility operator or similar entity located within the rights-of-way of the city, without notice, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to a public health or safety emergency. The city will use qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations to the extent reasonably practicable without impeding the city’s response to the emergency. The city will notify the utility operator of any cutting or moving of facilities as soon as reasonably practicable after resolution of the emergency.

     2.     If the utility operator fails to remove any facility when required to do so under this chapter, the city may remove the facility using qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations, and the utility operator shall be responsible for paying the full cost of the removal and any administrative costs incurred by the city in removing the facility and obtaining reimbursement. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the city, the utility operator shall reimburse the city for the costs the city incurred within thirty (30) days. The obligation to remove shall survive the termination of the license or franchise.

     3.     The city shall not be liable to any utility operator for any damage to utility facilities, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom, by the city or its contractor in removing, relocating or altering the facilities pursuant to subsections B, C or D of this section or undergrounding its facilities as required by subsection A of this section, or resulting from the utility operator’s failure to remove, relocate, alter or underground its facilities as required by those subsections, unless such damage arises directly from the city’s negligence or willful misconduct.

     F.     Engineering Designs and Plans. The utility operator shall provide the city with two complete sets of engineered plans in a form acceptable to the city showing the location of all its utility facilities in the rights-of-way after initial construction if such plans materially changed during construction. The utility operator shall provide two updated complete sets of as built plans upon request of the city, but not more than once per year. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.100 Leased capacity.
     A utility operator may lease capacity on or in its systems to others, provided that, upon request, the utility operator provides the city with the name and business address of any lessee. A utility operator is not required to provide such information if disclosure is prohibited by applicable law or a valid agreement between the utility operator and the lessee. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.110 Maintenance.
     A.    Every utility operator shall install and maintain all facilities in a manner that complies with applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and policies. The utility operator shall, at its own expense, repair and maintain facilities from time to time as may be necessary to accomplish this purpose.

     B.     If, after written notice from the city of the need for repair or maintenance as required in subsection A of this section, a utility operator fails to repair and maintain facilities as requested by the city and by the date reasonably established by the city, the city may perform such repair or maintenance using qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations at the utility operator’s sole expense. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the city, the utility operator shall reimburse the city for the costs the city incurred within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.120 Vacation.
     If the city vacates any right-of-way, or portion thereof, that a utility operator uses, the utility operator shall, at its own expense, remove its facilities from the right-of-way unless the city reserves a public utility easement, which the city shall make a reasonable effort to do provided that there is no expense to the city, or the utility operator obtains an easement for its facilities. If the utility operator fails to remove its facilities within thirty (30) days after a right-of-way is vacated, or as otherwise directed or agreed to in writing by the city, the city may remove the facilities using qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations at the utility operator’s sole expense. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the utility operator shall reimburse the city for the costs the city incurred within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.130 Right-of-way use fee.
     A.    Every person that owns utility facilities in the city and every person that uses utility facilities in the city to provide utility service, whether or not the person owns the utility facilities used to provide the utility services, shall pay the right-of-way use fee for every utility service provided using the rights-of-way in the amount determined by resolution of the city council.

     B.     A utility operator whose only facilities in the right-of-way are facilities mounted on structures within the right-of-way, which structures are owned by another person, and with no facilities strung between such structures or otherwise within, under or above the right-of-way, shall pay the attachment fee set by city council resolution for each attachment, or such other fee set forth in the license granted by the city. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city, the fee shall be effective as of July 1, 2016, and shall be paid annually, in arrears, within forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar year, and shall be accompanied by information sufficient to illustrate the calculation of the amount payable. The utility shall pay interest at the rate of nine percent per year for any payment made after the due date.

     C.     Right-of-way use fee payments required by this section shall be reduced by any franchise fee payments received by the city, but in no case will be less than zero dollars.

     D.    Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city, the right-of-way use fee set forth in subsection A of this section shall be effective as of July 1, 2016, and shall be paid quarterly, in arrears, within forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by an accounting of gross revenues, if applicable, and a calculation of the amount payable. The utility shall pay interest at the rate of nine percent per year for any payment made after the due date.

     E.     The calculation of the right-of-way use fee required by this section shall be subject to all applicable limitations imposed by federal or state law.

     F.     The city reserves the right to enact other fees and taxes applicable to the utility operators subject to this chapter. Unless expressly permitted by the city in enacting such fee or tax, or required by applicable state or federal law, no utility operator may deduct, offset or otherwise reduce or avoid the obligation to pay any lawfully enacted fees or taxes based on the payment of the right-of-way use fee or any other fees required by this chapter. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.140 Audits.
     A.    Within thirty (30) days of a written request from the city, or as otherwise agreed to in writing by the city:

     1.     Every provider of utility service shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate that the provider is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and its franchise agreement, if any, including but not limited to payment of any applicable registration fee, right-of-way use fee, attachment fee or franchise fee.

     2.     Every utility operator shall make available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals all maps, records, books, diagrams, plans and other documents, maintained by the utility operator with respect to its facilities within the rights-of-way. Access shall be provided within the city unless prior arrangement for access elsewhere has been made with the city.

     B.     If the city’s audit of the books, records and other documents or information of the utility operator or utility service provider demonstrate that the utility operator or provider has underpaid the right-of-way use fee, attachment fee or franchise fee by three percent or more in any one year, the utility operator shall reimburse the city for the cost of the audit, in addition to any interest owed pursuant to subsection B or D of Section 12.05.130 or as specified in a franchise.

     C.     Any underpayment, including any interest or audit cost reimbursement, shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the city’s notice to the utility service provider of such underpayment. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.150 Insurance and indemnification.
     A.    Insurance.

     1.     All utility operators shall maintain in full force and effect the following liability insurance policies that protect the utility operator and the city, as well as the city’s officers, agents, and employees:

     a.     Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:

     i.      Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;

     ii.     Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) aggregate including collapse, explosions, underground hazards and products completed operations.

     b.     Commercial automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) combined single limit.

     c.     Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).

     d.     Liability insurance shall name as additional insured the city and its officers, agents, and employees. Additional insured coverage shall be for both on-going operations and products and completed operations, on forms acceptable to the city. Coverage shall be primary and non-contributory. Waiver of subrogation endorsement, in a form acceptable to the city, shall be provided for general liability and worker’s compensation.

     2.     The limits of the insurance shall be subject to statutory changes as to maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the state of Oregon. The insurance shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing. The coverage must apply as to claims between insureds on the policy. The insurance shall not be canceled or materially altered without thirty (30) days prior written notice first being given to the city. If the insurance is canceled or materially altered, the utility operator shall obtain a replacement policy that complies with the terms of this section and provide the city with a replacement certificate of insurance. The utility operator shall maintain continuous uninterrupted coverage, in the terms and amounts required. The utility operator may self insure, or keep in force a self-insured retention plus insurance, for any or all of the above coverage.

     3.     The utility operator shall maintain on file with the city a certificate of insurance, or proof of self-insurance acceptable to the city, certifying the coverage required above.

     B.     Financial Assurance. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city, before a franchise granted or license issued pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the utility operator shall provide a performance bond or other financial security or assurance, in a form acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of the franchise or license, if applicable, and compliance with the terms of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the utility operator to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in addition to the performance surety required by subsection C of Section 12.05.080.

     C.     Indemnification.

     1.     Each utility operator shall defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all liability, causes of action, claims, damages, losses, judgments and other costs and expenses, including attorney fees and costs of suit or defense (at both the trial and appeal level, whether or not a trial or appeal ever takes place) that may be asserted by any person or entity in any way arising out of, resulting from, during or in connection with, or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless, or wrongful acts, omissions, failure to act, or other misconduct of the utility operator or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors, or lessees in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of its facilities, and in providing or offering utility services over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise agreement. The acceptance of a license under Section 12.05.070 of this chapter shall constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not. Upon notification of any such claim the city shall notify the utility operator and provide the utility operator with an opportunity to provide defense regarding any such claim.

     2.     Every utility operator shall also indemnify the city for any damages, claims, additional costs or expenses assessed against or payable by the city arising out of or resulting, directly or indirectly, from the utility operator’s failure to remove or relocate any of its facilities in the rights-of-way in a timely manner, unless the utility operator’s failure arises directly from the city’s negligence or willful misconduct. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.160 Compliance.
     Every utility operator shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city, heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of any license granted under this chapter. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.170 Confidential/proprietary information.
     If any person is required by this chapter to provide books, records, maps or information to the city that the person reasonably believes to be confidential or proprietary, and such books, records, maps or information are clearly marked as confidential at the time of disclosure to the city (“confidential information”), the city shall take reasonable steps to protect the confidential information to the extent permitted by Oregon Public Records Laws. In the event the city receives a public records request to inspect any confidential information and the city determines that it will be necessary to reveal the confidential information, to the extent reasonably possible the city will notify the person that submitted the confidential information of the records request prior to releasing the confidential information. The city shall not be required to incur any costs to protect any confidential information, other than the city’s routine internal procedures for complying with the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.180 Penalties.
     A.    Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the license shall be subject to a penalty of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense. A violation shall be deemed to exist separately for each and every day during which a violation exists.

     B.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial or other remedies the city may have at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.190 Severability and preemption.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be consistent with applicable federal and state law, and shall be interpreted, to the extent possible, to cover only matters not preempted by federal or state law.

     B.     If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition or portion of this chapter is for any reason declared or held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, clause, phrase, term,

provision, condition, covenant and portion of this chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event any provision is preempted by federal or state laws, rules or regulations, the provision shall be preempted only to the extent required by law and any portion not preempted shall survive. If any federal or state law resulting in preemption is later repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed to end the preemption, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding without further action by the city. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

 

12.05.200 Application to existing agreements.
     To the extent that this chapter is not in conflict with and can be implemented consistent with existing franchise agreements, this chapter shall apply to all existing franchise agreements granted to utility operators by the city. (Ord. 489 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 12.06 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
12.06.010 Title.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referenced as the “small wireless facilities ordinance.” (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.020 Purpose and scope.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and nondiscriminatory policies and procedures for the placement of small wireless facilities in rights-of-way within the city’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and reasonable aesthetic qualities of the city rights-of-way and the city as a whole.

     B.     Intent. In enacting this chapter, the city is establishing uniform standards consistent with federal law to address the placement of small wireless facilities and associated poles in the rights-of-way, including, without limitation, to manage the public rights-of-way in order to:

     1.     Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;

     2.     Prevent the creation of obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;

     3.     Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of facilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;

     4.     Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees;

     5.     Preserve the character of the community, historic districts or areas with decorative poles; and

     6.     Facilitate technology advancements, such as deployment of small wireless facilities, to provide the benefits of wireless services. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.030 Definitions.
     “Antenna” means the same as defined in 47 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Section 1.6002(b), as may be amended or superseded. The term includes an apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radio frequencies (RF) to be operated or operating from a fixed location pursuant to Federal Communications Commission authorization, for the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled information services. For purposes of this definition, the term antenna does not include an unintentional radiator, mobile station, or device authorized under 47 C.F.R, Part 15.

     “Antenna equipment” means the same as defined 47 C.F.R. §1.6002(c), as may be amended or superseded, which defines the term to mean equipment, switches, wiring, cabling, power sources, shelters or cabinets associated with an antenna, located at the same fixed location as the antenna, and, when collocated on a structure, is mounted or installed at the same time as such antenna.

     “Antenna facility” means the same as defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6002(d), as may be amended or superseded, which defines the term to mean an antenna and associated antenna equipment.

     “Applicable codes” means uniform building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or state or local amendments to those codes that are of general application and consistent with state and federal law.

     “Applicant” means any person who submits an application as or on behalf of a wireless provider.

     “Application” means requests submitted by an applicant: (1) for permission to collocate small wireless facilities; or (2) to approve the installation, modification or replacement of a structure on which to collocate a small wireless facility in the rights-of-way, where required.

     “City structure” means a structure owned by the city of Happy Valley and for purposes of this chapter, means structures located in the rights-of-way within the city’s jurisdictional boundaries that are owned, managed or operated by the city or any subdivision or instrumentality thereof, including electric utilities. The definition includes, but is not limited to, streetlights, traffic signals, utility poles, free-standing poles and similar structures.

     “Collocate” means the same as defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6002(g), as may be amended or superseded, which defines that term to mean: (1) mounting or installing an antenna facility on a preexisting structure; and/or (2) modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that structure. “Collocation” has a corresponding meaning.

     “Day” means calendar day. For purposes of the FCC shot clock, a terminal day that falls on a holiday or weekend shall be deemed to be the next immediate business day. Shot clock provisions that apply to small wireless facilities are codified in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6003.

     “Decorative pole” means a city structure that is specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes.

     “Permissions” means local franchise agreements, right-of-way permits, engineering permits, building permits and if applicable, land use permits.

     “Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the city.

     “Pole” means a type of structure in the rights-of-way that is or may be used in whole or in part by or for wireline communications, electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or similar function, or for collocation of small wireless facilities; provided, such term does not include a tower, building or electric transmission structures.

     “Rights-of-way” or “ROW” is as defined in Chapter 16.12 (Definitions) of this title.

     “Routine maintenance” means inspections, testing, repair, and modifications subject to C.F.R. Section 6409(a) that maintain functional capacity, aesthetic and structural integrity of a small wireless facility and/or the associated pole or structure.

     “Small wireless facility” means a facility that meets each of the following conditions per 47 C.F.R Section 1.6002(l), as may be amended or superseded:

     1.     The facilities: (a) are mounted on structures fifty (50) feet or less in height including the antennas; or (b) are mounted on structures no more than ten (10) percent taller than other adjacent structures, or (c) do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than fifty (50) feet or by more than ten (10) percent, whichever is greater; and

     2.     Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume; and

     3.     All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume; and

     4.     The facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1307(b).

     “Structure” means the same as defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6002(m), as may be amended or superseded, which defines that term as a pole, tower, or base station, whether or not it has an existing antenna facility, that is used or to be used for the provision of personal wireless service (whether on its own or comingled with other types of service).

     “Wireless infrastructure provider” means any person, including a person authorized to provide communications service in the state, that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, but that is not a wireless services provider.

     “Wireless provider” means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.

     “Wireless services provider” means a person who provides personal wireless services (whether or not it is comingled with other services). (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.040 Permitted use—Application and fees.
     A.    Permitted Use. The following uses within the rights-of-way shall be a permitted use, subject to compliance with the applicable design standards found within the city’s Engineering Design Standards Manual and are subject to administrative review only and issuance of a permit as set forth in this chapter:

     1.     Collocation of a small wireless facility; and

     2.     Placement of a new, modified, or replacement pole to be used for collocation of a small wireless facility.

     B.     Permissions Required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall place any small wireless facility described in subsection A of this section, in the rights-of-way, without first filing an application for the facility and obtaining necessary city permissions.

     C.     Application Requirements. All applications shall follow the adopted city requirements for the pertinent permissions.

     D.    Routine Maintenance and Replacement. An application shall not be required for: (1) routine maintenance; or (2) the replacement of a small wireless facility with another small wireless facility that is the same, substantially similar or smaller in size and weight and height. The city may require a permit for work within the right-of-way. Such a permit must be issued to the applicant on a non-discriminatory basis upon terms and conditions applied to any other person performing similar activities, regardless of technology, in the rights-of-way.

     E.     Information Updates. Any amendment to non-material information contained in an application shall be submitted in writing to the city within thirty (30) days of the change.

     F.     Application Fees. Application fees shall be set by the city’s master fee schedule. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.050 Action on administrative permit applications subject to this chapter.
     A.    The city must process all applications on a nondiscriminatory basis and may deny an application subject to this chapter if the proposed small wireless facility or new, modified, or replaced pole:

     1.     Materially and demonstrably interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment;

     2.     Materially and demonstrably interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation or pedestrians;

     3.     Materially fails to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal, state, or local laws, standards and regulations regarding pedestrian access or movement;

     4.     Fails to comply with applicable codes, standards and regulations, including the city’s design standards; or

     5.     Fails to comply with the provisions in this chapter.

     B.     The city must act on an application within the applicable shot clock provisions as codified in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6003 and provide written notice to the applicant if the application is denied. The written notice shall state the reasons for denial, with reference to specific code provisions, ordinance, application instruction or otherwise publicly-stated procedures on which the denial was based, and be sent to the applicant within five days after the city denies the application or before the applicable FCC shot clock expires, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.060 Small wireless facilities in the ROW—Maximum height—Other requirements.
     A.    Maximum Size of Permitted Use. Any wireless provider that seeks to install, modify, or replace facilities on a pole in the rights-of-way that exceeds the height limits contained in Section 12.06.030, definition for “small wireless facility,” subsection (1), shall be subject to applicable requirements of 16.44.020 “Wireless communications facilities.”

     B.     Decorative Poles. Subject to this code and applicable design standards, a wireless provider is permitted to collocate on or replace a decorative pole when necessary to collocate a small wireless facility; provided that any such replacement pole shall, to the extent feasible, replicate the design of the pole being replaced. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.070 Effect of construction/work permit.
     A.    Authority Granted—No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter and does not create a property right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the rights-of-way. A permit from the city does not grant a right-of-way license or right to provide services.

     B.     Permit Duration.

     1.     A permit for construction granted pursuant to this section shall be valid for the period of time associated with the public right-of-way permit, engineering permit or applicable building permit after issuance unless the city agrees to extend this period for good cause, including, but not limited to, delay caused by the lack of commercial power or communications facilities, or by other events outside of the reasonable control of the wireless provider.

     2.     The installed facility is subject to applicable relocation requirements, termination for material noncompliance after notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, and an applicant’s right to terminate a permit at anytime. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.080 Removal, relocation or modification of small wireless facility in the public right-of-way.
     A.    Notice. The city shall provide the applicant reasonable advance notice, but no less than thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, the wireless provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any small wireless facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the city has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way. These public improvements may be constructed by the city or another entity.

     B.     Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any small wireless facility located within the rights-of-way of the city in the event of an emergency, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any imminent danger to public health, safety, or property. If circumstances permit, the city shall notify the wireless provider and provide the wireless provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the wireless provider promptly after cutting or removing a small wireless facility.

     C.     Abandonment of Facilities. Abandonment of small wireless facilities shall mirror those found in the requirements of Section 16.44.020(D)(4) of this code.

     D.    Damage and Repair. The city may require a wireless provider to repair all damage to the rights-of-way directly caused by the activities of the wireless provider and return the rights-of-way to its functional equivalence before the damage pursuant to the competitively neutral, reasonable requirements and specifications. If the wireless provider fails to make the repairs within sixty (60) days after written notice, the city may affect those repairs and charge the applicable party the actual, documented cost of such repairs. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.090 Collocation on city structures in the ROW.
     Collocation on City Structures. Small wireless facilities may be collocated on city structures in the rights-of-way pursuant to this chapter. No person will be permitted an exclusive arrangement or an arrangement which excludes otherwise qualified applicants to attach to city structures in the rights-of-way. A person who purchases or otherwise acquires a city structure is subject to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

 

12.06.100 Rates for ROW and collocation on city structures in the ROW.
     The recurring rate for use of the ROW and attachment of small wireless facilities to a city structure in the ROW shall be subject to the city’s master fee schedule which is adopted and updated via city council resolution. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020)

Chapter 12.08 ROAD NAMES AND STREET ADDRESSES
12.08.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to:

     A.    Establish a consistent and accurate methodology for site identification;

     B.     Provide standards and procedures for addressing and readdressing properties within the city;

     C.     Provide standards and procedures for naming and renaming roads within the city;

     D.    Enhance site identification for improved emergency dispatch response, mail delivery and geographic information system (GIS) compatibility;

     E.     Provide a public participatory process that includes dispute resolution procedures. (Ord. 174 § 1, 1997)

 

12.08.020 Definitions.
     For this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:

     “Address” means a number that assigns a reference point to a site based on the appropriate regional grid system.

     “Emergency service provider” means Clackamas County central dispatch, a fire district providing service in Clackamas County or the city of Happy Valley, or the Clackamas County sheriff’s department.

     “Front property line” means any boundary line separating the lot from a public or private road.

     “Grid” means the addressing matrix based on the nearest urban system, i.e., Portland, Salem, etc.

     Roads. The term “road” for the purposes of this chapter shall be synonymous with the term “street,” except when used as a suffix as described below:

     1.     “Avenue” means a public right-of-way that runs in a north-south direction.

     2.     “Boulevard” means a broad, landscaped minor or major arterial that carries moderate to heavy volumes of traffic at moderate to high speeds.

     3.     “Circle” means a road that runs in a circular direction terminating at or in near proximity to its beginning, and carries low to moderate volumes of traffic at low to moderate speeds (synonymous with Loop).

     4.     “City road” means a road that has been created and accepted into the road maintenance system by order of the Happy Valley city council.

     5.     “County road” means a road that has been created and accepted into the county road maintenance system by order of the board of county commissioners.

     6.     “Court” means a local road that is of a short length, with no cross streets, that carries low volumes of traffic, at low speeds, and generally terminates in a cul-de-sac.

     7.     “Drive” means a meandering collector or arterial that carries low, moderate or high volumes of traffic at low, moderate or high speeds (synonymous with Parkway).

     8.     “Lane” means a local road that is of a short length, that carries low volumes of traffic, at low speeds, and generally terminates in a cul-de-sac or dead end.

     9.     “Loop” means a road that runs in a circular direction terminating at or in near proximity to its beginning, and carries low to moderate volumes of traffic at low to moderate speeds (synonymous with Circle).

     10.   “Parkway” means a meandering collector or arterial that carries low, moderate or high volumes of traffic at low, moderate or high speeds (synonymous with Drive).

     11.   “Place” means a local road that is of a short length, that carries low volumes of traffic at low speeds (synonymous with Terrace and Way).

     12.   “Private road” means a local road that may be an easement, that has been created without a dedication to the public, and is not maintained by either the city or the county.

     13.   “Public road” means a road that has been created and accepted by the city or county to provide a public way, but has not been accepted by the city for maintenance.

     14.   “Road” means any public or private right-of-way.

     15.   “Street” means a public right-of-way that runs generally in an east-west direction.

     16.   “Terrace” means a local road that is of a short length, that carries low volumes of traffic at low speeds (synonymous with Place and Way).

     17.   “Way” means a local road that is of a short length, that carries low volumes of traffic at low speeds (synonymous with Place and Terrace). (Ord. 174 § 2, 1997)

 

12.08.030 Addressing standards.
     Addresses shall be assigned by the city consistent with the following standards:

     A.    Eligibility for Address.

     1.     All occupied structures shall be assigned separate addresses.

     2.     Unoccupied structures or properties may be assigned addresses if it is necessary to identify the site because of utility connections, assessment, permit issuance, emergency dispatching or other similar reasons.

     3.     Temporary residences shall be addressed separately from other uses on the property.

     B.     Placement of Addresses. Addresses shall be placed and located in a manner that is readily visible and legible from the street as required by the Uniform Fire Code. Additionally:

     1.     Addresses placed on residential structures shall be a minimum of four inches high and in a contrasting color to the structure’s surface;

     2.     Addresses placed on commercial structures shall be a minimum of six inches high and in a contrasting color to the structure’s surface;

     3.     Structures shall have addresses posted on the wall adjacent to the front entrance;

     4.     Structures not having street frontage shall have additional addresses posted at the driveway entrance to the road serving the site;

     5.     Commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks shall post addresses on each site. Buildings with multiple addresses shall have the address range identified on the structure through the use of on-building signs.

     C.     Sequence of Numbering. Addresses shall be assigned consistent with the regional or established grid of the county in consideration of the following:

     1.     Sites located on the south or east side of a road shall be assigned even numbered addresses and remain consistent the entire length of the road regardless of its meandering;

     2.     Sites located on the north or west side of a road shall be assigned odd numbered addresses and remain consistent the entire length of the road regardless of its meandering;

     3.     Street numbers for urban areas shall be assigned according to the front property line. Corner lots shall be addressed according to the grid on which the front door of the building is located;

     4.     Street numbers for rural areas shall be assigned at that point where the driveway intersects the road. Should a driveway be relocated, the address shall be changed consistent with the applicable grid system unless the original driveway is maintained in a usable condition;

     5.     Subdivisions shall be assigned different address numbers for adjacent parallel streets. Additionally, streets that are within the same subdivision and have similar names shall not have the same address numbers.

     D.    Exceptions. The following exceptions may be granted when the addressing of property conflicts with the addressing standards:

     1.     The addressing on any road may remain sequential along the entire length of that road regardless of its meandering;

     2.     a. The addressing of Loops or Circles shall start the lowest number at one end where the Loop or Circle intersects the road giving access to the Loop or Circle, and shall progressively increase, consistent with the grid, with the even numbers on the outside and odd numbers on the inside of the Loop or Circle, until the Loop or Circle terminates,

     b.     If the Loop or Circle is located at the terminus of the road giving access to it, the Loop or Circle shall be given a separate name only if appropriate road name signage can be installed. This type of Loop or Circle necessitates odd and even addresses meeting on the same side of the road. Addresses shall be assigned such that this occurs at the most logical location based on road design.

     3.     Addresses of sites with circular driveways shall be assigned to that access point having the lowest number on the grid;

     4.     Commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks may be assigned building, suite, unit or space numbers when there are insufficient numbers available to assign addresses according to the grid. In the case of multiple floor structures, the first digit of a unit or suite number shall be consistent with the floor level. Numbers, rather than letters, shall be used for such identification;

     5.     Sites without access to the road adjacent to the front property line shall be addressed in reference to the grid of the road accessing the site. (Ord. 174 § 3, 1997)

 

12.08.040 Road naming standards.
     Road names shall be selected in consideration of the following factors:

     A.    A new name shall not duplicate or sound similar to the name of an existing road. However, duplicate road names may be permitted when the roads to be so named intersect with one another and are given different suffixes in accordance with the suffix definitions in Section 12.08.020 of this chapter;

     B.     All new roads serving three or more existing or potential properties shall be named. Sites being served by this road shall be addressed on this road using the grid system in effect for the area;

     C.     A minimum of two existing or potential properties being served by a single road is required before the road is eligible for a name;

     D.    New mobilehome parks shall name access roads as private roads. (Ord. 174 § 4, 1997)

 

12.08.050 Road sign standards.
     City, public and private roads shall be identified with an approved road sign. An “approved” road sign is a sign built and placed by or at the direction of the city public works department, and shall be consistent with the following standards:

     A.    City and public road signs shall be green with white letters and constructed to city standards;

     B.     Private road signs shall be white with black letters and constructed to city standards;

     C.     Road signs shall be placed and maintained so they are fully visible from the intersecting roadway. City and public road signs shall be maintained by the city whereas private road signs shall be maintained by the residents the road is serving;

     D.    When a city or public road is named or renamed at the request of other than the city or county or an emergency service provider, the first road sign(s) shall be purchased by the person(s) who made the request. Future replacement signs will be provided by the city at no charge to the residents whom the road is serving. The purchase of private road signs is the sole responsibility of the residents whom the road is serving. (Ord. 174 § 5, 1997)

 

12.08.060 Initiation of action.
     The following provisions shall establish procedures to request new or revised addresses and to request the naming or renaming of roads:

     A.    Addresses. The addressing, or readdressing of properties may be considered by the city upon receipt of a permit application, except:

     1.     New subdivisions shall have addresses assigned after approval of the final plat by the planning division;

     2.     Commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks shall have addresses assigned after final development approval by the planning division;

     3.     Individual sites not described above may be issued an address when consistent with Section 12.08.030(A) of this chapter;

     4.     The city may initiate the reassignment of addresses without the consent of the affected property owners, consistent with the provisions of Section 12.08.080(B) of this chapter, under the following circumstances:

     a.     Emergency service providers state in a written request that the numbering sequence identifying properties is in such disarray that emergency response time may be compromised, or

     b.     The development or redevelopment of an area through a special district formation requires new street addresses as a result of the creation or extension of roads, or

     c.     Any other reason(s) that is in the public interest.

     B.     Road Names. The naming or renaming of roads shall occur consistent with the following procedures:

     1.     The planning division may administratively approve the naming of roads when reviewing applications for subdivisions, commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks, consistent with the provisions of Section 12.08.080(B) of this chapter, and in consideration of the following criteria:

     a.     The level of development currently being served by the road requires improved identification,

     b.     The potential for the road to be extended to serve additional development requires improved identification,

     c.     The need to more accurately identify the area for the dispatching of emergency service personnel requires improved identification.

     2.     The planning division shall consider an application to name or rename a road, consistent with the provisions of Section 12.08.080 of this chapter, under the following circumstances:

     a.     The planning division receives a completed road naming/renaming application consistent with the provisions of Section 12.08.070 of this chapter,

     b.     The city may initiate the naming or renaming of a road without the consent of the affected property owners when:

     i.      Emergency service providers state in a written request that the current identification of the road is inadequate such that emergency response time may be compromised, or

     ii.     The development or redevelopment of an area through a special district formation requires new road names as a result of the creation or extension of roads, or

     iii.    Any other reason(s) that is in the public interest. (Ord. 174 § 6, 1997)

 

12.08.070 Submittal requirements.
     An application submitted by other than the city or an emergency service provider to name or rename a road shall be in the form of a petition that includes the following:

     A.    A statement acknowledging that existing property addresses will change should the road name request be approved;

     B.     Three road name choices, in order of preference;

     C.     Legal descriptions (township, range, section, tax lot) of all the properties receiving access from this road (county assessors maps are suitable for this purpose);

     D.    The current addresses of all the properties receiving access from this road;

     E.     The printed or typed names of the owners of all the properties receiving access from this road;

     F.     The signatures of the owners of properties receiving access from this road acknowledging and agreeing to the requested change. A minimum of three-fourths of the property owners’ signatures are necessary;

     G.    The name, mailing address and phone number of the designated contact person;

     H.    A site plan or map showing the location of the road and properties receiving access from this road;

     I.      An application fee as may be adopted by the city council. (Ord. 174 § 7, 1997)

 

12.08.080 Administrative review.
     The city may assign new addresses, revise existing addresses and name or rename roads subject to the following procedures:

     A.    Type I Actions. The assignment of new or revision of existing addresses, and the naming of roads within new subdivisions, commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks shall be considered Type I actions. These actions require notice consistent with Section 12.08.090(A) of this chapter. Staff decisions shall be considered final.

     B.     Type II Actions. Revising existing addresses and naming or renaming roads other than roads within new subdivisions, commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks shall be considered Type II actions and may be processed pursuant to the following procedures:

     1.     Notice shall be given, pursuant to Section 12.08.090 of this chapter, that the city is considering an application for a Type II action. A minimum of twenty (20) days following the date of notice shall be allowed for public comment on the application;

     2.     Following the public comment period, staff shall make a decision consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Notice of this decision shall be given pursuant to Section 12.08.090(B) of this chapter;

     3.     The staff decision shall be considered final unless written objections, pursuant to Section 12.08.100 of this chapter, are received within ten (10) days of the date of the staff decision;

     4.     If an appeal of the staff decision is filed, notice shall be given pursuant to Section 12.08.090 of this chapter within five days of the expiration of the appeal period;

     5.     The naming or renaming of a public or city road requires a public hearing before the planning commission pursuant to ORS 215.110. Staff decisions shall be in the form of recommendations to the planning commission. These applications shall be considered at a regularly scheduled planning commission hearing for final decision. (Ord. 174 § 8, 1997)

 

12.08.090 Notice requirements.
     The following notice requirements shall apply to all address and road name requests. The county assessor’s records shall be used as the official records for notification purposes.

     A.    Type I actions Require Notification to the Following Parties:

     1.     Clackamas County central dispatch - 911;

     2.     The fire district(s) having jurisdiction;

     3.     The Clackamas County sheriff’s department;

     4.     The main Portland Post Office;

     5.     The local post office(s) having jurisdiction;

     6.     The Clackamas County department of assessment and taxation;

     7.     Others as requested or deemed appropriate.

     B.     In Addition to Those Parties Notified of Type I Actions. Type II Actions Require Notification To:

     1.     All property owners whose address will be changed;

     2.     All occupants of properties whose address will be changed when records identify a different mailing address for the property owner;

     3.     The local community planning organization. (Ord. 174 § 9, 1997)

 

12.08.100 Dispute resolution.
     Appeals of Type II actions to resolve disputes shall be considered by the city council when filed within ten (10) days of the date of the staff decision. Approval of the appeal shall only be granted when consistent with the provisions of this chapter as determined by the majority of the participating city council members. Additionally, the following requirements and procedures shall apply to appeals:

     A.    Submittal Requirements:

     1.     A written description of the basis for the appeal;

     2.     Alternative(s) to the administrative review decision;

     3.     Any other evidence deemed necessary to support the appellant’s position;

     4.     A fee as may be adopted by resolution of the city council.

     B.     Appeal Procedures. The city council shall consider all appeals of these provisions and render a decision pursuant to their adoption of rules and procedures for the conduct of the hearing. Additionally:

     1.     At least thirty-five (35) days prior to the hearing a copy of the appeal shall be mailed pursuant to Section 12.08.090 of this chapter;

     2.     The decision of the city council shall be considered the final decision of the city;

     3.     Notice of the decision of the city council shall be given pursuant to Section 12.08.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 174 § 10, 1997)

Chapter 12.16 PARKS
12.16.010 General statement of council authority over parks and other city property.
     Council authority over city parks and other city owned recreational lands. The council shall have general management and supervisory authority of all parks and public grounds surrounding public buildings now owned or hereafter acquired by the city. The council may adopt such rules and regulations for the management, use and supervision of the city’s parks and public grounds surrounding public buildings or other places of recreation now belonging to the city or hereafter acquired by it as the council deems reasonable and necessary. (Ord. 222 § 1, 2001)

 

12.16.020 Authority of city manager to make park rules and regulations.
     The city manager is authorized to establish, after consultation with the parks advisory committee such rules and regulations not in conflict with ordinances of the city as the manager finds necessary for the better control and management of city parks and other public grounds. If any person feels aggrieved by a rule adopted by the city manager, that person may bring the matter to the council for its review by filing with the city recorder a petition which shall be presented to the council at its next regular meeting. Until and unless amended or repealed by the council, any rule or regulation made by the city manager shall be in full force and effect as if it were an ordinance. (Ord. 222 § 1, 2001)

 

*       Editor’s Note: The Park Rules and Regulations are on file in the office of the city clerk.

 

12.16.030 Fireworks in city parks prohibited.
     A.    Definition. As used in this section the term “fireworks” shall mean any device defined at ORS 480.110(1) and ORS 480.127 for which a permit from the State Fire Marshal is required before it may be sold, kept, used or exploded excluding:

     1.     Sparklers, toy pistol paper caps, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps containing .25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, and when the rate of burning and the explosive force of the materials in such devices are not greater than an equivalent weight of F.F.F.G. black powder, and when such devices are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for explosion, and the major explosive force is contained or dispelled within the housing or shell of the device, there is no visible flame during discharge, there is no flaming or smoldering of any of the components or parts of the device after discharge, and the device does not produce sufficient heat to readily ignite combustible materials upon which the device may be placed.

     2.     Snakes or similar smoke-producing material containing not more than one hundred (100) grains of combustible substances when there is no visible flame during discharge, there is no after smoldering, and the devices do not produce sufficient heat to readily ignite combustible materials upon which the devices may be placed.

     3.     Model rockets and model rocket motors designed for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models.

     B.     Prohibition. The possession, use, explosion or discharge of fireworks is prohibited in all city-designated parks. This prohibition does not apply to fireworks where there is properly issued public display permit from the State Fire Marshal under the terms of ORS 480.130 to ORS 480.150.

     C.     Penalty—Ability to Impound Illegal Fireworks. Any person found in violation of the prohibition found in subsection B of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per device. Any duly authorized employee of the city or law enforcement officer may immediately impound all such devices found in any city park and hold same for evidentiary purposes. (Ord. 223 §§ 1—3, 2001)

 

12.16.040 Smoking and tobacco use prohibited—Penalty.
     A.    Smoking and tobacco use are prohibited in all city parks and public grounds unless otherwise specifically designated.

     B.     Definitions. The following terms, unless clearly contrary to or inconsistent with the content in which they are used, shall mean as follows:

     1.     “Smoking and tobacco use” means either carrying or smoking any kind of tobacco containing device such as a pipe that is lit or a lit cigarette, cigar or other lit tobacco product as well as using any chewing, tasting tobacco product or ingesting a tobacco product(s).

     2.     “Parks and public grounds” includes all publicly owned or operated parks, trails, squares, drives, natural areas and the like as well as all publicly owned or operated building(s) and/or parking lots serving those building(s) within the city.

     C.     Violation and Penalty. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter subjects a person to a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence. A person commits a separate violation for each unlawful act. (Ord. 386 § 1, 2009)

Title 13 (Reserved)

Title 14 (Reserved)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 15.08 SPECIALTY CODES AND STANDARDS ADOPTED
Chapter 15.10 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.11 DISTRESSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Chapter 15.12 INFILL AND GRADING
Chapter 15.20 EROSION CONTROL
Chapter 15.24 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 15.28 MOVING OF EXISTING BUILDING OVER CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 15.32 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION

Chapter 15.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.04.010 Planning review fee.
     The city may collect a planning review fee for the purpose of off-setting the costs associated with the review of building permits by the planning department for compliance with the Land Development Code (LDC) and any applicable development agreements or approvals. (Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 152 § 1, 1996)

 

15.04.020 Fee established by resolution.
     This fee shall be established by resolution of the city council and reviewed annually. (Ord. 152 § 2, 1996)

 

15.04.030 Building and construction rules and regulations adopted.
     The city adopts the following rules and regulations regarding the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use and/or maintenance of all buildings or structures in Happy Valley. (Ord. 153, 1996)

 

15.04.040 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum performance standards to safeguard the health, safety, welfare, comfort and security of the occupants and users of buildings and structures within the city limits. The performance standards are intended to provide for the use of modern methods, devices, materials, techniques and practicable maximum energy conservation by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use, occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 153 § 1, 1996)

 

15.04.050 Scope.
     A.    This chapter shall apply to the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, maintenance and work associated with any building or structure except those located in a public way.

     B.     Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.

     C.     Where, in any specific case, there is a conflict between this chapter and an Oregon Revised Statute, the statute shall govern. (Ord. 153 § 2, 1996)

 

15.04.060 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Building official” means the officer appointed by the city to regulate and enforce all provisions of this chapter pursuant to ORS 455.150 and who shall possess a state certification.

     “ICC” means International Code Council.

     “ORS” means Oregon Revised Statute. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 153 § 3, 1996)

 

15.04.070 Authority of the building official.
     A.    General. The building official is authorized to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. The building official shall have the power to render written and oral interpretations of this chapter and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this chapter.

     B.     Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the appointing authority, the building official may appoint technical officers and inspectors and other employees to carry out the functions of this chapter, including enforcement.

     C.     Right of Entry. When it is necessary to inspect to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is in violation of this chapter or which otherwise makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if the building or premises be occupied, credentials shall be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to any remedies provided by law to secure entry.

     D.    Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter (or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through its enforcement), the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person(s) engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done. Such person(s) shall stop such work until specifically authorized by the building official to proceed thereafter.

     E.     Authority to Disconnect Utilities in Emergencies. The building official or the building official’s authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect fuel-gas utility service, and/or other energy supplies to a building, structure, premises or equipment regulated by this chapter when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall, whenever possible, notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or premises of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action, and shall notify such serving utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure or premises in writing of such disconnection within a reasonable time thereafter.

     F.     Authority to Abate Hazardous Equipment.

     1.     When the building official ascertains that equipment, or any portion of such equipment regulated by this chapter has become hazardous to life, health or property, the building official shall order the equipment either removed from its location or restored to a safe and/or sanitary condition, as appropriate. The order shall be in writing and contain a fixed time limit for compliance. Persons shall not use the defective equipment after receiving the notice;

     2.     When equipment or an installation is to be disconnected, written notice of the disconnection (and causes therefor) shall be sent by first class U.S. mail within twenty-four (24) hours to the involved utility, the owner and/or occupant of the building, structure or premises. When equipment is maintained in violation of this chapter and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building official may institute such action as necessary to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.

     G.    Connection After Order to Disconnect. No person shall make a connection to or from an energy, fuel or power supply to any equipment regulated by this ordinance which has been disconnected or ordered disconnected or discontinued by the building official until the building official specifically authorizes the reconnection and/or use of such equipment.

     H.    Maintenance. All buildings and structures, both existing and new, and all parts of such buildings or structures, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter shall be maintained in conformance with this chapter. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures. To determine compliance with this section, the building official may cause a structure to be reinspected.

     I.      Occupancy Violations. Whenever any building, structure or equipment therein regulated by this chapter is used contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the building official may order such use discontinued and the structure (or portion of such structure) vacated. All persons using the structure (or portion of such structure) shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the building official in the notice and make the structure, or portion of such structure, comply with the requirements of this chapter. Use or occupancy of any structure, plumbing, mechanical equipment or electrical system without approval of the building official is a violation of this chapter.

     J.      Suspension/Revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued in error on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or if its issuance (or activity thereunder) is in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any other provisions of the city ordinances. All fees shall remain property of the city and shall not be refunded. (Ord. 153 § 4, 1996)

 

15.04.080 Inspections.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the permit holder or authorized agent to request all inspections that may be necessary or otherwise required in a timely manner, to provide safe access to the site and inspection area, and to provide all equipment as may be deemed necessary or appropriate by the building official or city engineer. All corrections required by the building official or city engineer shall be made within a reasonable time and before covering. The permit holder shall not proceed with construction activity until authorized to do so by the building official or city engineer. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Any expense incurred by the permit holder to remove or replace any material required for proper inspection shall be the responsibility of the permit holder.

     B.     No use or occupancy will be allowed without approval of the building official, and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 153 § 5, 1996)

 

15.04.090 Alternate materials and methods.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate material, design or method of construction not specifically proscribed by this chapter, provided such alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the building official.

     B.     The building official may approve any such alternate material, design or method, provided the building official finds that the proposed material, design or method complies with the provisions of this chapter and that it is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation.

     C.     The building official may require that evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. The details of any approval of any alternate material, design or method may be recorded and entered in the files of the jurisdiction.

     D.    Modifications. When there are practical difficulties in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the building official may grant modifications provided the building official finds that the modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this chapter and that such modification does not lessen any fire protection requirements nor the structural integrity of the building involved. Any action granting modification may be recorded in the files of this jurisdiction.

     E.     Tests.

     1.     Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter or that any material, method or design does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the building official may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at no expense to this jurisdiction;

     2.     Test methods shall be as specified by the building official in accordance with the recognized test standards. If there are no recognized and accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the building official shall determine test procedures;

     3.     All tests shall be made by an approved testing agency. Reports of such tests may be retained by the building official. (Ord. 153 § 7, 1996)

 

15.04.100 Plans and permits.
     A.    Issuance.

     1.     The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for a building permit shall be reviewed by the building official. The plans may be reviewed by other city departments to verify compliance with any applicable laws or permits. If the building official finds that the work described in an application for a building permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed with the application conform to the requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws and permits, and that all required fees have been paid, the building official shall issue the building permit to the applicant;

     2.     When the building official issues the permit where plans are required, the building official shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications “Approved.” The approved plans and specifications may not be changed, modified or altered without authorizations from the building official, and all work regulated by the building official and this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved plans;

     3.     The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before all plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all applicable requirements of this chapter. The issuance of a partial permit does not constitute and may not be construed as an assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted. The holder of a partial permit proceeds with such work at the holder’s own risk.

     B.     Retention of Plans. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than two years from date of completion of the work covered by the plans, specifications and computations. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be returned to the applicant and must be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the authorized work is in progress.

     C.     Validity of Permit.

     1.     The issuance of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and computations does not and shall not be construed to authorize any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance of this jurisdiction or any other federal, state or local law, statute, rule, regulation or Oregon Specialty Code;

     2.     The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data does not prevent the building official thereafter from requiring the correction of errors in such plans, specifications and other data, or to preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction;

     3.     The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data is not and shall not be construed as a guarantee by the city or the building official of the soundness of such plans or specifications, and shall not be a basis for imposing liability upon the city or any of its agents or employees, specifically including the building official.

     D.    Not Transferable. Absent express written approval of the building official, a permit issued to one person or firm is not transferable and shall not permit any other person or firm to perform any work under the permit.

     E.     Expiration of Plan Reviews. An application for which a permit is not issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of the application shall expire and plans and other data submitted with the application may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for issuing a permit for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the applicant’s control prevented the applicant from providing information or taking other action necessary to allow the building official to complete review of the application and issue the permit. An application may not be extended more than once. In order to renew an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee, inclusive of the difference in cost between previously paid fees and charges and any applicable updated fees and charges.

     F.     Permit Expiration, Extension and Reinstatement.

     1.     Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become void if the building or work authorized is not commenced within the time limitations set forth in this section;

     2.     Every permit issued by the building official shall expire by limitation and become void if the building or work authorized by the permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the permit is issued, or if the building or work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. The work shall not be considered suspended or abandoned where the permittee has pursued activities deemed by the building official, at the building official’s sole discretion, to indicate an intent to start, continue and complete the project. The building official may require the permittee to document these activities.

     G.    Exception.

     1.     When a permit has expired, the permit may be reinstated and the work authorized by the original permit may be recommenced, provided the following are met:

     a.     The specialty code under which the original permit was issued and other ordinances that are enforced by the building official have not been amended in any manner that affects the work authorized by the original permit;

     b.     No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and

 

     c.     If the original permit expired less than one year from the request to reinstate the fee for a reinstated permit shall be one-half the amount required for a new building permit. For all other fees and charges, the applicant is responsible for payment of the difference in cost between previously paid fees and charges and any applicable updated fees and charges.

     2.     When the request for reinstatement does not comply with the criteria in subsection (G)(1), a new permit, at full building permit fees, is required.

     H.    Temporary and Final Occupancy Permits.

     1.     A person seeking a final occupancy permit must provide all private and public improvements required by federal, state and local regulations, including satisfaction of all conditions of approval from any applicable land use decision(s). The improvements may include, but are not limited to: public and private street improvements including improved sections, curb, gutter, sidewalk, planter strip construction and vegetation, driveways, disabled person access and signage; direct pedestrian access; bicycle parking facilities; vehicular and delivery parking and maneuvering surfaces; commercial/industrial drive aisles; open space areas; stormwater detention/retention facilities; wetland mitigation; hardscaping; landscaping; parking lot lighting; signage, etc.

     2.     A person may receive a temporary occupancy permit when all structural components have been constructed, inspected and authorized by the building official or the official’s designee. The structural components include all required Level 1 facilities: access; public sewer; public water; fire, life and safety provisions, etc. Temporary occupancy permits are subject to the provisions of subsection F.

     3.     A person seeking a final occupancy permit for financing or market purposes; for approval of a building shell that will have future tenant improvements, or for other similar reasons may apply for an exception under subsection G. The exception may be granted by the city manager or the manager’s designee upon submittal of the exception application, application fee and an irrevocable standby letter of credit in an amount not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the value of the incomplete improvements based on contractor estimates for all remaining private and public improvements not completed at the time of issuance of the final occupancy permit. The contractor estimates must be reviewed and approved by the building official, planning official or city engineer before an occupancy permit may be issued under this subsection. In the event that the person does not complete the remaining improvements within one hundred eighty (180) days, the city shall begin proceedings to utilize the funds available through the letter of credit to complete all the remaining improvements. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 153 § 8, 1996)

 

15.04.110 Fees.
     A.    Fees charged under this chapter shall be as provided in Resolution 96-05.

     B.     The building official may authorize the refunding of fees paid.

 

     C.     The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this chapter shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment. (Ord. 153 § 9, 1996)

 

15.04.120 Appeal procedure.
     A.    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building official made pursuant to the following specialty codes may appeal that decision to the following:

     1.     Electrical Specialty Code—appeals may be made to the state of Oregon, Building Codes Division, Chief Electrical Inspector;

     2.     Structural Specialty Code—appeals may be made to the state of Oregon, Building Codes Structures Board;

     3.     Mechanical Specialty Code—appeals may be made to the state of Oregon, Building Codes Structures Board;

     4.     Plumbing Specialty Code—appeals may be made to the state of Oregon, Building Codes Division;

     5.     One- and Two-Family Dwelling Specialty Code—appeals may be made to the state of Oregon, Building Codes Structures Board;

     6.     Manufactured Dwelling Code—appeals may be made to the state of Oregon, Manufactured Structures and Parks Advisory Board as per ORS 455.690;

     7.     Recreational Park and Organizational Camp Regulations—appeals may be made to the state of Oregon, Manufactured Structures and Parks Advisory Board as per ORS 455.690.

     B.     An appeal shall be in writing, shall describe the basis for the appeal and shall first be filed with the building official. (Ord. 153 § 10, 1996)

 

15.04.130 Penalties.
     Any person violating any of the provisions in this chapter for which a special penalty has not been expressly provided shall, upon conviction of such violation, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day that a violation exists is a separate offense. (Ord. 153 § 12, 1996)

 

15.04.140 Work without a permit—Investigation fees—Penalties.
     A.    Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this chapter has been commenced without first obtaining such permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

     B.     An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this chapter nor from any penalty prescribed by law. (Ord. 153 § 12.1, 1996)

 

15.04.150 Toilets on construction sites.
     A.    Prior to construction of any building or structure, a temporary water-flushed toilet or an approved chemical toilet shall be installed and maintained on the premises where the construction activity is occurring and not in the public-right-of-way throughout the time of construction of the building or structure.

     1.     If a water-flushed toilet is used, the toilet shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an existing lawful septic tank system.

     2.     If a chemical toilet is used, it shall collect human waste in a container charged with a chemical solution for the purpose of disinfecting and deodorizing the content.

     3.     The person in whose name the building permit for the construction is issued is charged with providing a temporary water-flushed toilet or approved chemical toilet as well as with maintenance of those facilities at each construction site during the entire course of construction.

     B.     The requirements of this section are in addition to those set out in Division 3, Chapter 437 of the Oregon Administrative Rules as they presently exist or as they may be amended. (Ord. 282 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 15.08 SPECIALTY CODES AND STANDARDS ADOPTED
15.08.010 Various specialty codes and standards adopted.
     The following specialty codes, rules and standards are adopted and incorporated herein by this reference as included in this chapter and shall be enforced by the city.

     A.    Structural Code. The 2014 Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-460-0010 through 918-460-0015, including Appendix “J” is enforced as part of this chapter.

     B.     Mechanical Code. The 2014 Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-440-0012 through 918-440-0040 is enforced as part of this chapter.

     C.     Plumbing Code. The 2017 Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-750-0110 is enforced as part of this chapter.

     D.    Electrical Code. The 2017 Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-305-0100 is enforced as part of this chapter.

     E.     Residential Code. The 2017 Oregon Residential Specialty Code as adopted by OAR 918-480-005 is enforced as part of this chapter.

     F.     Manufactured Dwelling and Park Code. The Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code adopted by OAR 918-600-0010 (2002), are enforced as part of this chapter, subject to any modifications or restrictions detailed within Title 16 of the city’s municipal code.

     G.    Manufactured Home Installation Code. The 2010 Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code (MDISC) Rules adopted by OAR 918-500-0000 through 918-500-0590 are enforced as part of this chapter, subject to any modifications or restrictions detailed within Title 16 of the city’s municipal code.

     H.    Recreational Park and Organizational Camp Rules. The Recreational Park and Organizational Camp Rules adopted by OAR 918-650-0000 through 918-650-0080, are enforced as part of this chapter, subject to any modifications or restrictions detailed within Title 16 of the city’s municipal code.

     I.      Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. The 1997 ICBO Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is enforced as part of this chapter.

     J.      Energy Efficiency Specialty Code. The 2014 Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-460-0500 and 918-460-0510, is enforced as part of this chapter.

     K.    Solar Installation Specialty Code. The 2010 Oregon Solar Installation Specialty Code as adopted pursuant to ORS 455-010 through 455-895, is enforced as part of this chapter.

     L.     Fire Code. The 2014 Fire Code of Clackamas Fire District #1 is enforced as part of this chapter.

     M.    Property Maintenance Code. The 2012 International Property Maintenance Code is enforced as part of this chapter. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 465 § 1, 2014; Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 419 § 1, 2011; Ord. 378 § 1, 2008; Ord. 355 § 1, 2007: amended during 2001 codification; Ord. 153 § 6, 1996)

Chapter 15.10 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
15.10.010 Purpose.
     A.    This chapter provides a method (cumulative with and in addition to any other remedies available to the city) whereby buildings or structures which, for any reason, endanger the health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or the building’s/structure’s occupants, shall be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished.

     B.     This chapter does not create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms hereof. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.015 Scope.
     This chapter shall apply to all “dangerous buildings” as herein defined be they now in existence or which may hereafter become so in the city. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.020 Alternations, additions and repairs.
     All buildings or structures required to be repaired under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Section 3403, 3404 and 3405 of the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.025 Administration.
     A.    The building official (or his/her designate) is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.030 Inspections.
     The building official and other officials such as the fire marshal and Clackamas County health officials are authorized to make such inspections and take such other actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.035 Right of entry.
     When necessary to make an inspection to enforce the requirements imposed by the terms of this chapter, or when the building official or the building official’s authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter, making the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter. If such building or premises are occupied, credentials must be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises are unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.040 Dangerous buildings declared to be public nuisances—Abatement.
     All buildings or portions thereof determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous as defined in this chapter are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures specified in Sections 15.10.065 to 15.10.155. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.045 Violations.
     It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.050 Inspections of work.
     All buildings or structures within the scope of this chapter and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official consistent with, and in the manner provided by this chapter and Section 105 of the Oregon Specialty Codes. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.055 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the Oregon Specialty Codes. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meaning within the context in which they are used. Webster’s 3rd New International Dictionary of the English Language (Unabridged, copyrighted 1986) shall be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.

     “Building official” means the officer appointed by the city manager to regulate and enforce all provisions of this code regarding building construction and improvements pursuant to ORS Section 455.150 and who shall possess a state building official certification.

     “City” means the city of Happy Valley.

     “Dangerous building” means any building or structure having any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described, provided such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or the building or structure’s occupants are endangered:

     1.     Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;

     2.     Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;

     3.     Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;

     4.     Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;

     5.     Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property;

 

     6.     Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings;

     7.     Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction;

     8.     Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay, (ii) faulty construction, (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building, (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation, or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse;

     9.     Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;

     10.   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base;

     11.   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings;

     12.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: (a) an attractive nuisance to children; (b) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to (c) enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts;

     13.   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code or housing code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;

     14.   Whenever any building or structure, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than fifty (50) percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent of the: (a) strength; (b) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or (c) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location;

     15.   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease;

     16.   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard;

     17.   Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence;

     18.   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.060 Commencement of proceedings.
     When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition thereof. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.065 Notice and order.
     The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building or structure. The notice and order shall contain:

     A.    The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located.

     B.     A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous, with a brief description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 15.10.055.

     C.     A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the building official.

     1.     If the building official has determined that the building must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of the order) and completed within such time as the building official shall determine reasonable under all of the circumstances.

     2.     If the building official has determined that the building must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the building official to be reasonable.

     3.     If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of the order), that all required permits be secured therefor within sixty (60) days from the date of the order, and that the demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable.

     D.    Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified, the building official:

     1.     Will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed; and

     2.     May proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner.

     E.     Statements advising that:

     1.     Any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the building official to the municipal court provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this chapter and filed with the building official within fourteen (14) days from the date of service of such notice and order; and

     2.     Failure to appeal constitutes a waiver of a right to a hearing and determination of the matter. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.070 Service of notice and order.
     The notice and order (and any amended or supplemental notice and order) shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property; and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if known to the building official or disclosed from official public records: the holder of any mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record, the owner or holder of any lease of record, and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the building official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.075 Method of service.
     Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy by certified mail, postage prepaid, to each such person at their address as it appears in the Clackamas County tax records, or as otherwise known to the building official. If no address of such person appears or is known to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed and addressed to such person at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.080 Proof of service.
     Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.085 Repair, vacation and demolition.
     The following standards shall be followed by the building official (and by the municipal court if an appeal is taken) in ordering repair, vacation or demolition of any dangerous building or structure:

     A.    Any building declared a dangerous building under this chapter shall be made to comply with one of the following:

     1.     The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair;

     2.     The building shall be demolished at the option of the building owner; or

     3.     If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against entry.

     B.     If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.090 Notice to vacate—Posting.
     Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 15.10.070, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:

 

DO NOT ENTER

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

______________________

Building Official

City of Happy Valley, Oregon

 

(Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.095 Compliance with notice to vacate.
     A.    Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued under Section 15.10.070 reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting.

     B.     No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit.

     C.     No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and all lawful requirements have been met. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.100 Form of appeal.
     Any person entitled to service under Section 15.10.070 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the building official under this chapter by filing with the municipal court a written appeal containing:

     A.    A heading in the words: “Before the Municipal Court of the City of Happy Valley, Oregon;”

     B.     A caption reading: “Appeal of __________,” giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal;

     C.     A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order;

     D.    A brief statement concerning the specific order or action protested, together with any material fact(s) claimed to support those contentions;

     E.     A brief statement of the relief sought and the reasons why the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside;

     F.     The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses;

     G.    The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

     The appeal shall be filed within twenty-one (21) days of the date of service of the building official’s order or action, except that if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with Sections 15.10.090 and 15.10.095, such appeal shall be filed within ten days from the date of the service of the notice and order of the building official. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.105 Scheduling appeal for hearing.
     As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the municipal court shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall not be less than ten or more than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the court either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.110 Effect of failure to appeal.
     Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.10.100 shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.115 Scope of appeal hearing—Stay of order.
     A.    Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

     B.     Except for vacation orders, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.120 Form of notice of hearing to appellant.
     The notice to the appellant(s) shall be substantially in the following form:

 

You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the Happy Valley Municipal Court at on the ___ day of _________, 20___ at the hour ___________ upon the notice and order served upon you for alleged violation(s) of the Happy Valley Dangerous Building Code. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents or other things by filing an affidavit therefor with the Court.

 

(Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.125 Record—Continuances—Subpoenas—Failure to comply with subpoena.
     A.    A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the court.

     B.     The court may grant continuances for good cause shown.

     C.     The court may issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of evidence at a hearing upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of an affidavit therefor which:

     1.     States the name and address of the proposed witness;

     2.     Specifies the things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof to the issues involved; and

     3.     States that the witness has the desired things in possession or under control.

     A subpoena need not be issued when the affidavit is defective in any particular.

     D.    Any person who refuses without lawful excuse to attend any hearing or to produce material evidence which the person possesses or controls as required by any subpoena served upon such person as provided for herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.130 Conduct of hearings.
     A.    Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.

     B.     Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.

     C.     Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.

     D.    Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.

     E.     Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.135 Rights of parties.
     Each party shall be able to:

     A.    Call and examine witnesses on matters relevant to the issues of the hearing;

     B.     Introduce documentary and physical evidence;

     C.     Cross-examine opposing witnesses;

     D.    Rebut evidence; and

     E.     Be represented by anyone lawfully permitted to do so. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.140 Official notice.
     In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken (either before or after submission of the case for decision) of any fact which judicially noticeable by Oregon courts. Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed which is to be noted in the record. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity to refute the noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.145 Inspection of the premises.
     The court may inspect any building or premises involved in an appeal during the course of the hearing provided that:

     A.    Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made;

     B.     The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; and

     C.     The judge shall state for the record after the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom.

     Each party shall have a right to rebut or explain such matters. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.150 Form of decision.
     With contested appeals heard by the municipal court, the court shall within a reasonable time (not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date the hearing is closed) prepare a written decision and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements to be complied with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant personally or sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.155 Effective date of decision.
     The effective date of the decision shall be as stated therein. Any appeal from the decision of the municipal court is to be taken, if at all, solely by way of writ of review pursuant to ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.160 Enforcement of orders.
     After any order of the building official or municipal court made pursuant to this chapter has become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. If the person to whom such order is directed fails, neglects or refuses to comply with such order, the building official, in consultation with the city manager, may take any and all actions deemed by him/her to be appropriate. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.165 Failure to commence work.
     Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within thirty (30) days after any final notice and order issued under this chapter becomes effective:

     A.    The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:

 

DANGEROUS BUILDING

DO NOT OCCUPY

It is unlawful to occupy this building, or to remove

or deface this notice.

________________________

Building Official

City of Happy Valley, Oregon

 

     B.     No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the building official have been completed and inspected consistent with the law and, if required, a certificate of occupancy issued.

     C.     The building official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided cause the building to be repaired to correct the conditions rendering the building dangerous, or, if the notice and order required demolition, to then cause the building to be demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.170 Extension of time to perform work.
     Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order, and by written agreement of such person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, the building official may grant an extension of time (not to exceed an additional one hundred twenty (120) days) within which to complete the repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the building official determines the extension will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official’s authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises, and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the notice and order. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.175 Interference with repair or demolition prohibited.
     No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this chapter whenever such officer, employee, contractor, or city representative or person having an interest or estate in such building or structure is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, including necessary acts preliminary to or incidental to such work. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.180 Performance of repair or demolition.
     When any repair or demolition is to be done by the city, the work may be accomplished either by city personnel or by private contractor under the direction of the public works director. The costs arising from the repair or demolition shall be made an assessment lien against the property involved or a personal obligation of the property owner, whichever the city council determines to be more appropriate. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.185 Account of expense and report.
     The public works director shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred by the city in the repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to this chapter and upon completion of the repair or demolition, the public works director shall prepare and file with the city recorder a report specifying the work done, along with an itemized statement of the costs therefor, a description of the real property upon which the building or structure was located, and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 15.10.070. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.190 Notice of charges—Protest.
     Upon receipt of the report, the city recorder shall send a copy thereof to the persons entitled to notice under Section 15.10.070 by certified mail, postage prepaid. Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the city recorder not later than thirty (30) days after the date of the mailing, and the city recorder shall then set a hearing before the city council in order that it may hear the protest or objection. Each protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which person is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. In the event no objection or protest is filed with the city, the city recorder shall cause the report to be filed in the city’s records and the charges denominated therein made an assessment lien against the property. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.195 Hearing on protest to charge.
     Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of the public works director together with the objections or protests thereto. The council may make such revision, correction or modification to the report or charge(s) as is deemed appropriate, and when the council is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the report (as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified), together with the charge, shall be confirmed or rejected. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. Judicial review of the city council’s decision shall be by way of writ of review pursuant to ORS 34.010 to 34.100 and no other. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

 

15.10.200 Lien.
     Immediately upon its being placed on the assessment roll, the assessment shall be deemed to be complete, the several amounts assessed shall be payable, and the assessments shall be liens against the lots or parcels of land assessed, respectively. The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and shall be paramount to all other liens except for state, county and property taxes with which it shall be upon a parity. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon are paid. Interest shall accrue at the legal rate. (Ord. 287 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 15.11 DISTRESSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
15.11.010 Definitions.
     The following definitions apply to Sections 15.11.010 to 15.11.080 unless inconsistent with the context:

     “Abandoned residential property” means:

     1.     Residential property that is both vacant and subject to either a pending judicial execution sale under ORS 18.901 (2016) et seq., or to non-judicial foreclosure pursuant to ORS 86.740 to 86.755 (2016); or

     2.     Residential property that is both vacant and was the subject of either a judicial execution sale under ORS 18.901 (2016) et seq., or non-judicial foreclosure pursuant to ORS 86.740 to 86.755 (2016) where legal title is retained by the beneficiary(ies) of a foreclosed trust deed or was otherwise transferred to beneficiary(ies) pursuant to a deed in-lieu of foreclosure.

     “Foreclosed residential property” means residential property an owner obtains as a result of:

     1.     Foreclosing a trust deed on the residential property;

     2.     Obtaining a judgment foreclosing a lien on the residential property; or

     3.     Purchasing the residential property at a trustee’s sale or a sheriff’s sale.

     “Local” means within thirty (30) road/driving miles distance of the city of Happy Valley.

     “Manager” means the city manager or authorized designate thereof.

     “Owner” means any natural person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity identified as having or claiming a lien interest either as a mortgagee under a mortgage or as a trustee and/or beneficiary under a trust deed in abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property.

     “Residential property” is property as defined in ORS 18.901 (2016).

     “Vacant” means condition(s) indicative of residential property being uninhabited, vacant or abandoned including, but are not limited to:

     1.     Visibly overgrown and/or dead vegetation at the property;

     2.     Accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail;

     3.     Visible accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris;

     4.     Absence of typical household furnishing consistent with active residential habitation; and/or

     5.     Statements by neighbors, delivery agents or government employees that the property is uninhabited or vacant. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2016)

 

15.11.020 Registration, security and maintenance obligations.
     All owners of abandoned residential property and vacant foreclosed residential property are obligated to continuously comply with the requirements imposed by Sections 15.11.030 to 15.11.060. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2016)

 

15.11.030 Registration requirement—Information required—Change in ownership.
     A.    Residential property shall be registered by the owner(s) thereof with the city recorder in the event:

     1.     Of an anticipated judicial foreclosure of the property, no earlier than the commencement of any of the actions described by ORS 18.904, 18.906, 18.908 (2016) and not later than the date first set for the execution sale described in ORS 18.930 (2016);

     2.     Of an anticipated non-judicial foreclosure of the property done pursuant to ORS 86.740 to 86.755 (2016) not later than the date of service or mailing of the notice of sale described in ORS 86.740 (2016); or

     3.     An owner receives written notice from the city manager that the city manager believes the residential property is vacant.

     B.     Each registration shall be on a form approved by the city recorder and contain at a minimum the following:

     1.     The name of the trustee or mortgagee;

     2.     If applicable, the name of the beneficiary (if different from the trustee) under the trust deed;

     3.     The street/office mailing address(es) of the trustee/mortgagee and if there is one, the beneficiary under the trust deed;

     4.     The name, mailing address and contact information of a local individual or entity charged with responsibility by the trustee, mortgagee and/or beneficiary for ensuring compliance with the obligations imposed by Sections 15.11.030 through 15.11.050.

     C.     Each registration shall be accompanied by payment of a registration fee which amount is to be set by council resolution. In the event residential property subject to the registration requirement imposed by the terms of Section 15.11.020 remains in a state subject thereto for more than three hundred sixty (360) days, an additional fee may be imposed each thirty (30) days thereafter for the period the property remains either abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property. Said fee, if unpaid, shall be made an assessment lien on the property and recorded as such in the city’s lien docket.

     D.    The city recorder shall maintain a current list of registered residential properties.

     E.     In the event ownership of a registered residential property changes, notice of the change shall be provided to the city recorder’s office no later than thirty (30) days after the change becomes effective. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2016)

 

15.11.040 Maintenance obligations.
     A.    The owners of residential property either determined to be or registered as abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property shall cause said property to be maintained in a generally kempt condition generally found on surrounding occupied residential property and free of weeds, dead vegetation, graffiti, trash, accumulated newspapers, circulars, flyers, discarded personal items and other items/conditions that give the appearance the property is vacant or abandoned.

     B.     In the event there is an outdoor pool and/or spa at an abandoned residential property or a vacant residential property, it/they shall either be kept in working order or drained and kept dry. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2016)

 

15.11.050 Security obligations.
     A.    The owners of residential property determined to be or registered as abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property shall cause said property to be secured (including closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other opening(s) allowing access to the dwelling) and thereafter maintained so as not to be readily accessible to unauthorized persons.

     B.     Residential property subject to subsection A shall be continuously posted with a notice (printed and legible with a font size no less than 14 point) listing the name and contact information of the local individual or entity identified in the city’s registration form along with the following phrases completed with the appropriate identification and contact information.

 

“THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY _________________.”

“TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL _____________.”

 

     The posting shall be placed either on the interior of the dwelling or secured to the exterior of the dwelling. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed on weather resistant materials. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2016)

 

15.11.060 Inspection obligation.
     The local individual or entity identified in the registration required by Section 15.11.030 shall cause to be inspected or inspect the property not less than monthly to ensure the requirements imposed by the terms of Sections 15.11.040 to 15.11.050 are met. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2016)

 

15.11.070 City authorized to act—Additional authority—Enhanced penalty.
     A.    In the event the city manager believes an owner has failed to meet any or all of the registration, maintenance, security and inspection mandates of this chapter, the city manager shall send notice of said failure to the owner at the address listed on the county’s tax rolls maintained consistent with ORS 311.560 (2016) or at such other address as may be known to the city manager. The notice shall set out the nature of the failure(s) to be corrected, giving the owner not less than fourteen (14) working days from the date of the notice to correct them.

     B.     In the event the owner fails to remedy the matters within the time set out in the notice (or make, in the city manager’s reasonable view, adequate arrangements otherwise) the city may then enter the property and cause said failures to be corrected, charging the costs thereof to the property as an assessment lien to be recorded in the city’s lien docket. All said liens may be enforced consistent with the terms of ORS 223.505 to ORS 223.595 (2016).

     C.     In addition to authority afforded the city manager under the terms of this section, the city manager may also seek to obtain compliance with and/or enforce the terms of this chapter as may be otherwise allowed using remedies and enforcement mechanisms provided for either in the Happy Valley Municipal Code or in state law.

     D.    If the city manager reasonably believes an owner’s failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter is willful or purposeful, the city manager may authorize appropriate enforcement personnel to seek an enhanced penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day in addition to the general penalty provided for in Section 1.12.010 of this code either in the municipal court or in any court with competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2016)

 

15.11.080 Appeals.
     A.    In the event an owner is notified that residential property under their ownership is subject to the terms of this chapter but believes the property should not be, they may appeal said determination to the municipal court.

     B.     Any appeal by an owner shall be:

     1.     In writing;

     2.     Received by the municipal court within ten (10) working days of the date of the notice informing the owner that their residential property was subject to this chapter; and

     3.     Setting out in summary form the basis for their belief that their residential property should not be subject to this chapter.

     C.     Upon receipt of an appeal, the municipal court shall review the matter and provide the owner an opportunity to give additional information if the court believes additional information could better inform the decision on whether to affirm, deny or modify the notification. After the owner had been given the opportunity to provide additional information, the court shall within ten (10) working days of the receipt of that information, affirm, deny or modify the notification as to the applicability of this chapter to the residential property in writing. The court’s decision is final subject only to judicial review pursuant to a writ of review taken pursuant to ORS 34.010 et seq. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.12 INFILL AND GRADING
15.12.010 Scope.
     This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction. (Ord. 138 § 1, 1995)

 

15.12.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter the definitions listed in this section shall be construed as specified in this section; other terms will have standard meaning.

     “Approval” means that the proposed work or completed work conforms to this chapter in the opinion of the building official.

     “As-graded” means the extent of surface conditions on completion of grading.

     “Bedrock” means in-place solid rock.

     “Bench” means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed.

     “Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

     “City engineer” means the officer appointed by the city manager to regulate and enforce all provisions of this code regarding civil engineering.

     “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the state to practice in the field of civil works.

     “Civil engineering” means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works.

     “Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

     “Earth material” means any rock, natural soil or fill or any combination of rock, soil and fill.

     “Engineering geologist” means a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology.

     “Engineering geology” means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

     “Erosion” means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice.

     “Excavation” means the mechanical removal of earth material.

 

     “Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

     Geotechnical Engineer. (See “Soils engineer”)

     “Grade” means the vertical location of the ground surface.

     1.     “Existing grade” means the grade prior to grading.

     2.     “Rough grade” means the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

     3.     “Finish grade” means the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

     “Grading” means any excavation or filling or combination of excavation and filling.

     “Key” means a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.

     “Professional inspection” means the inspection required by this code to be performed by persons supervised by such engineers or geologists and submitted to the building official for review and filing, and shall be sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work.

     “Site” means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination of lot or parcel, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.

     “Slope” means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

     “Soil” means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bedrock.

     “Soils engineer (Geotechnical engineer)” means an engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soils engineering (geotechnical engineering) and registered with the state to practice the discipline.

     “Soils engineering (Geotechnical engineering)” means the application of the principles of soils mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection or testing of the construction of them.

     “Terrace” means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 138 § 2, 1995)

 

15.12.030 Permits required.
     A.    Except as specified in subsection (B) of this section, no person shall do any grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the building official or city engineer.

     B.     Exempted Work. A grading permit is not required for the following:

     1.     When approved, in writing, by the building official or city engineer, before beginning work, grading in an isolated, self-contained area if there is no danger to private or public property;

     2.     An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure as part of work authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than four feet after the completion of such structure;

     3.     Stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel or aggregate when prior written approval has been granted by the building official or city engineer, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property or structures;

     4.     Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists, when prior written approval is obtained from the building official or city engineer;

     5.     A fill less than one foot in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, or less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures, which does not exceed twenty-five (25) cubic yards per calendar year on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course.

     C.     Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 138 § 3, 1995)

 

15.12.040 Hazards.
     Whenever the building official or city engineer determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage swale, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of such property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official or city engineer, shall within the period specified in such notice repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 138 § 4, 1995)

 

15.12.050 Grading permit requirements.
     A.    Permits Required. Except as exempted under Section 15.12.030(B) of this title, no person shall do any grading without first obtaining a grading permit from the building official or grading or site development permit from the city engineer. A separate permit shall be obtained for each site, and may cover both excavations and fills.

     B.     Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the city for that purpose. Every such application shall:

     1.     Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

     2.     Describe the land on which the fill is to be placed by legal description and street address;

     3.     Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications and other data as required in this chapter;

     4.     Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent;

     5.     Contain a provision that the applicant agrees to comply with the requirements, limitations and permit requirements imposed by Section 16.20.090 (Tree cutting and preservation) of this code; and

     6.     Give such other data and information as may be required by the building official or city engineer.

     C.     Plans and Specifications. Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams and other data shall be submitted in two sets with each application for a permit. The building official or city engineer may require plans, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer licensed by the state to practice as such.

     D.    Grading Designation. Grading in excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and shall be designated as “engineered grading.” Grading involving less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards shall be designated “regular grading” unless the permittee chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading, or the building official determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case grading shall conform to the requirements for engineered grading.

     E.     Engineered Grading Requirements.

     1.     Applications for a grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the building official or city engineer.

     2.     Specifications shall contain information covering construction and materials requirements.

     3.     Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this chapter and other relevant ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give locations of the work, the name and address of the owner and the person by whom they were prepared.

     4.     The plans shall include the following information:

     a.     General vicinity of the proposed site;

     b.     Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage;

     c.     Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction;

     d.     Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains;

     e.     Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners which are within fifteen (15) feet of the property or which may be affected by the proposed grading operations;

     f.      Recommendations included in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report shall be incorporated into the grading plans or specifications. When approved by the building official, specific recommendations contained in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report, which are applicable to grading, shall be included by reference;

     g.     The dates of the soils engineering and engineering geology reports together with the names, addresses and phone numbers of the firms and/or individuals who prepared the reports.

     h.     A plan showing that the grading limits for infrastructure (streets and utilities) within new developments not extending outside a line running twenty (20) feet of the public right-of-way except where an exception to said limitation has been granted in writing by the building official or city engineer.

     i.      The exception referred to in subsection h of this section shall be granted when, in the opinion of either the building official or city engineer, extraordinary topographic, engineering or other non-financial constraints imposed by the site proposed to be graded prevent reasonable development of the site should compliance with the strict terms of subsection h of this section be required.

     F.     Soils Engineering Report. The soils engineering report required by subsection D of this section shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress fills, when necessary, and opinion on adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading as affected by soils engineering factors, including the stability of slopes.

     G.    Engineering Geology Report. The engineering geology report in accordance with subsection D of this section shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and a statement on the adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading, as affected by geologic factors.

     H.    Regular Grading Requirements. Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a plan in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner and the name of the person who prepared the plan. The plan shall include the following information:

     1.     General vicinity of the proposed site;

     2.     Limiting dimensions and depth of cut and fill;

     3.     Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures within fifteen (15) feet of the proposed grading.

     I.      Issuance.

     1.     a. Issuance of Permit. The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official or city engineer. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable ordinance of this jurisdiction. If the building official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed with such permit conform to the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent ordinances, and that the fees specified in this chapter have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.

     b.     When the building official or city engineer issues the permit, the building official or city engineer shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications “Approved.” Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the building official or city engineer, and all work regulated by this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.

     2.     Retention of Plans. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than two years from date of completion of the work covered in such plan; and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, and that set shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized is in progress.

     3.     a. Validity of Permit. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance of this jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of this jurisdiction shall not be valid.

     b.     The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the building official or city engineer from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.

     4.     a. Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official or city engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced, for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.

     b.     Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit, when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this chapter for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official or city engineer may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days on written request by the permittee, showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once.

     5.     Suspension or Revocation. The building official or city engineer may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 291 § 1, 2004; Ord. 138 § 5, 1995)

 

15.12.060 Grading fees.
     A.    General. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section or shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by city council resolution.

     B.     Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Such plan review fee shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by city council resolution. For excavation and fill on the same site, the fee shall be based on the volume of excavation or fill, whichever is greater.

     C.     Grading Permit Fees. A fee for each grading permit shall be paid as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 138 § 6, 1995)

 

15.12.070 Bonds.
     A.    The city may require bonds in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions.

     B.     In lieu of a surety bond the applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit with the city in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond. (Ord. 138 § 7, 1995)

 

15.12.080 Cuts.
     A.    General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils engineering or engineering geology report, cuts shall conform to the provisions of this section.

     B.     In the absence of an approved soils engineering report, these provisions may be waived for minor cuts not intended to support structures.

     C.     It is required that permittee request location of underground utility service from providers before commencing work.

     D.    Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, unless the permittee furnishes a soils engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. (Ord. 138 § 8, 1995)

 

15.12.090 Fills.
     A.    1. General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils engineering report and approved by the building official or city engineer, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section.

     2.     In the absence of an approved soils engineering report, these provisions may be waived by the building official for minor fills not intended to support structures.

     3.     It is required that permittee request location of underground utility service from providers before commencing work.

     B.     Preparation of Ground. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than 2:1. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill and, where slopes are steeper than 5:1 and the height is greater than five feet, by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than 5:1 shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. The cut shall be made before placing the fill and acceptance by the soils engineer or engineering geologist or both as a suitable foundation for fill.

     C.     Fill Material. Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Except as permitted by the building official or city engineer, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than twelve (12) inches shall be buried or placed in fills.

     Exception: The building official or city engineer may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, and continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply:

     1.     Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan;

     2.     Rock sizes greater than twelve (12) inches in maximum dimension shall be ten (10) feet or more below grade, measured vertically;

     3.     Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with well-graded soil.

     D.    Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety (90) percent of maximum density.

     E.     Slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.

     F.     Materials. All fill used or to be used as base for structure will be as set forth in Section 15.12.050(D) of this chapter. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 138 § 9, 1995)

 

15.12.100 Setbacks.
     A.    General. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary. Setback dimensions shall be measured as shown in Figure 1 of this chapter.

     B.     Top of Cut Slope. The top of cut slopes shall not be made nearer to a site boundary line than one-fifth of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of ten (10) feet. The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains or other infrastructure related requirements of the city or a service provider.

     C.     Toe of Fill Slope. The toe of fill slopes shall be made no nearer to the site boundary line than one-half the height of the slope with a minimum of two feet and maximum of twenty (20) feet. Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the building official deems necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions may include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Additional setbacks;

     2.     Provision for retaining or slough walls;

     3.     Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion;

     4.     Provisions for the control of surface waters.

     D.    Modifications of Slope Location. The city engineer or designee may approve alternate setbacks. The city engineer or designee may require an investigation and recommendation by a qualified engineer or engineering geologist to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 138 § 10, 1995)

 

15.12.110 Drainage and terracing.
     A.    General. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan, drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of this section for cut or fill slopes steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.

     B.     1. Terrace. Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than thirty (30) foot vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage, erosion and debris except that where only one terrace is required, it shall be at mid-height. For cut or fill slopes greater than sixty (60) feet and up to one hundred twenty (120) feet in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-height shall be twelve (12) feet in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and approved by the building official or city engineer. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.

     2.     Swales or ditches or terraces shall have a minimum gradient of five percent and must be paved with reinforced concrete not less than five inches in thickness or an approved equal protection. They shall have a minimum depth at the deepest point of one foot and a minimum paved width of five feet.

     3.     A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) square feet (projected) without discharging into a down drain.

     C.     Subsurface Drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.

     D.    1. Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainage way approved by the building official or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive downdrains or other devices as approved by the building official or city engineer.

     2.     Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of two percent toward approved drainage facilities, unless waived by the building official or city engineer.

     Exception: The gradient from the building pad may be one percent if all of the following conditions exist throughout the permit area:

     a.     No proposed fills are greater than ten (10) feet in maximum depth;

     b.     No proposed finish cut of fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of twenty (20) feet;

     c.     No existing slope faces, which have a slope face steeper than ten (10) horizontal to one vertical, have a vertical height in excess of ten (10) feet.

     E.     Interceptor Drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of

all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes toward the cut and has a drainage path greater than forty (40) feet measured horizontally. Interceptor drains shall have their design approved by the building official or city engineer before installation. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 138 § 11, 1995)

 



 

15.12.120 Erosion control.
     A.    General. The faces of cut and fill surfaces shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. The protection for the surface shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final approval. Where cut surfaces are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, the building official may approve omission of such control.

     B.     Other Devices. Where required by the building official or city engineer, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 138 § 12, 1995)

 

15.12.130 Grading inspection.
     A.    General. Grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official or city engineer at the request of the permittee. Professional inspection of grading operations shall be provided by the civil engineer, soils engineer and the engineering geologist retained to provide such services in accordance with subsection (E) of this section for engineered grading and as required by the building official for regular grading.

     B.     Civil Engineer. The civil engineer shall provide professional inspection within such engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall consist of observation and review as to the establishment of line, grade and surface drainage of the development area. If revised plans are required during the course of the work they shall be prepared by the civil engineer.

     C.     Soils Engineer. The soils engineer shall provide professional inspection within such engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall include observation during grading and testing for required compaction. The soils engineer shall provide sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be submitted to the permittee, the building official or city engineer and the civil engineer.

     D.    Engineering Geologist. The engineering geologist shall provide professional inspection of the bedrock excavation to determine if conditions encountered are in conformance with the approved report. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved engineering geology report shall be submitted to the soils engineer.

     E.     Permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for the work to be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and the permittee shall engage consultants, if required by the building official or city engineer, to provide professional inspections on a timely basis. The permittee shall act as a coordinator between the consultants, the contractor and the building official. In the event of changed conditions, the permittee shall be responsible for informing the building official or city engineer of such change and shall provide revised plans for approval.

     F.     Building Official or City Engineer. The building official or city engineer shall inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.

     G.    Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter, the civil engineer, the soils engineer or the engineering geologist finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the permittee and to the building official or city engineer.

     H.    Transfer of Responsibility. If the civil engineer, the soils engineer or the engineering geologist of record is changed during grading, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed in writing to accept their responsibility within the area of technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the building official or city engineer in writing of such change prior to the recommencement of such grading. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 138 § 13, 1995)

 

15.12.140 Completion of work.
     A.    Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings and supplements to such drawings and reports are required for engineered grading or when professional inspection is performed for regular grading, as applicable.

     1.     An as-built grading plan prepared by the civil engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 15.12.130(E) showing original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage facilities and of the outlets of subsurface drains. As-constructed locations, elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the soils engineer. Civil engineers shall state that to the best of their knowledge the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan.

     2.     A report prepared by the soils engineer retained to provide such services in accord with Section 15.12.130(C), including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils engineering investigation report. Soils engineers shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report and applicable provisions of this chapter.

     3.     A report prepared by the engineering geologist retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 15.12.130(E), including a final description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of the same on the recommendation incorporated in the approved grading plan. Engineering geologists shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved engineering geologist report and applicable provisions of this chapter.

     4.     The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the building official or city engineer a statement of conformance to the as-built plan and the specifications.

     B.     Notification of Completion. The permittee shall notify the building official or city engineer when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted to the city. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 138 § 14, 1995)

 

15.12.150 Penalties.
     A.    Failure to complete all aspects of this chapter will be considered a violation of this chapter, and upon conviction of such violation, be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).

     B.     Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and may be punishable as such. (Ord. 138 § 15, 1995)

 
Chapter 15.20 EROSION CONTROL
15.20.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate environmental and property damage resulting from soil erosion due to construction, excavation, and other land disturbances. (Ord. 141 § 1, 1995)

 

15.20.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:

     “Construction” means land disturbing activities or structural development, installation or expansion of a building or other structure.

     “Erosion” means the movement of soil particles or other contaminants resulting from the flow of water or wind.

     “Erosion control plan” means a site specific plan containing a scale drawing of the site installation and proposed erosion control measures to be used during construction. Minimum erosion control measures may include, but are not limited to: silt fencing; plastic sheeting; loose straw or hay; straw or hay in bales or other forms; and erosion control landscaping, including approved grasses, turf or sod.

     “Property” means real estate property. (Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 141 § 2, 1995)

 

15.20.030 Erosion prohibited.
     A.    Visible or measurable erosion during construction is prohibited. Contaminants which enter, or are likely to enter the public storm and surface water system are prohibited. The owner of the property from which the erosion occurs, together with any person who actually causes such occurrence are in violation of this chapter.

     B.     On any site where construction activity will disturb an area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet, approval of an erosion control plan and issuance of an erosion control permit are required. Installation of approved erosion control measures must be completed and approved by the city inspector prior to the commencement of any construction activity.

     C.     On any site where construction activity may disturb an area of less than five hundred (500) square feet, the city may require an erosion control plan and permit if the city determines that it is likely that erosion will occur on the site as a result of the construction activity. All work on the site shall immediately cease following notice of the problem by the city until an erosion control permit is obtained and erosion control measures are installed and approved by the city inspector.

     D.    Erosion control measures set forth in any approved erosion control plan shall be implemented and maintained on the site until final landscaping has provided sufficient erosion control. The city may allow for removal of erosion control measures at an earlier date if erosion control is assured by established landscaping.

     E.     This chapter is not intended to regulate home gardening. When no erosion issues exist, the home garden is exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 141 § 3, 1995)

 

15.20.040 Erosion control plan required.
     Erosion control plans shall include a description of erosion control methods that are adequate to ensure that runoff, siltation and pollutants from the grading, site clearing or construction are contained on-site during the period of activity on the site or until the final landscaping is sufficiently established to control erosion. Each plan shall also contain a date by which approved erosion control measures will be installed. Prior to the issuance of any building or engineering permit, all erosion control measures shall have been installed and inspected by the building official or designee. For all uses, final erosion control measures shall, at a minimum, include necessary silt fencing, straw or hay baffles or similar erosion control measures. For single-family uses, final erosion control measures shall, at a minimum, include necessary silt fencing, straw or hay baffles or similar erosion control measures within side and rear yards, and front yard landscaping to include sod or lawn, or an approved alternate front yard landscape plan. An exception to these requirements may be granted per the provisions of Section 15.04.100(H) of this title and shall be enforceable through the mechanisms found within the Happy Valley Municipal Code. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 141 § 4, 1995)

 

15.20.050 Processing fees.
     Fees to cover the cost of erosion control plan review, site inspections and permit will be set by city council resolution. (Ord. 141 § 5, 1995)

 

15.20.060 Amendment of inadequate measures.
     An approved erosion control plan may be amended by the city if, prior to the establishment of final landscaping sufficient to control erosion, the city determines that the erosion control measures in the approved plan have not, in fact, controlled site erosion or runoff as intended. All work on the site shall cease pending approval of an amended erosion control plan and installation of approved erosion control measures. Such amended plan shall be provided by the permittee in writing and shall be implemented by the permittee or property owner. (Ord. 141 § 6, 1995)

 

15.20.070 Work in progress.
     Permittee or property owners for any site activities which were underway on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be required to prepare an erosion control plan for approval pursuant to this chapter. If the city determines that an erosion control problem exists, and requests an erosion control plan, all work on the site shall cease pending approval of the plan and installation of approved erosion control measures. The provisions of this section shall apply until final approval by the city. (Ord. 141 § 7, 1995)

 

15.20.080 Enforcement—Violation—Penalty.
     A.    The building official or city engineer or designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Beginning or continuing site clearing, grading or construction activities without an approved erosion control plan and permit required by this chapter constitutes a violation of this chapter. Failure to implement the erosion control measures set forth in the approved erosion control plan constitutes a violation of this chapter. No building shall be certified for occupancy if the property is deemed to be in violation of this chapter. A stop work order may be issued at any time when determined necessary by the building official or city engineer. Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 141 § 8, 1995)

Chapter 15.24 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
15.24.010 Statement of purpose.
     It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designated:

     A.    To protect human life and health;

     B.     To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

     C.     To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

     D.    To minimize prolonged interruptions;

     E.     To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

     F.     To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

     G.    To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

     H.    To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 95 § 1.2, 1987)

 

15.24.020 Method of implementation.
     In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

     A.    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

     B.     Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

     C.     Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

     D.    Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

     E.     Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 95 § 1.3, 1987)

 

15.24.030 Definitions.
     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

     “Appeal” means a request for a review of the planning commission’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

     “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map. The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized by sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.

     “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.

     “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “one hundred (100)-year flood.” Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.

     “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.

     “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

     1.     The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

     2.     The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

     “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

     “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

     “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

     “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at Section 15.24.060(B)(1)(b).

     “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term “manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers or other similar vehicles.

     “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

     “Structure” means a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

     “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either:

     1.     Before the improvement or repair is started; or

     2.     If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

     “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1987)

 

15.24.040 General provisions.
     A.    Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of Happy Valley.

     B.     Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Happy Valley,” with accompanying flood insurance maps is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.

     C.     Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more that one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

     D.    Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

     E.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

     1.     Considered as minimum requirements;

     2.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

     3.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

     F.     Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee of the city, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this chapter. (Ord. 228 § 1, 2001; Ord. 95 § 3, 1987)

 

15.24.050 Administration.
     A.    Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, and for all development including fill and other activities.

     B.     Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the planning commission and may include but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of them. Specifically, the following information is required:

     1.     Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

     2.     Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

     3.     Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.24.060; and

     4.     Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

     C.     Designation of the Planning Commission. The planning commission is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.

     D.    Duties and Responsibilities of the Planning Commission. Duties of the planning commission shall include, but not be limited to:

     1.     Permit Review:

     a.     Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

     b.     Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;

     c.     Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Section 15.24.060 are met.

     2.     Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.24.040(B) the planning commission may obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Section 15.24.060(B), Specific Standards and Floodways.

     3.     Information to be Obtained and Maintained:

     a.     Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study or required as in this section, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement;

     b.     For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:

     i.      Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed, and

     ii.     Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in this section.

     c.     Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

     4.     Alteration of watercourses:

     a.     Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Land Conservation and Development of the state of Oregon prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;

     b.     Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

     5.     Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeal shall be granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the Rules and Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59—78).

     6.     Variance Procedure—Appeal Board:

     a.     The city council as established by the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

     b.     The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the planning commission.

     c.     Those aggrieved by the decision of the city council, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the appropriate court or administrative board as provided in Oregon law.

     d.     In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

     i.      The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

     ii.     The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

     iii.    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

     iv.    The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

     v.     The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

     vi.    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

     vii.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

     viii.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

     ix.    The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

     x.     The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

     xi.    The costs of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.

     e.     Upon consideration of the factors in the standards of Section 60.6 of the Rules and Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59-78) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

     f.      The planning commission shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.

     7.     Variance Procedure—Conditions for Variance:

     a.     Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (i to xi, inclusive) in subsection (D)(6)(d) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

     b.     Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.

     c.     Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

     d.     Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

     e.     Variances shall only be issued upon:

     i.      A showing of good and sufficient cause;

     ii.     A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

     iii.    A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in this section or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

     f.      Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

     g.     Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry-floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (D)(7) of this section (Conditions for Variances), and otherwise complies with Section 15.24.060(A), General Standards.

     h.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. 374 § 1, 2008; Ord. 95 § 4, 1987)

 

15.24.060 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
     A.    General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

     1.     Anchoring:

     a.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structures resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;

     b.     All mobilehomes shall be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that:

     i.      Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobilehome, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobilehomes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one additional tie per side,

     ii.     Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobilehomes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four additional ties per side,

     iii.    All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds, and

     iv.    Any additions to the mobilehome be similarly anchored requiring one additional tie per side.

     c.     An alternative method of anchoring may involve a system designed to withstand a wind force of ninety (90) miles per hour or greater. Certification must be provided to the planning commission that this standard has been met.

     d.     Reference is made to Oregon Administrative Rule OAR 814.23.065 (effective October 17, 1986). That rule was primarily designed to minimize damage from high winds. It is noted that although the administrative rule does not apply to Clackamas County, in which Happy Valley is located, the city council has determined that it would be appropriate to establish these requirements for the City of Happy Valley.

     e.     All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. (Reference FEMA’S “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques.)

     2.     Construction Materials and Methods:

     a.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

     b.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

     c.     Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

     3.     Utilities:

     a.     All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.

     b.     New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and

     c.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

     Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source (Section 15.24.050(D)(2), use of Other Base Flood Data), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

     B.     Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 15.24.040(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or Section 15.24.050(D)(2), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required:

     1.     Residential Construction:

     a.     New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation unless the city is granted an exception by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the allowance of basements in accordance with Section 60.6(b) or (c) of the National Flood Insurance Program’s (NFIP’s) regulations;

     b.     Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

     i.      A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided,

     ii.     The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade,

     iii.    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

     2.     Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

     a.     Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and so that the structure meets the standards of Section 16.16.460(G) for impacts to the base flood level;

     b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

     c.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 15.24.050(D)(3)(b);

     d.     Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in Section 15.24.060(B)(1)(b);

     e.     Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level).

     3.     Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones Al-30, AH and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.24.060(A)(1)(b); and

     a.     Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A, AH, and AE within the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor on the manufactured home is elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement;

     b.     Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A, AH, and AE on the FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (c)(6) of this section shall be elevated so that either (i) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot above the base flood elevation, or (ii) the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

     4.     Recreational Vehicles.

     a.     Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A, AH, and AE on the FIRM shall:

     i.      Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;

     ii.     Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if its wheels or jacking system is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has not permanently attached additions); or

     iii.    Meet the city’s requirements for anchoring of “manufactured homes” described in Section 15.24.060(A)(1)(b).

     C.     Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.24.040(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

     1.     Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating thorough hydrologic and hydrostatic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

     2.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the city may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the city first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, and receives approval of FEMA.

     3.     If subsection (C)(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. (Ord. 374 § 1, 2008; Ord. 95 § 5, 1987)

Chapter 15.28 MOVING OF EXISTING BUILDING OVER CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
15.28.005 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following words have the meaning set out below:

     “Building” means an existing structure removed from its foundation which is used or intended for sheltering any use or occupancy.

     “Building permits” include all permits necessary to make a building capable of being legally used or occupied. The permits include those required for work subject to the State Building Code (as that term is defined at ORS 455.010) including but not limited to all specialty codes including structural, plumbing, electrical, dwelling, heating and ventilating. In addition, the term includes permits necessary for sewer, water and erosion control.

     “City” means the city of Happy Valley.

     “Manager” means the city manager for the city of Happy Valley or his/her designate.

     “Occupancy” is the purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used.

     “Owner” is any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in property or a building.

     “Person” includes any individual, firm, association or corporation of any kind or nature capable of owning real or personal property.

     “Right-of-way” is that area between property lines comprising a street, alley, pedestrian walkway, bike path, easement or other area essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated for public use and having a width of not less than ten (10) feet.

     “Structure Moving Permit” or “SMP” is that permit issued by the city for the transport of a building over city rights-of-way. (Ord. 245 § 1, 2002)

 

15.28.010 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to move any building over any city right-of-way or to occupy any portion thereof without first obtaining a structure moving permit. A separate SMP shall be required for each building proposed to be moved. (Ord. 245 § 1, 2002)

 

15.28.015 Application—Fee deposit.
     A.    Application for a structure moving permit shall be on a form approved by the city, signed by the building’s owner or authorized agent and shall include (at a minimum) information on the following:

     1.     Applicant’s name, address and telephone number;

     2.     The assessor’s tax map and lot number upon which the building is currently located (if within the city limits);

     3.     The size (square footage) of the building proposed to be moved;

 

     4.     The building’s occupancy group and/or rating;

     5.     The proposed use of the building at the new location in the city;

     6.     The assessor’s tax map and lot number to which the building is proposed to be moved, that property’s zoning and ownership (both legal and equitable) if within city limits;

     7.     The route proposed to be taken during the move;

     8.     The length of time required for moving the building;

     9.     Whether building permits have been applied for, approved and obtained; and

     10. The name and address of the owner of the building if different than the applicant.

     11. The name and address of the property owner if different than the applicant.

     B.     Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee which shall be nonrefundable and is in addition to the structure moving permit fee and the financial guarantee referenced in 15.28.020. The amount of the application fee and structure moving permit fee shall be established by the council in a separate resolution. (Ord. 245 § 1, 2002)

 

15.28.020 Application review—Insurance requirements—Financial guarantee—Approval.
     A.    The manager shall review the application and verify, if appropriate, that all relevant building permits have been obtained, that the zoning at the proposed relocation site allows for the building’s proposed use and that all appropriate fees have been paid. Thereafter, the manager shall, in consultation with the public works director determine whether the route proposed by the applicant is satisfactory and if not, will inform applicant. The applicant shall then provide an alternative route for review by the manager.

     B.     No structure moving permit may be issued until the applicant has filed with the city a policy or certificate of insurance naming the city, its councilors, officers, agents, and employees as additional named insureds in a minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury to one person, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injuries from one accident and at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. Any insurance shall also contain a provision that it is not cancelable during the term of the permit.

     C.     No structure moving permit shall be issued until applicant has deposited with the city a financial guarantee (in a form approved of by the city) in a sum sufficient to cover the city’s cost of preparing for the building move and for the repairs, restoration or replacement of the city’s rights-of-way or the improvements located therein or adjacent thereto arising from the moving operation. If the cost exceeds the amount reflected in the financial guarantee, the applicant shall promptly provide the additional monies to the city.

     D.    Provided the manager is satisfied that the zoning of the proposed site for the building’s location allows for its use or occupancy there and that evidence of all appropriate permit fees, insurance, financial guarantees, building permits and moving route have been either obtained or approved, the manager is authorized to issue the structure moving permit to applicant. The permit shall reference the regulations set out below and may include other conditions deemed by the manager to be reasonable and necessary for the protection of the city’s right-of-way and other facilities (regardless of ownership) that may be impacted by the building’s movement along the rights-of-way. The manager shall keep a copy of the permit issued along with evidence that the other necessary requirements have been obtained or provided to the city. (Ord. 245 § 1, 2002)

 

15.28.025 Regulations.
     A.    The moving of a building or structure shall be a continuous day-by-day operation occurring only during the hours specified by the city in the moving permit.

     B.     The move shall continue until complete so as to ensure the least possible obstruction to city rights-of-way and other users thereof.

     C.     It is unlawful to move a building or structure under a permit and leave said building (or any portion thereof) stationary in the right-of-way for a period in excess of two (2) hours during the hours specified in the moving permit unless an emergency exists by reason of unforeseen difficulties encountered in cutting wires, trees, or removing obstructions in the course of the route selected.

     D.    All movement in the right-of-way must be completed within an elapsed time of twelve (12) hours unless application is made for a longer period of time and permission specifically is granted by the manager prior to the commencement of the move. In the event unforeseen difficulties are encountered and an extension of time is necessitated thereby, the manager may extend the twelve (12) hour requirement by the additional time he/she believes necessary.

     E.     Lights and other warning devices sufficient to warn and protect traffic shall be displayed in conspicuous places at or on a building being moved during the hours in which street lights are lighted. Additional warning devices may be required if the manager finds those displayed by the permittee to be insufficient. (Ord. 245 § 1, 2002)

 

15.28.030 Removal or replacement of overhead wires in moving operation.
     A.    When overhead wires or other aerial facilities in any right-of-way designated in a permit for moving a building or structure might interfere with the moving operation. Applicant shall give the owner of the wire or other aerial facility a minimum of ninety-six (96) hours written notice that he/she desires to have the aerial facility/wire temporarily removed or rearranged so as to accommodate the building’s move. Applicant must provide the city with proof facilities owners have been notified.

     B.     Applicant shall either pay or tender to the owner of the aerial facility or wire the amount estimated by the owner to be necessary to remove, rearrange and/or replace the same.

     C.     When the city owns the facility, the cost of temporary removal and replacement shall be included in the deposit prerequisite to permit, as provided in this chapter.

     D.    If applicant disputes the amount demanded by the owner as the advance or tender, the amount shall be determined by the manager. Applicant shall pay the actual expense of removing and replacing the wire, and as soon as the actual expense can be determined, applicant shall immediately pay any deficit and the owner shall refund any surplus. Upon receipt or tender of the amount estimated or the amount fixed by the manager in case of dispute, the owner of the wire shall remove it in time to permit the passage of the building or structure without unnecessary delay. (Ord. 245 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 15.32 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION
15.32.010 General provisions.
     Whenever any officer or employee of the city is authorized by this code to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance or other regulation, the officer or employee is authorized to enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided, that the officer or employee shall effect entry in the manner provided in Section 15.28.020, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or control of such building or premises has been otherwise obtained. (Ord. 231 § 1, 2001)

 

15.32.020 Consent to enter occupied premises.
     If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the officer or employee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry to the building or premises from them. If consent to entry is not given, the officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 231 § 2, 2001)

Title 16 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
ARTICLE 16.1 INTRODUCTION
ARTICLE 16.2 LAND USE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 16.3 SPECIFIC AREA PLAN DISTRICTS AND OVERLAY ZONES
ARTICLE 16.4 COMMUNITY DESIGN STANDARDS
ARTICLE 16.5 PUBLIC FACILITIES
ARTICLE 16.6 ADMINISTRATION OF LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 16.7 EXCEPTION TO CODE STANDARDS
APPENDIX A Happy Valley Plant List
APPENDIX B. Happy Valley Style

ARTICLE 16.1 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 16.11 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
16.11.010 Title.
This title and its chapters shall be known and may be cited and referenced as the “City of Happy Valley, Oregon, Land Development Code” (“LDC”) or “this Code.” (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.11.020 Severability.
The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of the title is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the title. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.11.030 Compliance and scope.
A.  Area of Applicability. This title and all amendments to it shall be applicable to all land areas within the incorporated limits of the City as determined by the latest official boundary survey or legal description of those incorporated limits. This title shall not apply to land outside the incorporated limits of the City, but shall apply to annexed lands without regard as to whether said lands retain an interim Clackamas County Comprehensive Plan designation/zoning district or an official City of Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan designation/zoning district.

B.  Compliance with the Provisions in the Land Development Code. Land and structures may be used or developed only as this title or any amendment thereto permits. No plat shall be recorded or no building permit shall be issued without compliance with the provisions of this title.

C.  Obligation by Successor. The requirements of this title apply to the owner(s) of record, persons undertaking the development or the use of land, and to those persons’ successors in interest.

D.  Most Restrictive Regulations Apply. Where this title imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.

E.  Variances. Variances shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 16.71.

F.  Transfer of Development Standards Prohibited. No lot area, yard, landscaping, or open space that is required by this title for one use shall be a required lot area, yard, landscaping, or open space for another use, except as otherwise specifically allowed by this title. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.11.040 Consistency with Plan and Laws.
A.  Any action initiated under this specific title shall be consistent with the adopted Happy Valley, Oregon Comprehensive Plan, the latest adopted edition of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, all applicable State and Federal laws, and other ordinances, regulations or codes as may be appropriate and applicable, whether Federal, State or local. Any action initiated under this specific title shall be coordinated with all other adopted plans, laws, ordinances, regulations or codes in order to insure orderly and uniform development.

B.  Minimum Requirements Intended. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

C.  Violation of Code Prohibited. No person shall erect, construct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure or shall use, divide or transfer any land in violation of this Code or any amendment thereto. (Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.11.050 Use of a development.
A development shall be used only for a lawful use. A lawful use of a development is one that is permitted by this Code (including nonconforming uses, subject to Chapter 16.72), and is not prohibited by law. Any use which becomes nonconforming at the adoption of this title shall not be an unlawful use, but shall be governed by the criteria and procedures as set forth in Chapter 16.72. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.11.060 Pre-existing approvals.
A.  Legality of Pre-Existing Approvals. A development or uses that was approved by the City or Clackamas County prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code may continue pursuant to such approvals. A modification to an approved development or use shall comply with Chapter 16.66, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval.

B.  Subsequent Development Applications. All developments and uses initiated on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code shall conform to the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.11.070 Conformity of permits.
No permit shall be issued by the Building Official for the construction, reconstruction, alteration or change of use of a structure or lot that does not conform to the requirements of this title, unless an exception applies. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.11.080 Official action.
A.  Official Action. The Planning Official or designee is vested with authority to issue permits or grant approvals in conformance with this Code, and shall issue no permit or grant approval for any development or use which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed to carry out this Code.

B.  Severability. Any permit or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this Code shall be void, unless it is modified to conform to the Code. The City Manager and designees shall determine when an approval is void and he or she may modify the approval, or refer it back to the original decision making body for modification, to make it conform to the Code.

C.  Notice. The failure of any person to receive mailed notice or failure to post a notice shall not invalidate any actions pursuant to this Code, provided a good faith effort was made to notify all parties entitled to notice. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.11.090 Official maps.
Maintenance of Official Maps. The City of Happy Valley maintains several official maps that are regularly updated or amended, and in some cases, are located within ancillary documents to the City’s Comprehensive Plan. Said maps include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.   Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map;

2.   Damascus-Boring Concept Plan Map;

3.   Pleasant Valley Concept Plan Map;

4.   East Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan Map;

5.   Rock Creek Comprehensive Land Use Plan Map;

6.   Aldridge Road Sub-Area Plan Map;

7.   Parks Master Plan Map;

8.   Local Wetland Inventory and Stream Assessment Maps;

9.   Transportation System Plan Maps;

10. Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map;

11. Sunnyside Corridor Community Plan Maps;

12. Clackamas Regional Center Area Design Plan Maps. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.12 DEFINITIONS
16.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of Chapter 16.12 is to define terms that are used frequently in the City of Happy Valley Development Code, to assist decision makers in interpreting and applying the Code. Some of the terms that are defined here may have different meanings in other communities. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular tense shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word “shall” is always mandatory and the word “may” denotes a use of discretion. For the purposes of this title certain terms and words are defined in this section. Specific definitions which shall also apply to this title may be found in various appropriate sections throughout. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.12.020 Applicability.
Definitions. The definitions in Section 16.12.030 apply to all actions and interpretations under the City of Happy Valley Development Code. The meanings given terms in this chapter may, in certain contexts in which they are used, be clearly inapplicable. In such cases the context in which a term is used will indicate its intended meaning, and that intent shall control. Where a term used in this Code is already defined in another part of the City of Happy Valley Code (e.g., the Building Code, etc.) the term is not redefined herein for purposes of that other code. Terms not defined in this Code shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be considered a standard reference. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.12.030 Definitions.
The following definitions are organized alphabetically and some related terms are also grouped together and cross-referenced under group leadings (e.g., Lot Types). See also Chapter 16.21 for descriptions of the land use districts.

     Abutting. Properties that share a common property line at any point along the boundary of either property. Abutting includes the terms adjacent, adjoining and contiguous. Abutting includes properties that are separated by a private roadway, driveway or drive aisle but does not include properties that are separated by a public right-of-way.

     Access. The way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter and leave property.

     Access drive. An improved internal street within a commercial development that provides vehicular access to a commercial complex or parking area, typically bordered by structures.

     Access easement. An easement recorded for the purposed of providing vehicle, bicycle, and/or pedestrian access from a public street to a parcel across intervening property under separate ownership from the parcel being provided access. Cross access is a service drive providing vehicular access between two or more separate sites, so that the driver need not enter the public street system between sites.

     Access management. The systematic control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings interchanges, and street connections to a roadway to minimize conflicts between turning and through vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians. The purpose of access management is to provide vehicular access to land development in a manner that preserves the safety and efficiency of the transportation system. Public facility measures to support access management include roadway design applications, such as median treatments and auxiliary lanes, and the appropriate spacing of traffic signals. Measures that may be included as conditions of approval for development decisions include but are not limited to (1) standards such as minimum spacing of driveways and onsite vehicle storage requirements, (2) mitigations related to site conditions such as right-in-right-out only approaches, medians, dedicated turn lanes, and shared access approaches, and (3) provision for future opportunities for mitigation by land dedication or easement.

     Access spacing/intersection spacing. The minimum required distance from an intersection of a public or private street to the nearest driveway or other access connection, measured from the closest edge of the pavement of the intersecting street to the closest edge of the pavement of the connection along the traveled way.

     Accessible. Two meanings are possible depending on the specific code provision: In general, accessible means approachable by pedestrians, vehicles or other transportation mode, as applicable. Accessible may also mean approachable and useable by people with disabilities, in conformance with the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act. Either or both definitions may apply in a particular situation.

     Accessible route. A route that can be used by a disabled person using a wheelchair and that is also usable by people with other disabilities.

     Accessory. Secondary or incidental to a primary use or structure.

     Accessory dwelling unit. A second dwelling unit created on a lot with a house, attached house, or manufactured home. The second unit is created auxiliary to, and is always smaller than, the house, attached house, or manufactured home.

     Accessory parking facility. A parking facility that provides parking for a specific use or uses. The facility may be located on or off the site of the use or uses to which it is accessory. A fee may or may not be charged. An accessory parking facility need not be in the same ownership as the specific uses to which it is accessory.

     Accessory structure (or accessory building). Structure of secondary importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Accessory structures may be attached or detached from the primary structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not limited to: detached garages, covered rear porches or porticos (“outdoor rooms”), covered front porches, sheds, decks, fences, arbors, gazebos, heat pumps, and other structures. See also “primary structure.”

     Accessory use. A use or activity that is a subordinate part of a primary use and that is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site. See also “primary structure.”

     Accessway. See “access drive.”

     Adjoining. See “abutting.”

     Administrative. A discretionary action or permit decision made without a public hearing, but requiring public notification and an opportunity for appeal.

 

     Adult foster care. A family home or facility in which residential care is provided for five or fewer adults who are not related to the provider by blood or marriage. “Provider” means any person operating an adult foster care home. See also “residential home/group care home.”

     Adverse impact or effect. Negative effect that can be measured (e.g., noise, air pollution, vibration, dust, property values, etc.).

     Affordable housing. Housing affordable to a certain percentage of the population earning a specified level of income and spending no more than thirty (30) percent of their income on housing expenses. For more information, contact the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Oregon Department of Housing and Community Services.

     Agriculture. The raising and harvesting of plants for the purpose of obtaining a profit. The raising of animals or plants for personal household use is permitted by right in all development districts in the City. See ORS 215.203(2)(a).

     Alteration. A physical change to a structure or site. Alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. (See also “interior/exterior alteration.”) Alteration does include the following:

1.   Changes to the exterior of a building;

2.   Changes to the interior of a building;

3.   Increases or decreases in floor area of a building;

4.   Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;

5.   Changes to exterior improvements;

6.   Changes to landscaping; and

7.   Changes in the topography of the site.

     Alternative antenna support structures. Roofs of buildings, provided they are thirty (30) feet or more in height above the street grade upon which such buildings front, church steeples, existing and replacement utility poles, flagpoles, street light standards, traffic light and traffic sign structures, billboards and commercial signs and other similar man-made structures and devices that extend vertically from the ground to a sufficient height or elevation to accommodate the attachment of antennas at an altitude or elevation that is commercially desirable for wireless communications signal transmission and reception.

     Amateur radio. The licensed and private use of designated radio bands, for purposes of private recreation, noncommercial exchange of messages, experimentation, self-training, and emergency communication pursuant to an amateur operator license granted by the Federal Communications Commission. Amateur radio is also commonly referred to as “ham radio.”

     Ambient. Normal or background environmental condition, as in the level of light, dust or noise.

     Antenna. A specific device used to receive or capture incoming and/or to transmit outgoing radio-frequency (RF) signals, microwave signals and/or other communications energy transmitted from, or to be received by, other antennas. Antennas regulated by this title include omnidirectional (or “whip”) antennas, directional (or “panel”) antennas, micro cell, parabolic (or “dish”) antennas and any other devices designed for the reception and/or transmission of radio-frequency (RF) signals or other communication technologies. Antenna does not include support structures, utility structures, or support towers.

     Antenna array. A grouping of two or more antennas on a single support structure, support tower, or utility structure.

     Antenna height. The vertical distance measured from the ground surface at grade to the tip of the highest point of the antenna on the proposed or existing structure.

     Antenna support structure. A structure or device specifically designed, constructed and/or erected for the purpose of attaching, mounting or otherwise affixing antennas at a height, altitude or elevation which is above the base of such structure. Antenna support structures include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.   “Lattice tower” which is a vertical support structure consisting of a network of crossed metal braces, forming a tower which may be three, four or more sided;

2.   “Monopole tower” which is a vertical support structure consisting of a single vertical metal, concrete or wooden pole, pipe, tube or cylindrical structure, typically round or square, and driven into the ground or mounted upon or attached to a foundation.

     Applicant. A person who applies for a land use review or building permit. An applicant can be the owner of the property or someone who is representing the owner, such as a builder, developer, optional purchaser, consultant, or architect.

     Approval. Written approval by the City or an approved representative of the City.

     Arborist. A professional listed as a certified arborist or a registered consulting arborist.

     Arcade. An arched or covered passageway; often along building fronts or between streets.

     Architect. An architect licensed by the State of Oregon.

     Articulate/articulation. The jointing and interrelating of building spaces through offsets, projections, overhangs, extensions and similar features.

     Assessment. For the purposes of Section 16.42.070, the amount imposed as a charge for street lighting service.

     Attached structure. Any structure that is attached to another structure by a common wall, by a roof, or by structural connections that allow pedestrian access to both structures. For example, decks or stairways are attached structures when they are connected to another structure. A garage may be attached to another structure by sharing a wall or by a breezeway. Structures connected by an “I” beam or similar connections are not considered attached.

     Automobile-dependent development. Primary or accessory uses servicing motor vehicles, or patrons in motor vehicles, such as motor vehicle repair, gas station, car wash, auto and truck sales, drive-up windows, kiosks, and similar uses.

     Automobile-oriented development. Development in which the site layout and design gives preference to automobiles as the primary mode of transportation.

     Automobile-oriented use. Automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of the use, such as drive-through restaurants and banks.

     Auxiliary support equipment. All equipment necessary to provide wireless communications signals and data transmission, including, but not limited to, coaxial or fiber-optic cables, auxiliary power equipment, and electronic processing devices. Auxiliary support equipment also includes the shelter, cabinets, and other structural facilities used to house and shelter necessary equipment. Auxiliary support equipment does not include antennas, support towers, utility structures, support structures, or external cables and wires that are not required to provide backup power to a wireless communication facility.

     Awning. A shelter supported entirely by the exterior wall of a building and composed of nonrigid materials except for a supporting framework.

     Bankful stage. Defined in OAR 141-85-010 (definitions for Removal/Fill Permits) as the stage or elevation at which water overflows the natural banks of a stream or other waters of the State and begin to inundate upland areas. In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year recurrent flood elevation may be used to approximate the bankful stage.

     Basement. That portion of a building which has less than one-half of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average elevation of the adjoining grade.

     Base station. A structure that supports or houses an existing antenna, auxiliary support equipment, transceiver, or other associated equipment, encompassing such equipment in any technological configuration, which has been reviewed and approved under applicable codes. Base station does not include support towers or any equipment associated with a support tower.

     Bed and breakfast inn. Any establishment located in a structure designed for a single-family residence and structures appurtenant thereto, regardless of whether the owner or operator of the establishment resides in any of the structures, that:

1.   Has more than two rooms for rent on a daily basis to the public; and

2.   Offers a breakfast meal as part of the cost of the room.

     Berm. A small rise or hill in a landscape which is intended to buffer or visually screen certain developments, such as parking areas.

     Bikeway/bicycle facility. There are different types of bicycle facilities. In general, a “bicycle facility” is a public or private way designed for and dedicated to bicycle use. It may consist of a road, a lane within or on the shoulder of a road, a path, multi-use path, or other way that is specifically designated for bicycle travel or shared bicycle/pedestrian travel.

     Block. All of the property bounded by streets, rights-of-way, and water features, but is not divided or separated in any way by streets or water features.

     Block frontage. All of the property fronting on one side of a street that is between intersecting or intercepting  public streets, or that is between a public street and a natural water feature, or end of a dead end street. An intercepting street determines the boundary of the block frontage only on the side of the street that it intercepts.

     Bollard. A post of metal, wood or masonry that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians and/or bicycles). Bollards may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting.

     Buffer (wetland). An area established adjacent to a significant wetland which protects the resource from impacts.

     Building. Any structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least fifty (50) percent of the area of its sides, built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, motor vehicles, animals or personal or real property of any kind.

     Building area. The total area of a building, both above and below ground, measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure. Gross building area does not include the following:

1.   Roof area;

2.   Roof top mechanical equipment; and

3.   Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than forty-two (42) inches in height, for fifty (50) percent or more of their perimeter.

     Building coverage. See “lot coverage.”

     Building footprint. The outline of a building, including any roofed structure. A roofed structure includes any structure more than six feet above grade at any point, and that provides an impervious cover over what is below. Building footprint also includes uncovered horizontal structures such as decks, stairways and entry bridges that are more than six feet above grade. Eaves are not included in building coverage. Underground facilities and structures are defined based on the foundation line.

     Building frontage. The front façade of a building facing a public or private street or an access drive of more than two hundred (200) feet in length.

     Building height (or “structural height”). The height of a building or structure as measured from the elevation of the finished grade (see definition of “grade, finished”) to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. This definition shall not apply to broadcast towers or antennae connected to or separate from any structure.



 

     Building mass. The aggregate size of a building.

     Building limits. A line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected.

     Building line. A line running parallel to a lot line that is the same distance from the lot line as the closest portion of a building on the site.

     Building Official. The person who enforces the building ordinances and regulations for the City, and other ordinances and regulations as assigned.

     Building pad. A vacant building site on a lot with other building sites.

     Building permit. A permit for any structure, obtained in accordance with appropriate portions of the Uniform Building Code and any other applicable code, ordinance or statute.

     Building scale. The dimensional relationship of a building and its component parts to other buildings.

     Building site. The area on a lot or parcel that is designated to contain a structure, impervious surface or non-native landscaping.

     Build-to line. A maximum front or street yard setback which is typically required along commercial street frontages to promote a storefront character and pedestrian-oriented design.

     Bus stop. A location where bus service stops to load and unload passengers. For purposes of measuring, the bus stop is the location of a sign denoting the bus stop.

     Camouflaged. Any wireless or communication facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of camouflaged facilities may include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas integrated into architectural elements, towers painted to match the ambient background colors, and employing similar techniques to minimize the visual impact of the facility.

     Canopy. A permanent roofed structure that may be freestanding or be partially attached to a building, for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons on foot and/or in motor vehicles; does not include a completely enclosed structure.

     Capacity. Maximum holding or service ability, as used for transportation, utilities, parks and other public facilities.

     Carport. A stationary structure consisting of a roof, its supports, not more than one wall or storage cabinets substituting for a wall, used to shelter motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, or boats.

     Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated and approved for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.

     Centerline radius. The radius of a centerline of a street right-of-way.

     Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy or a certificate of inspection issued by the City at the completion of a building permit or change of occupancy.

     Change of use. Change in the primary type of use on a site.

     Child care home. The utilization of a private residence as a certified child care home that has been certified under ORS 657A.280 by the Oregon Child Care Division.

     City. The City of Happy Valley, Oregon.

     City Engineer. The City Engineer for the City of Happy Valley is the professional engineer (P.E.) that holds the title of City Engineer, or the City Engineer’s designee.

     City Manager. The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee, except where the context expressly requires otherwise.

     Clear and objective. Decision criteria and standards that do not involve substantial discretion or individual judgment in their application.

     Clearing. Any activity that removes existing vegetation or strips surface material from any portion of the site.

     Collocation. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, the mounting or installation of antennas and/or auxiliary support equipment on an existing support tower, support structure, replacement structure or base station for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for wireless communication purposes, but not including installation of a replacement structure or a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the existing wireless communications facility, as defined below.

     Commercial vehicles. For the purposes of Title 16, commercial vehicles are defined as being designed or used primarily for the transportation of property for compensation or profit, and include dump trucks, tractor-trailers, large commercial trailers, larger tow trucks, flat-bed trucks, larger box vans, etc. Depending on the nature of the commercial vehicle, further criteria for evaluation is that a commercial motor vehicle is a vehicle that will be operating at a gross vehicle weight rating or combination weight of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more. The definition also includes vehicles designed to transport sixteen (16) or more persons and vehicles designed to transport hazardous materials regardless of weight. This definition excludes fire trucks, emergency vehicles, motor homes and recreational vehicles operated solely for personal use, as well as SUVs, oversized “pick-up” trucks (for example, F-350s, “dualies,” etc., that may have a “T” plate commercial license but are less than twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds gross vehicle weight (empty)).

     Commission. The Happy Valley Planning Commission as appointed by the City Council.

     Common area. Land commonly owned to include open space, landscaping or recreation facilities (e.g., typically owned by a homeowners’ association).

     Common green. A courtyard that provides for pedestrian and bicycle access, but not vehicle access, to abutting property and generally provides a common area for use by residents. A common green may function as a community yard. Hard and soft landscape features may be included in a common green, such as groundcover, trees, shrubs, surfaced paths, patios, benches, or gazebos.

     Comprehensive plan. Those coordinated plans which have been adopted by the City of Happy Valley which designate plans and programs to encourage the most appropriate use of land and which outlines goals and policies and establishes guidelines which will guide development throughout the City in the interest of the public health, peace, safety and welfare.

 

     Computations (drainage). For the purposes of Chapter 16.51, calculations, including coefficients and other pertinent data, made to determine the drainage plan with flow rates of water given in cubic feet per second (cfs).

     Conditional use. A use that requires a conditional use permit and which may be allowed upon approval of the Planning Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent and subject to requirements, stipulations and conditions as stated by City ordinances which will insure the public health, safety, peace and general welfare of the community.

     Condominium. Ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit structure that includes common areas and facilities.

     Congregate housing. Multi-unit housing with self-contained apartments that contain cooking facilities which support independent lifestyles for those that have life-function disabilities due to age, medical, or mental condition, which do not require residential care or skilled nursing services. Congregate housing provides varying levels of support services, such as meals, laundry, housekeeping, transportation, and social, recreation, cultural and education activities.

     Conservation easement. An easement that protects identified conservation values of the land, such as wetlands, woodlands, significant trees or groves, floodplains, wildlife habitat, and similar resources.

     Constructed wetlands. Wetlands developed as a water quality or quantity facility, subject to change and maintenance as such. These areas must be clearly defined and/or separated from naturally occurring or created wetlands.

     Continuing care retirement community (CCRC). An age-restricted development that provides a continuum of accommodations and care, from independent living to convalescence care and long-term skilled nursing care, and enters into contracts to provide lifelong care. A CCRC typically includes a full range of living arrangements from independent living, congregate housing, residential care and skilled nursing and sometimes hospice care. CCRCs provide a range of ancillary facilities and services such as health care, meals with common dining facilities, physical therapy, education, recreation, and other social and cultural activities.

     Copy (sign). For the purposes of Chapter 16.45, any written or graphic information on a sign.

     Corner radius. The radius of a street corner, as measured around the curb or edge of pavement.

     Cornice. The projecting horizontal element that tops a wall or flat roof.

     Council. The elected members which constitute the governing body of the City, referred to as the City Council of Happy Valley, Oregon.

     County. Clackamas County, Oregon.

     Courtyard. A court or enclosure adjacent to a building, which usually provides amenities such as gardens, planters, seating, or art.

     Created wetland. Wetlands developed in an area previously identified as a non-wetland to replace or mitigate wetland destruction or displacement. A created wetland shall be regulated and managed the same as an existing wetland.

     Crown cover. The area directly beneath the crown and within the drip line of a tree or shrub. The crown consists of the above ground branches, stems, and leaves.

     Curb cut. A driveway opening delineated by a concrete apron along a street.

 

     Dangerous tree. A tree which, due to its location or condition, presents a clear public safety hazard or an imminent danger of property damage, where such hazard or danger cannot reasonably be alleviated by treatment, pruning or other means.

     Daycare facility/child care center/family child care. Facilities that provide care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours. Examples include daycare centers, nursery schools, preschools and before-and-after school care programs. Family child care providers provide care for not more than twelve (12) children in a home. See ORS 657A for certification requirements.

     Days. Calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days. Working days include Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.

     Debris. For the purposes of Chapter 16.34, discarded manmade objects that would not occur in an undeveloped stream corridor or wetland. “Debris” includes, but is not limited to, tires, vehicles, litter, scrap metal, construction waste, lumber, plastic or styrofoam. Debris does not include objects necessary to a use allowed by this chapter, or ornamental and recreational structures. Debris does not include existing natural plant materials or natural plant materials which are left after flooding, downed or standing dead trees or trees which have fallen into protected water features.

     Dedication. The designation of land by its owner for any public use as shown on a subdivision plat or deed. The term may also be used for dedications to a private homeowners’ association.

     Delineation. In reference to natural resources, an analysis of a resource by a qualified professional that determines its boundary according to an approved methodology.

     Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) water quality standards. The numerical criteria or narrative condition needed in order to protect an identified beneficial use.

     Design professional. A person with at least a Masters degree in architecture or urban design with five years of professional experience.

     Design flood elevation. The elevation of the one hundred (100) year storm as defined in FEMA Flood Insurance Studies or, in areas without FEMA floodplains, the elevation of the twenty-five (25) year storm, or the edge of mapped flood prone soils or similar methodologies.

     Design storm. The storm level which has been designated by the City as being the base storm for all computations and calculations.

     Design storm frequency. The average period of time in years that the design storm may be expected to occur once, with the probability being the same for each year that such storm will occur in any year of the frequency interval.

     Develop. To construct or alter a structure or to make a physical change to the land including excavations and fills.

     Developed land. A parcel or parcels of land developed to the extent permitted by the current development regulations or minimum density requirements, if applicable.

     Developed areas not providing vegetative cover. Areas that lack sufficient vegetative cover to meet one-acre mapping units of any other type of vegetative cover.

     Developed flood area. A flood area (1) upon which a building or other structure has been located, or (2) that is an uncovered, hard-surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface (such as

“Grasscrete”) that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy-impact uses; provided, however, that graveled areas shall not be considered developed flood areas.

     Development. Generally, all improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, impervious surface areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved land. In addition, development means any manmade change defined as mining, dredging, paving, filling or grading in amounts greater than ten (10) cubic yards on any lot or excavation, or any other activity that results in the removal of more than either: ten (10) percent of the vegetation in the water quality resource area or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of the vegetation in the Habitat Conservation Area on a lot or parcel. When individual trees are removed, the area contained within the tree’s dripline shall be the basis for calculating the square footage of vegetation removed. Development does not include the following: (1) Stream enhancement or restoration projects approved by cities and counties; (2) Farming practices as defined in ORS 30.930 and farm use as defined in ORS 215.203, except that buildings associated with farm practices and farm uses are subject to the requirements of this title; and (3) Construction on lots in subdivisions meeting the criteria of ORS 92.040(2)(l995). See also “exterior improvements.”

     Development agreement. An agreement between the City and a property owner related to a specific development proposal in which the property owner and City agree in writing to on-site and off-site public or private improvements related to the subject development proposal, pursuant to ORS 94.504.

     Development district. The specific designations applied to all land throughout the entire City which serves to indicate the potential density of development.

     Development site. The development site is either or both of the following:

1.   A lot of record existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; or

2.   A tract of land either unsubdivided or consisting of two or more contiguous lots of record which, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, was in single or common ownership.

     Disabled Person. For the purposes of this Code, a disabled person is a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability which substantially limits one or more major life activities as stated in Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and state law.

     Disabled person day care facility. Facilities that provide care and supervision of disabled persons for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours.

     Discontinued use. A use that physically left the land it was on, a permitted use that ceased, or a use terminated at the end of a lease or contract. See Chapter 16.72, Nonconforming Uses and Developments. A use is considered temporarily discontinued during the first two years after it ceases, after which it is considered permanently discontinued.

     Discretionary. A permit action or decision that involves substantial judgment or discretion.

     Display surface area. The total area of a sign that is available for displaying advertising or an informational message, subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.45.

     Distribution center. An establishment engaged in receiving, storing and distributing goods, products, cargo, and materials, including transshipment by rail, air, or motor vehicle.

     District, land use. As used in this code, a land use district is the same as a zoning district or zone.

     District, lighting. Clackamas County Service District No. 5 or its successor.

     Disturb. Manmade changes to the existing physical status of the land, which are made in connection with development. The following uses are excluded from the definition:

1.   Enhancement or restoration of the water quality resource area;

2.   Planting native cover identified in the Native Plants section of the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A).

     Disturbance area. An area that contains all temporary and permanent development, exterior improvements, and staging and storage areas on the site, both existing and proposed. Vegetation planted for resource enhancement and agricultural and pasture land is not included.

     Division of State Lands Wetland Determinations. As defined in OAR 141-86-200 (1997) (definitions for Local Wetland Inventory Standards and Guidelines), “wetland determination” means identifying an area as wetland or non-wetland.

     Drainage area. The watershed (acreage) contributing surface water runoff to and including the subject property.

     Drainage plan. A plan for receiving, handling, and transporting surface water within and releasing the flow of water from the subject property.

     Drainageway. Generally, an open linear depression, whether constructed or natural, that functions for the collection and drainage of surface water. It may be permanently or temporarily inundated.

1.   Major drainageway. Drainageways which, for the purpose of Chapter 16.51, are the primary water-carrying routes within the City. The major drainageways shall include Mt. Scott Creek and the natural drainageway that is tributary to Mt. Scott Creek, located immediately to the west of Mt. Scott Blvd.

2.   Minor drainageway. Drainageways which are secondary water-carrying routes within the City and shall include all other natural drainageways as indicated on the current Happy Valley drainage study.

     Drip-line. Imaginary line around a tree or shrub at a distance from the trunk equivalent to the canopy (leaf and branch) spread.

     Drive aisle. An internal vehicular drive within an, institutional, multifamily residential, commercial or industrial complex parking lot, typically bordered by parking spaces.

     Drive-through/drive-up facility. A facility or structure that is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during an activity on the site. Drive-through/drive-up facilities also include facilities designed for the rapid servicing of vehicles, where the drivers may or may not remain in their vehicles, but where the drivers usually either perform the service for themselves, or wait on the site for the service to be rendered. Drive-through facilities may serve the primary use of the site or may serve accessory uses. Examples are drive-up windows; automatic teller machines; coffee kiosks and similar vendors; menu boards; order boards or boxes; gas pump islands; car wash facilities; auto service facilities, such as air compressor, water, and windshield washing stations; quick-lube or quick-oil change facilities; and drive-in theaters.

     Driveway. There are two types of driveways:

1.   The area that provides vehicular access to a site from a street. A driveway is the same width as the curb cut excluding any aprons or extensions of the curb cut. This type of driveway begins at the street and extends into the site. A driveway does not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas in parking areas, such as aisles; and

 

2.   The area that provides vehicular circulation between two or more noncontiguous parking areas. A driveway does not include maneuvering or circulation areas within the interior of a parking area. Where required by Code for fire safety, a driveway must be used exclusively for circulation, with no abutting parking spaces.

     Driveway apron/approach. The edge of a driveway where it abuts a public way; usually constructed of concrete.

     Drought-tolerant/drought-resistant plants or xeriscaping. As listed and described in the Sunset Western Garden Book or similar information source for the area in which the development site is located (latest edition).

     Dwelling. A building which is occupied in whole or in part as a home or residence, either permanently or temporarily by one or more families, but excluding hotels, motels and motor hotels.

     Dwelling, attached duplex. A duplex located on its own lot that shares one or more common or abutting walls with another duplex (for a total of four dwelling units). The common or abutting wall must be shared for at least fifty (50) percent of the length of the side of the dwelling.

     Dwelling, single-family attached (townhouse or rowhouse). A single-family dwelling, located on its own lot, which shares one or more common or abutting walls with one or more other single-family dwellings. A single-family attached dwelling does not share common floors or ceiling with other dwellings.

     Dwelling, single-family detached (house). A detached building on a single lot designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of one family and having housekeeping facilities for only one family (See “household”).

     Dwelling, two-family (duplex). A building on a single lot designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having separate housekeeping facilities for each family. The units must share a common wall or common floor/ceiling.

     Dwelling, multiple-family (multifamily). A building on a single lot designed and used for occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other, and having separate housekeeping facilities

 

for each family. A multifamily building with three dwelling units is also known as a “triplex”. Multifamily dwellings include condominiums and apartment units without regard to ownership status.

     Dwelling, multifamily—Senior housing. Housing designated and/or managed for persons over a specified age. Specific age restrictions vary. Includes independent care and assisted care facilities for the elderly, but excludes nursing homes, convalescent care and institutional type living arrangements unless it is part of a congregate/assisted-living complex, and the congregate care portion does not make up more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross area of the facility. Senior housing can consist of a combination of apartments, rowhouses and other types of housing units. Units may be connected to each other by hallways or breezeways.

     Dwelling unit. A building, or a portion of a building, that has independent living facilities including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential occupancy by a group of people. Buildings with more than one set of cooking facilities are considered to contain multiple dwelling units or accessory dwelling units, unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory to the primary use, such as an outdoor grill.

     Easement. A grant of rights by a property owner that allows others to use the owner’s land for a specific purpose, such as access, or to locate utilities. Recorded and on record at Clackamas County.

     Eave. Projecting overhang at the lower border of a roof and extending from a primary wall or support.

     Ecological functions. The primary biological and hydrologic characteristics of healthy fish and wildlife habitat. Riparian ecological functions include microclimate and shade, streamflow moderation and water storage, bank stabilization and sediment/pollution control, sources of large woody debris and natural channel dynamics, and organic material sources. Upland wildlife ecological functions include size of habitat area, amount of habitat with interior conditions, connectivity of habitat to water resources, connectivity to other habitat areas, and presence of unique habitat types.

     Effective impervious area. A subset of total impervious area that is hydrologically connected via sheet flow or discrete conveyance to a drainage system or receiving body of water.

     Elevation, architectural. Scaled drawing of the outside wall of a building or structure, from grade to roof ridgeline, typically specifying materials, color, and dimensions.

     Emergency. Any manmade or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, and includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material, contamination, utility or transportation disruptions, and disease.

     Energy dissipators. For the purposes of Chapter 16.51, natural or artificial objects, structures or systems which serve to reduce flow velocity or volume in any drainage or runoff area in order to prevent erosion, channelization or the increase of flow beyond desired levels.

     Engineer. A registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Oregon.

     Engineering geologist. A registered professional engineering geologist licensed by the State of Oregon.

     Enhancement. For the purposes of Chapter 16.34, the process of improving upon the natural functions and/or values of an area or feature which has been degraded by human activity. Enhancement activities may or may not return the site to a pre-disturbance condition, but create/recreate processes and features that occur naturally.

 

     Equipment enclosure. In reference to wireless communications facilities, a small structure, shelter, cabinet, box or vault designed for and used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary and/or desirable for processing wireless communications signals and data, including any provisions for air conditioning, ventilation or auxiliary electricity generators.

     Erect or erected. To construct, build, assemble, alter, place, affix, attach, create, recreate, paint, draw or in any way bring into being or establish.

     Erosion. The movement of soil particles resulting from actions of water or wind.

     Evidence. Application materials, plans, data, testimony and other factual information used to demonstrate compliance or noncompliance with a code standard or criterion.

     Excavating or filling. The removal, placement, or replacement of earth, concrete, asphalt, and similar nondecomposable materials whether permanent or temporary in nature. Excavating or filling does not include the movement of earth or placement of gravel, asphalt, or other paving materials that is done in conjunction with road improvements. It does not include the excavation of mineral or aggregate resources. Excavating or filling includes the terms grading, preloading, surcharging, and stockpiling.

     Expressway. Expressways are complete routes or segments of multi-lane highways and planned multi-lane highways that provide for safe and efficient high speed and high volume traffic movements. The primary function is to provide for interurban travel and connections to high growth and existing and planned employment areas with minimal interruptions. A secondary function is to provide for long distance interurban travel in metropolitan areas. Speeds are moderate to high. Private access is discouraged and there is either a long-range plan or review process to identify alternative access. Public road connections are highly controlled and parking is prohibited. Pedestrian facilities and bikeways may be separated from the roadway.

     Exterior display. Exterior display includes the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and machinery for sale or lease. Exterior display is an outdoor showroom for customers to examine and compare products. There is variety or a distinction among the goods on display, through different products, brands, or models. The display area does not have to be visible to the street. Exterior display does not include goods that are being stored or parked outside, if there is no variety or distinction among the goods, and the goods are not examined and compared by customers. It does not include damaged or inoperable vehicles, vehicles or equipment being serviced, bulk goods and materials, and other similar products. Exterior display does not include car and boat sales and leasing when such vehicles are not accessible to customers to inspect and compare; this situation is considered exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior display are car and boat sales and leasing, and plant nurseries. See also “exterior work activities” and “exterior storage.”

     Exterior alteration. An alteration that is outside any buildings.

     Exterior storage. Exterior storage includes the outdoor storage of goods that generally have little or no differentiation by type or model. The goods may be for sale or lease, but if so, they are the type that customers generally do not inspect and compare. Exterior storage also includes the outdoor storage of goods for sale, lease or rent that may be differentiated by type or model, but that are not accessible for customers to inspect or compare. Exterior storage includes the storage of raw or finished goods (packaged or bulk), including gases, oil, chemicals, gravel; building materials, packing materials; salvage goods; machinery, tools, and equipment; vehicles that are for sale, lease or rent, which are not accessible to the customer to inspect or compare; vehicles that have been unloaded at port facilities and are waiting transport to off-site locations; vehicles that have been towed and are being kept in an impound lot; and other similar items. The storage of recreational vehicles outdoors is also considered exterior storage. Damaged or inoperable vehicles, or vehicles that have missing parts, which are kept outside are also included as exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior storage are lumber yards, wrecking yards, tool and equipment rental, bark chip and gravel sales, car dealerships or car rental establishments, and port facilities. See also “exterior display” and “exterior work activities.”

     Exterior work activities. Exterior work activities include the outdoor processing, assembly, or fabrication of goods; the maintenance, repair, and salvage of vehicles and equipment; and other similar activities that generally have an industrial orientation. Exterior work activities do not include normal pick-up and deliveries to a site, parking, excavation and fills, exterior eating areas, outdoor recreation, or outdoor markets. See “exterior display” and “exterior storage.”

     Facilities, wireless communication. All equipment and property associated with the construction of antenna support structures, antenna arrays and antennas, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas of all descriptions, electronic and mechanical equipment and devices, and buildings and similar structures.

     Family. See “household.”

     Farming or farm use. As used in this Code, “agriculture” is the same as “farm use.” (See ORS 215.203(2)(a).) Includes utilization of land to raise, harvest, or sell crops; feed, breed, manage, and sell livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, honeybees, or their produce; dairy and sell dairy products; or any other agricultural or horticultural use, animal husbandry, timber agricultural use, or combination thereof. Farm uses include preparation or processing and storage of products raised on such land, but do not include construction or use of dwellings and other buildings customarily provided in conjunction with farm uses.

     Fence and fencing. Any barrier or section thereof, other than a wall, designed to delimit a boundary or provide a visual screen.

     Fence, sight-obscuring. A structure, consisting of wood, metal or masonry or an evergreen hedge or other evergreen planting, built for the purpose of separating properties and/or uses and arranged in such a way as to obstruct normal human vision.

     Fill. Any material such as, but not limited to, earth, sand, gravel, soil, rock, and similar non-decomposable material that is used for the purposes of development or redevelopment. “Filling” is the placement or replacement of these materials.

     Final plat. The diagrams, drawings, and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions and information concerning a land division, approved and prepared for filing or recording with County clerk and containing those elements and requirements as set forth in this title, and as required by state statute.

     Fire apparatus lane or fire lane. Unobstructed area or driveway meeting Uniform Fire Code requirements; typically may not be used for parking or loading area.

     Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or, mudslides (i.e. mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. In addition, flooding means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

     Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

     Floodplain or flood-prone area. The land area identified and designated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Oregon Division of State Lands, FEMA or the City as susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see “flood or flooding”).

     Floodway. The active flowing channel during a flood, as designated on flood maps for the City; the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

     Floodway fringe. The area of the floodplain, lying outside the floodway, which does not contribute appreciably to the passage of floodwater, but serves as a retention area.

     Floor area. The total floor area of a building, both above and below ground with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet. Floor area is measured from the interior walls of a building or structure and does not include the following:

1.   Roof area;

2.   Roof top mechanical equipment;

3.   Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than forty-two (42) inches in height, for fifty (50) percent or more of their perimeter; and

4.   Vents, shafts, courtyards, stairwells, elevator shafts, rooms designed and used for the purpose of storage and operations of maintenance equipment and enclosed or covered parking areas.

     Floor area ratio. The ratio of the total amount of enclosed gross floor area within a structure to the amount of buildable acreage pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F), Density Calculations. For example, a single-story building constructed on one-quarter of the net developable site would have a floor area ratio of 0.25. If a second story were added, the floor area ratio would increase to 0.50, etc. For purposes of calculation, both floor area and net site area shall be converted to square feet. Total gross floor area is measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure, and does not include basement or semi-subterranean areas used for storage or parking.

     Foot-candle. A unit of illumination (light standards), equal to one lumen per square foot, or the amount of light from a source of one candela directly thrown on a square foot of surface at a distance of one foot.

     Forest canopy. Areas that are part of a contiguous grove of trees of one acre or larger in area with approximately sixty (60) percent or greater crown closure, irrespective of whether the entire grove is within two hundred (200) feet of the relevant water feature.

     Front of structure. The portion of building parallel or adjacent to the front property line, or the side on which the front door of the building is located.

     Front property line. Any boundary line separating the lot from a public or private road.

     Frontage. Generally, the dimension of a property line abutting a public or private street. However, for the purposes of Section 16.42.070, “frontage” specifically means the length of property abutting a street benefited by street lighting.

     Frontage street or road. A minor street that parallels an arterial street or highway in order to provide access to abutting properties and minimize direct access onto the arterial or highway.

     Functional classification. The classification given to streets by the road authority (e. g., “local/collector/arterial”). See Chapter 16.41 and the City’s Transportation System Plan for street standards.

     Future division plan or future development plan. A document that shows lot, tract and right-of-way boundaries for all potential future phases of a land division. The plan is not binding on the City or the applicant. The purpose of the plan is to document that the design of the first phase of the plan does not preclude future phases from meeting City standards.

     Garage. A covered structure designed to provide shelter for vehicles, and which is accessory to a use in these structure types: houses, attached houses, duplexes, mobile homes, or houseboats. Carports are considered garages. Floor area adjacent to the space designed to provide shelter for vehicles, if not entirely separated from the garage area by floor-to-ceiling walls, is considered part of the garage. A garage may be attached to or detached from another structure. See also “structured parking.”

     Glare. The effect of brightness or brightness difference within the visual field sufficiently high to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance.

     Grade, finished. The elevation or surface of the earth after all earthwork has been completed as approved on the final grading plan for the subject site (also finish grade). In the calculating of building height, finished grade is measured at the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and property line, or when the property line is greater than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building. The City Engineer shall have authority to further define finished grade when unusual conditions pertaining to structures and terrain exist.

     Grade, natural. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations.

     Grading. All cuts, fills, embankments, stockpile areas, and equipment maneuvering areas associated with development.

     Ground cover. Any living plant approved as part of a landscape plan that provides under story cover, shade of the ground, or cover for bare ground. See Chapter 16.42, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

     Habitat Conservation Area (HCA). An area identified on the Metro Habitat Conservation Areas Map and subject to specific development standards.

     Habitat-friendly development. A method of developing property that has less detrimental impact on fish and wildlife habitat than does traditional development methods. Examples include clustering development to avoid habitat, using alternative materials and designs such as pier, post, or piling foundations designed to minimize tree root disturbance, managing stormwater on-site to help filter rainwater and recharge groundwater sources, collecting rooftop water in rain barrels for reuse in site landscaping and gardening, and reducing the amount of effective impervious surface created by development.

     Hardscape. Hard-surfaced areas. Such areas include specially treated or textured concrete designed as a plaza, courtyard or building entrance and contain pedestrian sensitive amenities such as benches, drinking fountains, planters, trees in grated wells, street furniture, lighting, public art, water features or other design features integrated into the overall design of a building or portion of a site. Hardscaped areas may include canopies and overhangs to protect public activities from wet weather.

     Hazardous substances. Any substance, material, or waste listed below:

1.   Nuclear or radioactive materials or waste;

2.   Chemicals Subject to Reporting Under Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of 1986, published July, 1987, U. S. Environmental Protection Agency; and

3.   Hazardous Materials Table, in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 49, Part 172.101.

     Helicopter landing pad (helipad). A helipad is a relatively flat land area or landing platform for helicopters constructed of concrete or fabricated hard surface, marked with a circle and/or the letter “H” so as to be visible from the air.

     Heliport. A heliport is a small airport suitable only for helicopters that contains one or more helipads and may have limited facilities such as fuel, equipment storage, lighting, a windsock, or a hangar.

     Home occupation, home occupation site. A business activity that is carried out on the same site as a dwelling unit, and which is accessory to the residential use on the site, subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.22 (Residential Land Use Districts) and Section 16.69.020 (Home Occupation Permits).

     Hotel/motel. A building or portion thereof designed and used for occupancy of transient individuals lodged with or without meals. (See ORS 446.310.)

     House. See “Dwelling, single-family detached.” A detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.

     Household. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, civil union, legal adoption or guardianship, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit; one or more handicapped persons as defined in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit; or seven or more persons who live together in one dwelling unit as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct domestic character, with a demonstrable and recognizable bond where each party is responsible for the basic material needs of the other and all are living as a single housekeeping unit.

     Identified natural features (e.g., wetlands or streams). Natural features that are identified in the National Wetlands Inventory, Local Wetlands Inventory, and other references used by the City or natural resource regulatory agency, as being significant and in need of protection.

     Impervious surface. That surface area which prevents or slows the entry of water into the soil mantle and/or causes water to runoff the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate. Impervious surfaces may include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, oiled macadam, gravel or other surfaces which similarly resist infiltration or absorption of moisture.

     Incidental and subordinate to. Secondary to, and less apparent than, the primary use or other portion of the development.

     Infill. The development or division of vacant, bypassed lands located in an area that is mainly developed.

     Interior alteration. An alteration that is inside any buildings.

     Invasive non-native or noxious vegetation. Plant species that have been introduced and due to aggressive growth patterns and lack of natural enemies in the area where introduced, spread rapidly into native plant communities (see definition for “nuisance/non-native invasive plants”).

     Junk yard. (1) Any property or establishment on which one or more persons are engaged in breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying, or selling scrap or waste materials. (2) Any establishment or place of business on which one or more inoperable motor vehicles or an equivalent volume of waste or refuse are maintained, stored, bought, or sold. Includes wrecking yards, automobile grave yards, garbage dumps, and scrap metal processing facilities.

 

     Kennel. Any location where five or more dogs or cats aged six months or older are boarded or bred. The sale of these animals may be a part of the kennel use. Establishments where animals are offered for sale as the primary use, such as pet stores, are not classified as kennels.

     Land Development Code or LDC. Happy Valley’s Land Development Code, as amended.

     Land division. The process of dividing land to create parcels or lots. See Chapter 16.63, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments.

     Land use. The activity or activities that occur on a piece of land. Activities may be individually identified as primary or accessory uses.

     Land use approval. A land use decision for approval or approval with conditions. It includes any time limits or other restrictions that may apply to the land use decision.

     Land use review. An application for land use approval pursuant to this title, or the review of such application.

     Landing (stairs). A level part of a staircase, usually at the end of a flight of stairs.

     Landscaping. Any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative groundcover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as fences, benches, works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like. Also includes irrigation systems, and re-vegetation or the preservation, protection and replacement of trees.

     Lane, mid-block. A narrow, limited use roadway facility, similar to an alley in design, usually used to access a limited number of dwelling units.

     Legislative. A legislative action or decision is the making of law, as opposed to the application of existing law to a particular use (e.g., adoption of, or amendment to, a Comprehensive Plan or development regulation). See also Section 16.61.050 (Type IV Procedure).

     Level of service (“LOS”). A quantitative standard for transportation facilities describing operational conditions. Level of service may be described for intersections (signalized or unsignalized) or street segments (between signalized intersections).

     Limbing. The removal of a branch of a tree back to the main trunk of such tree.

     Livestock. Domestic animal types customarily raised or kept on farms. See “agriculture.”

     Living area. The habitable floor area of a residential structure conforming to applicable building codes; typically does not include garage area, and attic and basement areas with substandard ceiling height or substandard egress.

     Loading area. The area available for the maneuvering and standing of vehicles engaged in delivering and loading goods, freight, or other articles. See also Chapter 16.43, Parking and Loading.

     Local Improvement District (“LID”). A small public district formed for the purpose of carrying out local improvements (paving of streets, construction of storm sewers, development of a park, etc.). Property owners within the LID are assessed for the cost of the improvements in accordance with ORS 223.387-223.485.

     Lot. The State of Oregon defines lot as a legally defined piece of land other than a tract that is the result of a subdivision. For purposes of Title 16, the definitions for “lot” apply to the State definition of both lot (result of subdividing) and parcel (result of partitioning). See also “ownership,” “parcel” and “site.”

     Lot area. The total surface area (measured horizontally) within the boundary lines of a lot exclusive of streets or easements of access to other property.

     Lot, corner. See “lot types.”

     Lot coverage. The portion of a lot that is covered by buildings, and decks, stairways and entry bridges that are more than thirty (30) inches above grade. Eaves are not included in building coverage.

     Lot depth. The distance of a line measured from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line. For the purposes of measuring lot depth of corner lots, the longest lot line may be assumed to be a side lot line.

     Lot frontage. See “frontage.”

     Lot line adjustment. The relocation of a single common property line between two abutting properties, in conformance with ORS 92.010(11).

     Lot line, front. Front lot line is a lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shortest of the lot lines that abut a street. If two or more street lot lines are of equal length, then the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line. However, on a through lot, the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line and which lot line is to be the rear lot line, regardless of whether the street lot lines are of equal or unequal length. On a flag lot, the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line, so long as it is one of the lot lines that makes up the flag portion of the lot, and the rear lot line is the property line most distant from, and opposite from, the chosen front lot line.

     Lot line, rear. The property line most distant from, and opposite from, the front lot line. A triangular lot has two side lot lines but no rear lot line. For other irregularly shaped lots, the rear lot line is all lot lines that are most nearly opposite the front lot line.

     Lot line, side. A lot line that connects front and rear lot lines. On a corner lot, the longer lot line that abuts a street is a side lot line.

     Lot line, street. A lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. Street lot line does not include lot lines that abut an alley. On a corner lot, there are two (or more) street lot lines. Street lot line can include front lot lines and side lot lines.

     Lot of record.

1.   “Lot of record” means an area of land created prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title as shown as a lot on a final plat of a recorded subdivision; or

2.   An area of land described by metes and bounds in a deed or contract recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; the creation of which was not in violation of any state statute or City ordinance.

     Lot types.

1.   Corner lot. A lot bounded entirely by streets, or a lot which adjoins the point of intersection of two or more streets and which the interior angle formed by the extensions of the street lines in the direction which they take at their intersections with lot lines other than street lines, forms an angle of one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less. In the event that any street line is a curve at its point of intersection with a lot line other than street line, the tangent to the curve at that point shall be considered the direction of the street line.

 

2.   Interior lot. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage only on one street.

3.   Through lot. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots with frontage on two streets may be referred to as “double-frontage” lots.

4.   Flag lot. A lot with two distinct parts:

a.     The flag, which is the only building site and is located behind another lot; and

b.     The pole, which connects the flag to the street, provides the only street frontage for the lot, and at any point is less than the minimum lot width for the zone.

5.   Cul-de-sac lot. A lot which is basically triangular in shape and has a front lot line contiguous with the outer radius of a curve. Such lots shall have a minimum frontage as specified in the particular district. The calculation of lot width shall be made by measuring width at the midpoints of side lot lines.

6.   Lot, double-frontage. A lot that has frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

 

     Lot width. The distance of a line measured between the foremost points of the side lot lines. For the purposes of width of lot measurements on corner lots, the longest front lot line may be assumed to be a side lot line.

     Low impact development. Minimizing or eliminating pollutants in stormwater through natural processes and maintaining pre-development hydrologic characteristics, such as flow patterns, surface retention, and recharge rates.

     Low structure vegetation. Areas that are part of a contiguous area one acre or larger in size comprised of grass, meadow, crop-lands, or areas of open soils located within three hundred (300) feet of a surface stream (low structure vegetation areas may include areas of shrub vegetation less than one acre in size if they are contiguous with areas of grass, meadow, crop-lands, orchards, Christmas tree farms, holly farms, or areas of open soils located within three hundred (300) feet of a surface stream and together form an area of one acre in size or larger).

     Luminaire. A complete lighting device consisting of a light source together with its direct appurtenances, such as globe, reflector, refractor, housing and such support as is integral with the housing. The pole, post or bracket is not considered a part of the luminaire.

     Main/primary building entrance. A main entrance is the entrance to a building that most pedestrians are expected to use. Generally, each building has one main entrance. Main entrances are the widest entrance of those provided for use by pedestrians. In multi-tenant buildings, main entrances open directly into the building’s lobby or principal interior ground level circulation space. When a multi-tenant building does not have a lobby or common interior circulation space, each tenant’s outside entrance is a main entrance. In single-tenant buildings, main entrances open directly into lobby, reception, or sales areas.

     Maintenance. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, emergency or routine repairs or replacement of transmitters, antennas, or other components of previously approved wireless communication facilities which do not create a substantial change in the physical dimensions.

     Major transit stop. Transit centers and major bus stops that are identified as part of the regional transit system, as depicted in the Happy Valley Transportation System Plan (TSP) Transit Plan.

     Maneuvering area/aisle. The driving area in a parking lot where motor vehicles are able to turn around and access parking or loading spaces.

     Manufactured dwelling park/manufactured home park. Any place where four or more manufactured homes are located within five hundred (500) feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space or keep space for rent or lease to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or lease or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person. “Manufactured dwelling park” does not include a lot or lots located within an approved subdivision being rented or leased for occupancy by no more than one manufactured dwelling per lot. See also ORS Chapter 446.

     Manufactured home. A dwelling unit which is fabricated in one or more sections at a location other than the home site by assembly line-type production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an off-site manufacturing process. A manufactured home is a mobile home constructed in accordance with Federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD Code) in effect after June 15, 1976. NOTE: A mobile home that was not constructed in accordance with Federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD Code), in effect after June 15, 1976 is a “residential trailer.” (See definition of “mobile home” and Chapter 16.44, Special Standards for Certain Uses.)

     Manufactured home accessory building or structure. Any awning, portable, demountable or permanent cabana, carport, porch, skirting or steps established for use of the occupant of the manufactured home and which are designed or intended to be attached to and which depend, in whole or in part, upon the manufactured home for structural support.

     Marijuana. The plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 571.300.

     Marijuana items. Marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, and cannabinoid extracts.

     Marijuana processing. The processing, compounding, or conversion of marijuana into cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, or cannabinoid extracts, provided that the marijuana processor is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered with the Oregon Health Authority.

     Marijuana production. The manufacture, planting, cultivation, growing, trimming, harvesting, or drying of marijuana, provided that the marijuana producer is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, or registered with the Oregon Health Authority and a “person designated to produce marijuana by a registry identification cardholder.”

     Marijuana retailing. The sale of marijuana items to a consumer, provided that the marijuana retailer is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered with the Oregon Health Authority.

     Marijuana wholesaling. The purchase of marijuana items for resale to a person other than a consumer, provided that the marijuana wholesaler is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

     Marquee. A projecting, permanent, roofed structure attached to and supported only by a building.

     Master plan. A plan for a defined geographic area in single or multiple ownership that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and includes, but is not limited to, a land use plan, a circulation plan, an open space plan, a utilities plan and a program of implementation measures and other mechanisms needed to carry out the plan. The plan shall be created through the master plan process outlined in this Land Development Code.

     Medical center. An inpatient hospital and supporting emergency outpatient and related ancillary services to the sick and infirm, which is usually developed in a campus setting. Accessory uses may include diagnostic and treatment facilities; laboratories and surgical suites; kitchen/food service facilities; laundry, housekeeping and maintenance facilities; short-term lodging for patients and families; administrative offices and parking. Medical centers may also include freestanding offices for hospital-based and/or private-practice physicians and other allied health care professionals.

     Mitigation. The reduction of adverse effects of a proposed project by considering in this order: (1) avoiding the impact all together by not taking a certain action or parts of an action; (2) minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation; (3) rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment; (4) reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action by monitoring and taking appropriate measures; and (5) compensating for the impact by replacing or providing comparable substitute resource areas (e.g., water quality resource areas or habitat conservation areas).

     Mixed use area or center. An area designed to encourage a diversity of compatible and supporting land uses which may include a mixture of residential, retail, commercial, office or other miscellaneous uses.

 

     Mixed use building. A building supporting land uses which includes a mixture of residential, retail, commercial, office or other miscellaneous uses.

     Mobile food unit. Per Oregon Administrative Rule 333-150-0000, “mobile food unit” means any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate consumer. Also referred to as a “food cart.”

     Mobile home. A dwelling unit constructed off of the site and which is not constructed to the standards of the Uniform Building Code. Mobile homes include residential trailers and manufactured homes.

     Mobile home park. Two or more mobile homes that are located on a single site for thirty (30) days or more and intended for residential use. Mobile home park does not include sites where unoccupied mobile homes are offered for sale or lease. See also “recreational vehicle park.”

     Mobile home space. The area occupied by a mobile home and its accessory uses and structures in a mobile home park.

     Modular housing. See “prefabricated house or assembly.”

     Model home. A structure constructed as and intended to be occupied as a residential dwelling unit that is temporarily used as an example of the type of residential dwelling units to be constructed in a subdivision, is open to the public for that purpose and may include a real estate sales office. A model home is a temporary nonresidential use and may not be used as a real estate sales office except in conjunction with the sale of lots and homes in the residential subdivision in which it is located.

     Modification. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, a change or alteration to an existing wireless communications facility or collocation on a base station, including, but not limited to, the addition, removal and/or replacement of antennas and/or auxiliary support equipment.

     Motor home. Motor home includes motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis. A camper is considered a motor home when it is on the back of a pick-up or truck. Motor homes are regulated as trucks unless the regulations specifically indicate otherwise. See also “truck.”

     Motor vehicle. Vehicles that have their own motive power and that are used for the transportation of people or goods on streets. Motor vehicle includes motorcycles, passenger vehicles, trucks, and recreational vehicles, except all terrain vehicles, off-road vehicles, snow mobiles, and similar vehicles that are not allowed on streets.

     Mounting height. For the purposes of Section 16.42.070, the vertical distance between the roadway surface and the center of the apparent light source of the luminaire.

     Multi-use path. An eight to ten (10) foot wide improved, all-weather surface pathway that is utilized for pedestrian and bicycle traffic. Multi-use paths are typically located within public easements or rights-of-way, and may include the installation of removable bollards to prevent use by unauthorized motor vehicles. Private multi-use paths are required to be maintained by a homeowner’s association or equivalent maintenance organization.

     Native vegetation. Any vegetation native to the Portland metropolitan area, listed on the Native Plants section of the City of Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A).

     Natural area. An area of and improved, preserved and maintained as a native ecosystem for the benefit of natural systems and fish and wildlife habitat.

     Natural hazard. Natural areas that can cause dangerous or difficult development situations. For example, natural hazard areas include steep slopes, unstable soils, and areas prone to landslides, floodways and floodplains.

     Natural materials. Wood, stone, brick and rock or any combination thereof.

     Natural resource. Those significant natural riparian, wildlife, and wetland resources and water quality resources that are protected by the Natural Resources Overlay Zone (see Chapter 16.34).

     Neighborhood. A residential area usually having distinguishing character or geography.

     Neighborhood character. Those unique attributes including, but not limited to, architecture, historical and cultural features, development patterns, landscape, hardscape and the size, scale and spacing of buildings and other structures that define a neighborhood’s identity.

     Net acre. One acre of developable land, as calculated pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F), density calculations.

     Nonconforming development. An element of a development, such as a setback, height, or parking area, that was created in conformance with development regulations but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable development standards. See Chapter 16.72, Nonconforming Uses and Developments.

 

     Nonconforming residential density. A residential use that is an allowed use in the zone and that was constructed at a lawful density, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, now has greater density than is allowed in the zone. See Chapter 16.72 Nonconforming Uses and Developments.

     Nonconforming situation. A Nonconforming Residential Density, Nonconforming Development, or Nonconforming Use. A situation may be nonconforming in more than one aspect. For example, a site may contain a nonconforming use and also have some nonconforming development. See also “nonconforming residential density,” “nonconforming development,” and “nonconforming use.” See Chapter 16.72, Nonconforming Uses and Developments.

     Nonconforming Use. A use that was allowed by right when established or a use that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the amount of floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone. See Chapter 16.72, Nonconforming Uses and Developments.

     Nuisance/non-native invasive plants. Plants which are listed in the Nuisance and Prohibited Plants sections of the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A).

     ODFW construction standards. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife construction guidelines for building roads, bridges and culverts or any transportation structure within a waterway.

     Off-site. Any area not located within the property to be developed, whether or not in the common ownership of the applicant for development approval.

     Off-street parking. All off-street areas designed, used, required or intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles. See Chapter 16.43 for parking standards.

     On-street parking. Parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking lanes or bays. Parking may be parallel or angled in relation to the edge of the right-of-way or curb. See Chapter 16.43 for parking standards.

     Open space. Land that is undeveloped and that is planned to remain so. The term encompasses parks, forests and farmland. It may also refer only to land zoned as being available to the public, including playgrounds, watershed preserves and parks or to those lands within a subdivision or PUD, or separate from all other properties which have been dedicated in common to the ownership within the subdivision/PUD or to the public specifically for the purpose of providing places for fish and wildlife habitat preservation, scenic and/or recreational uses.

     Optimal tree protection zone. An area around a tree that must be protected to ensure that the tree is not physically damaged, and that the roots are protected.

     Ordinary mean high water line. Defined in OAR 141-82-005 means the line on the bank or shore to which water ordinarily rises in season; synonymous with mean high water (ORS 274.005).

     Ordinary mean low water line. Defined in OAR 141-82-005 means the line on the bank or shore to which water ordinarily recedes in season; synonymous with mean low water (ORS 274.005).

     Orientation. To cause to face toward a particular point of reference (e.g., “a building oriented to the street”).

     Original structure. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, a lawfully placed utility structure located in the right-of-way as of the effective date of the right-of-way use agreement between the owner and the City.

     Outdoor commercial use. A use supporting a commercial activity that provides goods or services, either wholesale or retail, where the amount of site area used for outdoor storage of materials or display of merchandise exceeds the total floor area of all buildings on the site. Examples of outdoor commercial uses include automobile sales or services, nurseries, lumber yards and equipment rental businesses.

     Outdoor living area. An outdoor or semi-outdoor area designed to provide a more pleasant and healthful environment for the occupants of a dwelling unit and the neighborhood in which such dwelling unit is located. It includes natural ground areas, gardens, landscaped areas, balconies, porches, patios, terraces, verandas, outdoor swimming pools, play areas, tennis courts, walkways and ties. Outdoor living areas do not include accessways, parking and loading areas, strips between buildings less than ten (10) feet in width, storage areas, and other areas not usable for outdoor activities.

     Overlay zone/district. Overlay zones impose and/or relax requirements of an underlying land use district, or base zone, where characteristics of the land or neighborhood, or the types of development planned for an area, require special regulations.

     Owner. The owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the latest assessment records in the Office of the County Assessor. Owner also includes a deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest assessment records, but who presents to the City a copy of a deed or contract of sale showing date, book, and page of recording.

     Ownership. An ownership is one or more contiguous lots that are owned by the same person, partnership, association, or corporation. Ownership also includes lots that are in common ownership but are separated by a right-of-way. See also “lot” and “site.”

     Parcel. A legally defined area of land created through a partition. See “lot.”

     Parking area. A parking area is all the area devoted to the standing, maneuvering, and circulation of motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include driveways or areas devoted exclusively to non-passenger loading. See also “driveway,” “garage,” “structured parking,” and “vehicle areas.”

     Parking lot perimeter. The boundary of a parking lot area that usually contains a landscaped buffer area.

     Parking space. A permanently maintained space designed to provide standing area for a motor vehicle pursuant to the applicable parking standards (see Chapter 16.43, Parking and Loading).

     Partition. To divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. (See ORS 92. 010(8).)

     Passenger vehicle. A motor vehicle designed to carry ten persons or less including the driver. Passenger vehicles are passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles as defined by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3. See also “recreational vehicle” and “truck.”

     Paved area. An uncovered, hard-surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface (such as porous concrete or pavers) that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy-impact uses. Graveled areas are not paved areas but are typically impervious.

     Peak discharge. The maximum surface water runoff rate in cubic feet per second (cfs) determined for the design storm frequency.

     Pedestrian amenity(ies). Areas and objects that serve as places for public socializing and enjoyment and are usually closed to motorized vehicles. Examples include plazas, building frontage areas (extra-wide sidewalks), street furnishings (e.g., benches, drinking fountains, bus waiting shelters), and pocket parks adjacent to a street, and similar areas and objects. Sidewalks designed to meet the minimum sidewalk width standards under Chapter 16.41 are not “amenities” for the purpose of this title.

     Pedestrian path. A path that is utilized primarily for pedestrian access. (See Section 16.50.030(B)(8)(d).)

     Pennant. A sign that is a triangular flag which is tapered to a point or swallowtail.

     Perennial streams. All primary and secondary perennial waterways mapped by the U.S. Geological Survey.

     Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company (LLC), syndicate, this and any other County, City and County, City, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     Phased development. The partial development of any lands through the procedures contained in Section 16.62.040(D) or 16.63.040(E).

     Planned unit development (PUD). See Section 16.63.130 of this title. The development of a parcel or contiguous parcels or portions of such parcel or contiguous parcels, as individually subdivided lots; as an unsubdivided multiple unit development; or the clustering of units or lots where these methods allow a degree of latitude in the overall land use density and/or individual lot sizes for the preservation or enhancement of open space (or greenway), natural features and the objectives identified in Section 16.63.130.

     Planning Official. The Planning Official of the City of Happy Valley or the Planning Official’s designee.

     Planter strip. A landscaped area of land located within the public right-of-way, between the street curb and the sidewalk. Planter strips adjacent to lots require planting with standard residential lawn or turf, or may be planted with acceptable vegetative groundcover designed to cover a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the planter strip area upon maturity, including xeriscape compatible groundcovers or artificial lawn. Secondary materials may include decorative rock, wood chip, bark nuggets, barkdust or similar treatments, but are unacceptable as the primary cover. Planter strips may also include street furnishing elements consistent with Happy Valley Style design guidelines such as tree grates, benches, and bicycle racks.

     Plat. A map, either preliminary or final, which includes diagrams, drawings and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a land division. This term includes the State law definitions of “partition plat” and “subdivision plat.” See also Chapter 16.63, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments.

     Plaza. An area generally open to the public on a controlled basis and used for passive recreational activities and relaxation. Plazas are paved areas typically provided with amenities, such as seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees, and landscaping for use by pedestrians. See also “pedestrian amenities.”

     Post-construction erosion control. Reestablishing groundcover or landscaping prior to the removal of temporary erosion control measures.

     Practicable. Available and capable of being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology and logistics in light of the overall project purpose and probable impact on ecological functions. In regard to Habitat Conservation Areas (HCAs) the practicability of a development option shall include consideration of the type of HCA that will be affected by the proposed development. For example, High HCAs have been so designated because they are areas that have been identified as having lower urban development value and higher-valued habitat, so it should be more difficult to show that alternative development options that avoid the habitat are not practicable. On the other hand, Low HCAs have been so designated because they are areas that have been identified as having higher urban development value and lower-valued habitat, so it should be less difficult to show that alternative development options that avoid the habitat are not practicable.

     Prefabricated house or assembly. A house, portion of a house or structural unit, the integral parts of which have been built up or assembled prior to incorporation in the building or structure. These factory-built or modular units are designed and constructed to satisfy all provisions of the Uniform Building Code and other related codes.

     Preliminary plan. A clearly legible and approximate drawing of the proposed layout of streets, blocks, lots and other elements of a subdivision or partition which shall help furnish a basis for the Planning Commission’s approval or disapproval of the general layout of the subdivision. For the purpose of this title the terms “preliminary” and “tentative,” as used with state law, shall by synonymous, as will “plat” and “plan.”

     Premises. A lot or number of lots on which are situated a business, or a building or group of buildings designed as a unit.

     Primary structure. A structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure is determined by comparing the size, placement, similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on a site.

     Primary use. An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use.

     Project. An existing or proposed use or development.

     Property lines. The property lines along the edge of a lot or site. See “lot line” (front, rear, interior side).

     Protected water features. Wetlands, rivers, natural lakes, streams, creeks, springs, and drainages.

     Public access easement. A public access easement is an easement granted to the public for all the purposes for which a public sidewalk may be used, including but not limited to, pedestrian and bicycle travel.

     Public and semi-public buildings and uses. A building or use, such as a church, school, auditorium, meeting hall, hospital, stadium, library, art gallery, museum, fire station or utility substation or use such as a park or playground or community center, owned or operated by a religious, fraternal, charitable or other nonprofit organization; a public utility; or any governmental agency.

     Public improvements. Development of public infrastructure, as required by the City, County, Special District, or Road Authority, as applicable. See Chapter 16.50.

     Public safety facility. A facility necessary to respond to an immediate hazard to the public health and safety, and that is owned, leased, or operated by the City of Happy Valley or other public agency or private utility. Public safety facilities include fire and police stations, flood control facilities, water towers and pump stations needed for emergency service, and emergency communication broadcast facilities. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, public safety communication facilities are temporary wireless communications facilities that are deployed for emergency purposes and that will remain in use no longer than is needed to provide emergency service.

     Qualified professional. An individual who has proven expertise and vocational experience in a given field (e.g., natural resource biologist, geotechnical engineers, traffic engineers, etc.).

     Quasi-judicial. An action or decision that requires substantial discretion or judgment in applying the standards or criteria of this Code to the facts of a development proposal, and usually involves a public hearing. See Chapter 16.61 (Type III Review).

     Rail right-of-way. A public or private right-of-way, for the purpose of allowing rail travel.

     Receiving bodies of water. Creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, ponds and other bodies of water into which surface waters are directed, either naturally or in manmade ditches or open systems.

     Recreational area. An area of land that is improved to create the opportunity for passive or active recreational activities. Passive recreational activities include but are not limited to walking, jogging, hiking, biking and picnicking. Active recreational activities include but are not limited to basketball, baseball, soccer, volleyball, tennis, use of playground equipment and other sports.

     Recreational vehicle park. A commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. There is no minimum required stay in a recreational vehicle park. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included as Recreational Vehicle Parks. See also “mobile home park.”

     Regional stormwater detention facility. A pond, swale or underground system engineered to detain stormwater from more than one development according to the rules and regulations of the City and Clackamas County Water Environment Services.

     Regional trail. A ten (10) to fifteen (15) foot wide improved, all-weather surface pathway that is utilized for pedestrian and bicycle traffic. Regional trails are typically located within public easements or rights-of-way, and may include the installation of removable bollards to prevent use by unauthorized motorized vehicles. Regional trails are required to be maintained by the local municipality or some circumstances, may be maintained by a homeowner’s association or equivalent maintenance organization.

     Registered family child care or disabled adult day care home. “Licensed” means registered or certified. “Registration” means the document a family childcare or disabled adult daycare provider as issued by the state of Oregon to operate a family child care or disabled adult daycare home where care is provided in the family living quarters of the provider’s home pursuant to ORS 329A.330 and OAR 414-205-0000 through 414-205-0170. Registration is limited to one provider at one address. “Certificate” means the document that is issued by the state of Oregon.

     Removal of, or remove, a tree. To cut down a tree, remove the crown or top of the tree, or to damage a tree so as to cause the tree to decline and/or die. “Removal” includes, but is not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system by the application of toxic substances, the operation of equipment and vehicles, storage of materials, change of natural grade due to unapproved excavation or filling, or by the unapproved alteration of natural physical conditions. “Removal” does not include normal trimming or pruning of trees, but does include topping of trees.

     Renovation plan. A written proposal to restore the distinctive and historically authentic architectural, historical, or cultural character of a historic resource while retaining or establishing the possibility for efficient, contemporary use.

     Replacement structure. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, a utility structure that replaces a lawfully existing utility structure or support structure to accommodate wireless communication facilities and does not result in an increase in the total number of utility, guy, or support poles in the right-of-way or on private property.

     Residence. Same as “dwelling.”

     Residential facility/group care facility. A residence for six to fifteen (15) physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The facility may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the State definition of Residential Facility. Residential facilities may also include nursing homes, convalescent homes, and extended care facilities.

     Residential home/group care home. A residence for five or fewer physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The residence may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the State definition of residential home.

     Residential trailer. A mobile home that was not constructed in accordance with Federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD Code), in effect after June 15, 1976. This definition includes the State definitions of residential trailers and mobile houses, as stated in Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) 446.

     Restaurant, full service. A restaurant where meals are principally served and eaten on premises, but services may also include take-out and food delivery.

     Restaurants, drive-through. A restaurant where food service is partially or principally provided via a drive-through window.

     Restoration (natural resources). For the purposes of Chapters 16.34 and 16.35, the process of returning a disturbed or altered area or feature to a previously existing natural condition. Restoration activities reestablish the structure, function and/or diversity to that which existed prior to impacts caused by human activity.

     Revegetation. The replacement of vegetation which was existing on any site prior to any work done and displayed by such work. Revegetation may be done by seeding the prepared ground surface or the actual planting of healthy seedlings, saplings or other vegetation of a quality which is equal to or in excess of the quality of the displaced vegetation.

     Review body. The person or group that is assigned to make decisions on land use reviews, whether initially or on appeal. Review bodies in the City of Happy Valley include the Planning Official, Hearings Officer, Planning Commission, Design Review Board and the City Council.

     Ridge line (building). The top of a roof at its highest elevation.

     Right-of-way. An area that allows for the passage of people or vehicles. Right-of-way includes passageways such as freeways, pedestrian connections, alleys, and all streets. A right-of-way may be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency, or it may be privately owned. A right-of-way that is not dedicated or deeded to the public will be in a tract. Right-of-way also includes the space upon, above, below, in, along, across, over, or under public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, bridges, trails, paths, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but does not include parks, parkland, or city owned property not generally open to the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the City’s right, title, and interest in the property and its authority to grant a license, permit, or other permission to use and occupy the property.

     Riparian. Those areas associated with streams, lakes and wetlands where vegetation communities are predominantly influenced by their association with water.

     Riparian corridor. The vegetated area adjacent to (and including) streams, lakes, rivers, and other watercourses.

     Roadway; Roadway Authority.

1.   Roadway. The portion of a right-of-way that is improved for motor vehicle travel. Roadway includes vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. Roadway does not include area devoted to curbs, parking strips, or sidewalks.

2.   Road Authority. The City or other agency (e.g., Oregon Department of Transportation, Clackamas County, a special purpose district, or other agency) with jurisdiction over a road or street.

     Roof pitch. The slope of a roof, usually described as ratio (e.g., one foot of rise per two feet of horizontal distance).

     Rooming house. A single-family dwelling, accessory dwelling unit (ADU) or either unit of a two-family dwelling (duplex), which is rented for a valuable consideration or wherein rooms with or without cooking facilities are rented for a valuable consideration to or occupied between more than two and up to five or more natural persons unrelated by blood, marriage or legal adoption to the owner or operator of the house. Foster children placed in a lawful foster family home, a community residential home with six or fewer residents, a nursing home, or a residential care facility shall not be considered a rooming house. Temporary gratuitous guests as used herein shall refer to natural persons occasionally visiting the single-family house for a short period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days within a ninety (90) day period.

     Routine repair and maintenance. Activities directed at preserving an existing allowed use or facility, without expanding the development footprint or site use.

     Screen. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, to effectively obscure the view of the base of a wireless communication facility and its auxiliary support equipment.

     Self-service storage. A business that provides individual storage spaces for customers to store personal or business goods. “Self-service storage” includes “mini-storage” and “mini-warehouse.”

     Senior housing. Includes independent care and assisted care facilities for the elderly, but excludes nursing homes, convalescent care and institutional type living arrangements unless part of a congregate/assisted-living facility complex, and the congregate care portion does not make up more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross area of the facility. Senior housing is allowed in multifamily zoning districts, and can consist of a combination of apartments, rowhouses and other types of housing units. Units may be connected to each other by hallways or breezeways.

     Setback/setback yard. The minimum or maximum distance required between a specified object, such as a building, and another point, measured from lot lines to a specified object. Typically, a setback refers to the minimum distance (yard dimension) from a building to a specified property line. Setbacks are measured along a horizontal plane as the shortest distance between the lot line and the closest portion of the structure’s foundation. A foundation survey in all development districts may be required at the discretion of the City.

     Shadow plan platting. A plan for future development shown on a master plan indicating where future buildings and lot divisions can be placed to ensure efficient development and redevelopment of larger parcels.

 

     Shared driveway. When land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one driveway. An easement or tract (owned in common) must be created and recorded for this purpose.

     Shared parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or lots or parcels, which are satisfied jointly with the same facilities. See Chapter 16.43.

     Shopping street. A driveway in a commercial development that is designed to mimic a public street with sidewalks, tree wells, pedestrian lighting, and street furnishings. A shopping street may also have on-street parking.

     Short-term rental housing. Renting of a dwelling unit (in full or in part) or accessory dwelling unit for purposes of short-term rental income. Commonly referred to as “AirBnB” (or similar).

     Sidewalk. A surfaced strip of land, legally accessible to the public, or a large segment of the public, improved to accommodate pedestrian traffic.

     Sight distance. The unobstructed viewing distance measured from one object or location to another object or location, usually required the purpose of traffic safety.

     Sign. Any outdoor device, or device visible from outdoors, providing identification, advertising or directional information for a specific business, group of businesses, service, product, brand, person, organization, place or building. Included in this definition of signs are graphic devices such as logos, trademarks, and attention attracting objects such as wind-driven spinners and portable sign devices, logo sculpture and banners, balloons, streamers, strobe lights, flags, inflatable structures, projected picture signs, holographic projection signs, laser projected designs/images/copy and other attention attracting media and devices. However, the term “sign” shall not include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, government unit, school or religious group, except as such emblems shall conform to illumination standards set forth in Chapter 16.45. The term includes the sign structure, display surface and all other component parts of a sign; when dimensions of a sign are specified, the term includes panels and frames; and the term includes both sides of a sign of specified dimensions or display surface area.

     Sign, A-Frame (aka A-Board or Sandwich Board). A double-faced portable sign constructed with an A-shaped frame, composed of two sign boards attached at the top and separated at the bottom, and not supported by a structure in the ground.

     Sign, Animated or Moving. A sign or display, or part of a sign or display, that changes position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation.

     Sign, Awning. A type of wall sign painted or printed on, or attached flat against the surface of the nonrigid materials of an awning.

     Sign, Balloon. An inflatable, stationary, temporary sign of any shape anchored by some means to a structure or the ground. It includes simple children’s balloons, hot and cold air balloons, helium filled balloons, blimps, and other dirigibles.

     Sign, Banner. A temporary sign made of nonrigid material without an enclosing framework. For the purposes of this chapter, advertisement flags are to be considered banners. National flags, flags of political subdivisions and symbolic flags of an institution, group or a business are excluded.

     Sign, Billboard. A large format sign advertising displays intended for viewing from extended distances, generally more than fifty (50) feet, with a display surface area of two hundred (200) square feet or more.

     Sign, Canopy. A type of wall sign painted or printed on, or attached to the canopy fascia.

     Sign, Construction. A temporary sign displayed on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction.

     Sign, Construction—Public Utility Facilities. A temporary sign displayed in conjunction with a construction project for public streets, public waterlines, public sewer lines and pump stations, public storm drain lines and other similar public facilities.

     Sign, Directional. A permanent sign designed and erected to guide the circulation of vehicles or pedestrians or both which are on the site.

     Sign, Directory. A permanent informational sign designed and erected to list the businesses, business occupants or tenants within buildings on the site and to be read by passengers of vehicles or pedestrians or both which are on the site.

     Sign, Electrical. A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are used.

     Sign Entry/Exit. A permanent sign designed and erected to show the location of vehicular access onto or off of a location from or to the public right-of-way.

     Sign, Festoon. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, lights, pennants, streamers, pinwheels or similar signs.

 

     Sign, Fin. A sign which is supported by a pole or poles or columns and partly by a building.

     Sign, Flashing. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign exhibiting changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. This includes illuminated signs exhibiting the illusion of movement by means of a preprogrammed repetitious sequential switching action in which illuminated elements of the sign and are turned on or off to visually simulate the impression of motion characteristic of chasing, running, blinking, oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, or expanding and contracting light patterns.

     Sign, Freestanding. A sign supported from the ground by its own structure and not attached to a building.

     Sign, Illegal. A sign which is erected, constructed, altered, relocated, maintained or repaired in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

     Sign, Illuminated. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of lighting the sign. The following are types of sign illumination:

1.   “Direct” means lighting where-in the light source is visible.

2.   “Fluorescent tube” means lighting wherein an electrical current is passed through a gas-filled tube, with a coating of fluorescent material on its inner surface, which emits visible light.

3.   “Incandescent bulb” means lighting wherein an electrical current is passed through a filament inside a bulb and the filament emits visible light. The filament source of light may be visible as in clear bulb or bare bulb illumination or it may not be visible as in frosted or painted bulb lighting.

4.   “Indirect” means lighting wherein the light source is separate from the object to be illuminated, including but not limited to a sign face or cabinet, and is directed to shine on the object or sign.

5.   “Internal” means a lighting wherein the light source and the bulb or tube enclosing the light source are enclosed within a structure, including but not limited to a sign and are not visible.

6.   “Neon” means lighting where-in an electrical current is passed through a tube containing neon gas which emits visible light.

     Sign, Incidental. A sign identifying or advertising associated goods, products, services or facilities available on the premises, including but not limited to, trading stamps, credit cards accepted, brand names or price signs.

     Sign, Lawn. A temporary, freestanding or A-frame sign.

     Sign, Marquee. A type of wall sign painted, printed on, or attached to the marquee fascia.

     Sign, Monument. A ground-level sign not mounted on a pole or structure. This sign is permanently affixed at grade and has a monolithic or columnar line and maintains essentially the same contour from grade to top.

     Sign, Nonconforming. A sign lawfully erected and existing, and properly maintained and repaired prior to the adoption of this Code and Chapter 16.45, but which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.

     Sign, Obsolete. A sign that calls attention to a business or other activity or a profession, commodity, product, service or entertainment no longer carried on, produced, sold or offered.

     Sign, Obstructing. A sign, including its supports and structure, which interferes with the use of a fire escape, exit or a window such that light, ventilation or ingress and egress is reduced below the minimum required by law.

 

     Sign, Off-premises. A sign which identifies or gives directions to a use or activity and which is located on premises other than where the activity or use is provided.

     Sign, Projecting. A sign projecting more than one foot from the wall of a building.

     Sign, Public. A sign erected and maintained by a special purpose district, public school district, municipal, County, State or Federal government, or any political subdivision or agency thereof.

     Sign, Readerboard. A sign no greater than twenty-four (24) square feet in size on which copy can be changed electronically by using patterns of lights that may be changed at intermittent intervals or can be changed manually, in the field, using letters, numbers or symbols which can be affixed to the sign face.

     Sign, Roof. A sign erected or maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support on the roof structure.

     Sign, Shingle. A rigid sign hanging from an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang or attached to a wall and perpendicular to that wall.

     Sign, Subdivision. A sign located on land in a recorded subdivision approved through the City of Happy Valley subdivision review process.

     Sign, Temporary. A sign that will become obsolete after the occurrence of an event or series of events. Temporary signs include, but are not limited to, for sale and lease signs, garage sale signs and political campaign signs. Temporary signs are not permanently attached to the ground (set on or post driven or dug into the ground with no footing or foundation), wall or building.

     Sign, Traffic Control. A sign or device used as an official route marker, guide sign, warning sign or sign directing or regulating traffic or pedestrians which has been erected by or under order of the City of Happy Valley, the State or Federal governments.

     Sign, Wall. A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than twelve (12) inches from such building or structure.

     Sign clearance. The distance from the grade directly below a sign to the bottom of the lowest portion of the sign.

     Sign contractor. A person engaged in the business of sign construction, sign maintenance or sign repair and registered with the Oregon Construction Contractors Board.

     Sign face. The total of display surface area visible from one side of a sign.

     Sign face area. The portion of a sign containing copy and the background for the copy.

     Sign maintenance. Normal care needed to keep a sign functional such as cleaning, painting, oiling and changing bulbs and tubes.

     Sign Official. Planning Official or designee.

     Sign structure. One or more supports, uprights, braces, or other framework of a sign.

     Significant wetland. A wetland mapped on the City local wetlands inventory.

     Site. For land divisions, property line adjustments, and lot consolidations, the site is the lots, lots of record, parcels, or tracts proposed to be divided or reconfigured. For all other purposes, the site is an ownership except as follows:

1.   If a proposed development includes multiple ownerships, then the site is the combined area of all the ownerships.

2.   If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and the balance of the ownership is vacant, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development.

3.   If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and there is other development on the ownership, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is currently developed plus the portion proposed for development.

     Site frontage. The part of a site that abuts a street. See also “block frontage.”

     Siting. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, the location, construction, collocation, modification, or installation of a wireless communication facility.

     Skilled nursing facility. Skilled nursing facilities provide twenty-four (24) hour direct medical, nursing and other health services. Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and nurses’ aides provide services prescribed by resident(s) physician(s). Skilled nursing is for those persons who need health supervision but not hospitalization. The emphasis of this use is on nursing care, but convalescent, restorative physical, occupational, speech, and respiratory therapies are also provided. The level of care may also include specialized nursing services such as specialized nutrition, rehabilitation services and monitoring of unstable conditions. The term skilled nursing facility is also synonymous with the terms nursing facility and nursing home.

     Slope. The “slope” of a lot is calculated pursuant to Chapter 16.32.

     Small cell network. A collection of functionally related small cell facilities designed to deliver wireless communication service. The small cell facilities in a small cell network may be located on one or more utility structures or support structures within and/or outside of the public right-of-way.

     Small wireless facilities. As defined by the Federal Communications Commission (CFR 1.1312.e.2), facilities that meet the following conditions:

1.   The facilities are mounted on structures fifty (50) feet or less in height including their antennas (as defined in CFR 1.1320.d);

2.   The facilities are mounted on structures no more than ten (10) percent taller than other adjacent structures;

3.   The facilities do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than fifty (50) feet or by more than ten (10) percent, whichever is greater;

4.   Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment is no more than three cubic feet in volume;

5.   All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure is no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume;

6.   The facilities do not require antenna structure registration under Part 17 of 47 CFR; and

7.   The facilities do not result in human exposure to radio-frequency radiation in excess of applicable safety standards specified in CFR 1.2307.b.

     Stealth technology. A facility, including, but not limited to, antennas, support towers, and ancillary support equipment that, to the extent feasible, are screened or otherwise designed such that the facility blends in with the surrounding area and visual impacts from nearby streets or properties are minimized. In the case of a modification, the change or alteration does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of a support structure. In the case of a support tower or monopole, “stealth technology” also means a facility that is designed and installed with specific features that render it visually similar to nearby objects such as trees, flag poles, or utility poles.

     Steep slopes. Slopes that are equal to or greater than fifteen (15) percent. (See Chapter 16.32.)

     Storefront character. The character expressed by buildings placed close to the street with ground-floor display windows, weather protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), corner building entrances or recessed entries, and similar features.

     Stormwater detention facility. A pond, swale or underground systems engineered to detain stormwater from the proposed development according to the rules and regulations of the City and Clackamas County Water Environment Services.

     Stormwater management system. A stormwater facility (e.g., conveyance, detention/retention, treatment system or outfall) intended to control and manage stormwater to minimize the detrimental effects of surface water runoff.

     Stormwater pretreatment facility. Any structure or drainageway that is designed, constructed and maintained to collect and filter, retain or detain surface water runoff during and after a storm event for the purpose of water quality improvement.

     Story. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of any floor next above, except that the top story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the top floor and the ceiling above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than five feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.

     Stream. An area where enough natural surface water flows to produce a stream channel, such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water either intermittently or during most of the year. This includes:

1.   The water itself, including any vegetation, aquatic life, or habitat;

2.   Beds and banks below the high water level which may contain water, whether or not water is actually present;

3.   The floodplain between the high water levels of connected side channels;

4.   Beaver ponds, oxbows, and side channels if they are connected by surface flow to the stream during a portion of the year; and stream-associated wetlands.

     Stream channel. An area with evidence of perennial or seasonal water passage. The depression between the banks worn by the regular and usual flow of the water. The channel need not contain water year-round. This definition does not include irrigation ditches, canals, storm or surface water runoff devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses.

     Street. A public right-of-way or private tract that is intended for motor vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle travel or for motor vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian access to abutting property. It shall include the terms street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other such terms. Street types include:

1.   Major arterial. A street which provides a connection between major traffic generators and is primarily concerned with the movement of large volumes of traffic within an urban area. Includes highways and other major streets with limited or no direct access from adjoining properties.

 

2.   Minor arterial. A street which generally serves as a connection between streets of both greater and lesser capacities traffic volumes. Minor arterials may be constructed to structural standards which are below that of a major arterial.

3.   Collector road. A street which provides connection between local street networks and arterial streets. This type of street serves traffic within commercial, industrial, and residential neighborhood areas.

4.   Neighborhood street. A street that is intended to provide direct access to abutting residential properties and discourage through traffic movements not related to the neighborhood in which the residential street is located.

 

5.   Local street. A street which provides minor traffic service.

6.   Lane. A street having two open ends not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in length and being constructed to the same specifications as a cul-de-sac.

7.   Alley. An undedicated private right-of-way that provides vehicle access to a lot or common parking area. Generally, alleys provide secondary vehicle access; however, where vehicle access from the street is not allowed, not possible, or not desirable the alley may provide primary vehicle access.

8.   Cul-de-sac. A street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated and provided with a vehicular turnaround at the termination of such street.

9.   Private street. An undedicated private right-of-way providing access from a public street to any property, except flag lots.

10. Dead-end street. A street that connects to another street at only one end and does not have a City-approved turnaround on its other end. A pedestrian connection may extend from the end of a dead-end street to connect with another street of any type, or with another pedestrian connection.

     Street connectivity. Expressed as the number of street and/or access way connections within a specific geographic area. Higher levels of connectivity provide for more direct transportation routes and better dispersion of traffic, resulting in less traffic on individual streets and potentially slower speeds through neighborhoods.

     Street-facing façade/wall. All the wall planes of a structure as seen from one side or view that are at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees or less from a street lot line.

     Street frontage. A street parallel to and adjacent to arterial street providing access to abutting properties and protection from the through traffic.

     Street furniture/furnishings. Benches, lighting, bicycle racks, drinking fountains, mail boxes, kiosks, and similar pedestrian amenities; may be located within a street furnishings zone or building front zone of a sidewalk or in a plaza. See also “pedestrian amenities.”

     Street light only pole. Any pole installed for the exclusive purpose of supporting street lighting facilities.

     Street stub. A temporary street ending where the street will be extended through adjacent property in the future, as those properties develop. Not a permanent street-end or dead-end street.

     Street tree. A tree planted in the public right-of-way in a planter strip or tree well between the street and sidewalk, or within a public utility and street tree easement along private streets.

     Structure. Anything constructed or built, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, including tennis courts and other recreational facilities, but excluding fences and grade level improvements such as pavement for driveways or concrete flatwork such as patios.

     Structure height. The height of a structure, and the cumulative height of a building with any appurtenant structures. (See definition of “building height.”)

     Subdivision. To divide land into four or more lots within a single calendar year. See also Chapter 16.63, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments and ORS 92.010(13).

     Subject property. The parcel or parcels of land that are the subject of the permit and/or approval action. (See “site.”)

     Substantial change in physical dimensions. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, a modification which meets one or more of the following criteria:

1.   The modification would increase the existing height of a support tower by more than ten (10) percent, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, or would increase the height of a base station by more than ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent, whichever is greater, provided the support tower or base station is located outside the right-of-way; or

2.   The modification would protrude from the edge of the support tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the support tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, and further provided the support tower is outside the right-of-way; and for towers in the right-of-way and base stations, the modification would increase the height more than ten (10) percent or six feet, whichever is greater; or

3.   The modification would involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four; or for support towers in the right-of-way and base stations, the modification involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the support tower or base station, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the support tower or base station; or

4.   The modification would involve excavation or deployment outside the current site, defined, with respect to support towers other than support towers in the right-of-way, as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the support tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site; with respect to support towers in the right-of-way and base stations, site is restricted to that area in proximity to the support tower, base station, or auxiliary support equipment already deployed on the ground; or

5.   A replacement structure; or

6.   The modification would defeat the concealment elements of the support tower or base station; or

7.   The modification does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the support tower, base station, or base station equipment, provided that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition.

     Substantial compliance. The City Comprehensive Plan and implementing ordinances, on the whole, conform with the purposes of the performance standards in the functional plan and any failure to meet individual performance standard requirements is technical or minor in nature.

     Sunrise Expressway. The Sunrise Expressway is a multi-lane highway planned for three through lanes and auxiliary lanes associated with the interchanges planned to be built in phases to provide safe and efficient high speed and high volume traffic movement. The primary function is to provide for interurban travel including for freight mobility. Speeds are moderate to high. Public road connections are highly controlled and parking is prohibited. Pedestrian facilities are separated from the roadway and bikeways are part of the roadway. Private access is discouraged and the FHWA’s Sunrise Project I-205 to Rock Creek Junction Record of Decision reflects the planned public access. See Figure PA-5.

     Swale. A type of stormwater facility. Usually a broad, shallow depression with plants that filter and process contaminants.

     Tangent. Meeting a curve or surface in a single point.

     Terrace. A porch or promenade supported by columns, or a flat roof or other platform on a building.

     Through lot. See “lot type.”

     Through street. A street that connects to other streets at both ends.

     Tiedown (manufactured home). Any device designed to anchor a manufactured home securely to the ground.

     Top of bank. The same as “bankful stage” defined in OAR 141-85-010(2).

     Topping (tree). The severe cutting back of limbs within the tree’s crown to such a degree as to remove the natural canopy and disfigure the tree. With regard to “fir,” “evergreen” or any other variety of conifer, “topping” means the removal of any portion of the highest point of the tree. If the tip has curled over, it will still constitute the highest point of the tree.

     Tract. A piece of land within a platted subdivision, partition or planned unit development reserved for open space, utility corridor, recreation facilities, natural resource area, or other purpose; may be dedicated to a homeowner’s association or other entity for maintenance.

     Trailer (travel). A vacation structure or self-propelled vehicle equipped with wheels for street or highway use; intended for human occupancy; equipped with plumbing, sink or toilets; used for vacation and recreational purposes; and not used as a residence.

     Transit street. A street that is classified in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan as a bus route.

     Transportation mode. The method of transportation (e.g., automobile, bus, walking, bicycling, train, etc.).

     Travel trailer/recreational vehicle park/campground. A lot or parcel on which two or more travel trailers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, tent trailers, tent sites, capers, and/or similar vehicles or devices are permitted outright, for a stay of limited duration, with or without a charge or fee.

     Tree canopy. The ground area that, when viewed from above the crown of one or more trees, is mostly covered by the tree(s). For deciduous trees, canopy area is based on the time of year when foliage is present.

     Tree farm. Any property being lawfully utilized for the commercial production of landscaping, nursery stock or Christmas trees, and including fruit and nut orchards; provided, however, that any land previously designated for exclusive farm use (EFU) by Clackamas County, within a state or County tax deferral program for timber production, and subsequently annexed into the City, shall be treated as a “tree farm” for so long as the deferrals remain in effect. Forested lands annexed within the City limits that hold a Clackamas County rural residential farm forest—five acre minimum parcel size (RRFF-5) or farm forest—ten (10) acre minimum parcel size (FF-10) or annexed lands that have subsequently received urban zoning, are not classified as “tree farms” unless trees have been planted in symmetrical rows.

     Tree well. A planter area cut out of a sidewalk within the street furnishing zone, planted with a street tree and including groundcover or a grate cover; typically used in commercial districts where on-street parking or pedestrian traffic makes the use of a planter strip impracticable.

     Truck. A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the movement of property or special purpose equipment, or a motor vehicle that is designed to carry more than ten (10) persons. Truck includes vehicles commonly called trucks, pick-ups, delivery vans, buses, motor homes and other similar vehicles. See also National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3.

1.   Light truck. Trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and single rear wheels.

2.   Medium truck. Trucks and similar vehicles, other than truck tractors, with single rear axles and dual rear wheels. Truck tractors are in the heavy truck category.

3.   Heavy truck. Trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with two or more rear axles.

     Turnaround. A vehicle maneuvering area at the end of a dead-end street (e.g., hammerhead, cul-de-sac, or other configuration) that allows for vehicles to turn around.

     Uniformity of illumination. The ratio of average illumination level on the roadway to the minimum illumination at any point on the roadway.

     Urban development value. The economic value of a property lot or parcel as determined by analyzing three separate variables: assessed land value, value as a property that could generate jobs (“employment value”), and the Metro 2040 design type designation of property. The urban development value of all properties containing regionally significant fish and wildlife habitat is depicted on the Metro Habitat Urban Development Value Map.

     Urban growth boundary (UGB). Urban growth boundary adopted pursuant to ORS Chapter 197.

     Usable open space. Planned and improved open space or outdoor facilities that provide active and passive recreational or relaxation opportunities, including, but not limited to one of the following: parks, play areas; improved playing fields; publicly accessible natural or wildlife viewing areas; unimproved park land dedicated or owned by a public entity; arboretums and gardens, ponds and water features; maintained and landscaped walking paths and running trails; public and private pedestrian spaces; and other similar environments. Usable open space does not include slopes over twenty-five (25) percent, wetlands, natural areas, streams or stream banks where access and improvements are prohibited under Federal or state law (including OAR 660-23, DLCD Goal 5 regulations). If such areas are publicly accessible, and if viewing areas and improvements are allowed and made at the periphery of the areas to enhance access to and viewing of the wildlife and/or natural areas, then those lands may be considered as usable open space.

     Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.

     Utility facilities. Buildings, structures or any constructed portion of a system which provides for the production, transmission, conveyance, delivery or furnishing of services including, but not limited to, heat, light, water, power, natural gas, sanitary sewer, stormwater, telephone and cable television. Utility facilities do not include stormwater pretreatment facilities.

     Utility trailer. A vehicle designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle which is used to carry property, trash, or special equipment and that is sixteen (16) feet or less in length. Boat trailers are included as utility trailers. Utility trailers that are longer than sixteen (16) feet are considered industrial vehicles and are regulated as heavy trucks.

     Vacate plat/street. To abandon a subdivision or street right-of-way. For example, vacation of a public right-of-way that is not needed or cannot be used for a street or other public purpose. Vacation of a plat typically returns the property to the adjoining owners and restores it to an undivided condition and ownership.

     Vacation home rental. A commercial use of a single-family or duplex dwelling unit where the unit is rented for periods of time of twenty-eight (28) or fewer consecutive days.

     Variance. An administrative or quasi-judicial decision to lessen or otherwise modify the requirements of this title. (See Chapter 16.71.)

     Vegetated corridor. The area of setback between the top of bank of a protected water feature and the delineated edge of the water quality resource area. (See Chapter 16.34.)

     Vehicle areas. All of the areas on a site where vehicles may circulate or park including parking areas, driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading areas. See also “driveway” and “parking area.”

     View corridor. A strip of land, not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width, through or over which an aesthetically pleasing vista of the surrounding landscape or cityscape may be seen.

     Vision clearance area. Those areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is necessary for traffic safety and to maintain adequate sight distance. See standards in Section 16.50.030(B).

     Wall. A masonry or similar structure serving to enclose or divide an area.

     Wall area. The measurement in square feet of a building wall based on the height and width of an architectural elevation.

     Warehouse. A building used primarily for the storage of materials or goods for use on the site or for later distribution.

     Waste collection areas. Waste collection areas include areas set aside or designed to be used for garbage collection and collection of materials for recycling. Waste collection areas include areas occupied by dumpsters and other solid waste receptacles.

     Water bodies. Permanently or temporarily flooded lands which may lie below the deepwater boundary of wetlands. Water bodies include rivers, streams, creeks, sloughs, drainageways, lakes, and ponds.

     Water quality facility. Any structure or drainageway that is designed, constructed and maintained to collect and filter, retain or detain surface water runoff during and after a storm event for the purpose of water quality improvement. It may also include, but is not limited to, existing features such as constructed wetlands, water quality swales, and ponds that are maintained as stormwater quality control facilities.

     Water quality resource areas. Vegetated corridors and the adjacent protected water feature as established in Chapter 16.34.

     Watershed. A geographic unit defined by the flows of rainwater or snowmelt. All land in a watershed drains to a common outlet, such as a stream, lake or wetland.

     Wetland. Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands are those areas identified and delineated by a qualified wetland specialist as set forth in the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual.

     Window. A transparent or semi-transparent (not more than fifty (50) percent opaque) glazing on a building façade. For the purpose of this Code, a window may be a display window (e.g., for merchandise, art, etc.) that is integral to a building design, but a window is not a display box mounted onto the exterior of a building.

     Wireless communications facility. Any structure, antenna, equipment or other device that transmits and/or receives wireless communications, including, but not limited to, antennas of any type, support towers, support structures, equipment cabinets, and other auxiliary support equipment associated with the transmission of wireless communications, excluding amateur radio stations as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.

     Wireless communications service. The providing or offering for rent, sale, lease or in exchange for other consideration, of the transmittal and reception of voice, data, image, graphic and other information by the use of current or future wireless communications facilities. Also, any wireless communication services authorized by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended, that currently exist or that may be developed in the future, including, but not limited to, cellular, personal communications services, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio, paging, similar Federal Communications Commission-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services, but excluding wireless communication services used exclusively by gas and electric utilities and cooperative utilities for internal communications of an operational nature.

     Woody vegetation. Areas that are part of a contiguous area one acre or larger of shrub or open or scattered forest canopy (less than sixty (60) percent crown closure) located within three hundred (300) feet of a surface stream.

     Yard. The area defined by setbacks (i.e., between the setback line and nearest property line).

     Zero-lot line house. A single-family detached dwelling with one “zero” side yard setback. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020; Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 491 § 1, 2016; Ord. 481 § 1, 2015; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 395 § 2, 2009; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.13 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
16.13.010 Enforcement.
A.  Complaints Regarding Violations.

1.   Filing Written Complaint. Whenever a violation of this Code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a signed, written complaint.

2.   File complaint with the City Manager. Such complaints, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the City Manager or designees. The City Manager or designee shall properly record such complaints, investigate and take action thereon as provided by this Code.

B.  Inspections. An official or employee may be designated by the City Council to make routine and periodic inspections of properties and premises within the corporate limits of Happy Valley to determine whether there is compliance with the laws, rules and regulations which are designed for the protection of the health, safety, peace and welfare of the public; and it shall also be the duty of such persons to make such inspections upon the receipt of complaints, or specific or general information indicating the existence of hazardous conditions or noncompliance with such rules, regulations and laws. In the event any authorized officer or employee of the City shall be denied access to any property or premises for the purpose of making an inspection provided for in this chapter, then such officer or employee shall not inspect such premises unless and until he or she shall have obtained a search warrant for the inspection of such premises.

C.  Search Warrants. No search warrant shall be issued, under the terms of this chapter, for the inspection of any property or premises within the corporate limits of the City unless and until there shall have been filed an affidavit showing probable cause for such inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, the code or ordinance sections which form the basis of such inspection, whether it is a routine or periodic inspection or an inspection instituted by a complaint or other specified or general information concerning the property or premises or the area in which it is situated. The search warrant issued shall specify the purpose and extent of the inspection which is proposed to be made and the specific property or premises covered by such warrant. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hinder, delay or obstruct the inspection of premises based on a search warrant issued under the terms of this chapter.

D.  Abatement. The location, erection, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use of a building or other structure in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such.

E.  Planning Official. It shall be the duty of the designated City official to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such official shall send a description of any violation of this Code to the Community Services Director or City Manager within fifteen (15) calendar days after he or she becomes aware of the violation. The enactment of this chapter shall not invalidate any prior, existing or future prosecutions for violation of the chapter committed under a previous ordinance.

 

F.  Legal Proceedings by City Attorney. In addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the City Attorney, upon written request from the City Council, shall cause to be instituted any civil action, suit or other legal means it considers to be appropriate to remedy violations of this chapter.

G.  Suits in Equity to Enjoin Violations. In case a building or other structure is, or is proposed to be located, constructed, maintained, repaired, altered or used, or any land is, or is proposed to be used in violation of this Code, the City Attorney, as prescribed in this section, or any person whose interest in real property in the City may be affected by the violation, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, temporarily or permanently enjoin, abate or remove the unlawful location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use.

H.  Stop Work Order.

1.   Issuance. When it is necessary to obtain compliance with any provision of the Land Development Code including any conditions of approval, the Planning Official or designee may issue a stop work order requiring that all work, except work directly related to elimination of the violation, be immediately and completely stopped. If the Planning Official issues a stop work order, the responsible party may not resume work until such time as the Planning Official gives specific approval in writing. The stop work order will be in writing and will include:

a.     Date of order;

b.     Permit or registration number, where applicable;

c.     Site address, legal description or project location of stop work order;

d.     A description of violations observed; and

e.     The conditions under which the work may resume.

The stop work order will be posted by the Planning Official at a conspicuous location at the site. In addition, a copy will be sent to the responsible party by certified mail. Where the responsible party is not the property owner, a copy of the stop work order will also be sent to the property owner. It is unlawful for any person to remove, obscure, mutilate or otherwise damage a stop work order. A stop work order is effective upon posting. When an emergency condition exists, the Planning Official may issue a stop work order orally. The Planning Official will then issue a written notice within twenty-four (24) hours.

2.   Hearing. The Planning Official or designee shall schedule a hearing, if requested, in municipal court on the stop work order for the earliest practicable date, but not more than thirty (30) days after the effectiveness of any required notice. The municipal court judge shall conduct a hearing and make written findings as to the violation within fourteen (14) days of the hearing. Upon a finding of no violation, the municipal court judge shall require the issuance of a resume work order. Upon finding a violation, the stop work order shall continue to be effective until the violating party furnishes sufficient proof to the municipal court judge that the violation has been abated.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.13.020 Violation—Penalties.
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter (except for those pertaining to illegal tree-cutting) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation.

B.  Any person, firm or corporation illegally involved in the cutting of trees outside the perimeters of the conditions set forth in Section 16.42.050 shall be subject to the following civil penalties:

1.   Not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each such tree having a diameter of twenty (20) inches or more at a point forty-eight (48) inches above mean ground level at the base of the trunk.

2.   Not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such tree having a diameter of six inches to less than twenty (20) inches at a point forty-eight (48) inches above mean ground level at the base of the trunk.

C.  Each person, firm or corporation found guilty (except as to the illegal cutting of trees) shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable therefore as provided for in this chapter, and any use, occupation, building or structure maintained contrary to the provision of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.14 FEES
16.14.010 Fees.
For the purpose of defraying the expenses arising from or incident to investigation, evaluation and processing of any application, petition or appeal and the cost of public notices, hearings, publications and mailings incident thereto, fees are prescribed and required to be paid to the City at the time of filing of the applicable application, petition or appeal. Such fees shall be prescribed by resolution of the City Council and shall be readily available to all interested parties from the City Recorder. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

ARTICLE 16.2 LAND USE DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.21 LAND USE DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION
16.21.010 Land use district map.
All development districts contained in this chapter are based on designations formulated for and contained in the Happy Valley revised Comprehensive Plan. The officially adopted land use map in the plan shall be the item used exclusively for the determination of the districts, their boundaries and their designations. The titles and descriptions of districts contained in this chapter are based directly upon the designations on the map. No separate zoning map shall exist. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.21.020 Classification of land use districts.
Every parcel, lot, and tract of land within the City limits of the City of Happy Valley is designated with a land use (zoning) district. The use of land is limited to the uses allowed by the applicable land use district and/or overlay zone. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.21.030 Determination of land use district boundaries.
Where due to the scale, lack of scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the City zoning map, or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of a district boundary line, the boundary line shall be determined by the Planning Official in accordance with all of the following criteria:

A.  Rights-of-Way. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, railroad tracks, alleys, irrigation canals, bridges, or other right-of-way shall be construed to follow such centerlines. Whenever any public right-of-way is lawfully vacated, the lands formerly within the vacated right-of-way shall automatically be subject to the same land use district designation that is applicable to lands abutting the vacated areas. In cases where the right-of-way formerly served as a land use district boundary, the lands within the right-of-way now vacated shall be allocated proportionately among the subject land use districts.

B.  Parcel, Lot, Tract. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the boundaries of a parcel, lot, or tract shall be construed as following such boundaries.

C.  Jurisdiction Boundary. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a City or County boundary, or the urban growth boundary, shall be construed as following said boundary.

D.  Natural Features. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a river, stream, drainage channel, drainage basin, topographic contour or other changeable natural feature not corresponding to any feature listed in subsections A through C of this section, shall be construed as following such feature, except that the location may be corrected administratively through a Type I (code interpretation) procedure, in accordance with Chapter 16.61. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.22 RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DISTRICTS
16.22.010 Future urbanization zone.
A.  Purpose—Future Urbanization (FU-10). This district is intended to preserve for future development at urban densities the future urbanizable areas of the City as designated by the Comprehensive Plan and to act as a “holding area” for future urban development on lands formerly in unincorporated Clackamas County that are annexed to the City.

B.  Area of Application. The FU-10 zone is applied to those areas designated as future urbanizable on the City’s zoning map.

C.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.22.010-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the Future Urbanization (FU-10) District.

 

Table 16.22.010-1 Future Urbanization (FU-10) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

FU-10

Residential

 

Accessory dwelling units complying with Section 16.44.050

P

One single-family dwelling, modular dwelling unit, mobile or manufactured home per lot. As an accessory use, there may be the customary outbuildings and no more than one accessory dwelling unit, complying with the requirements of Section 16.44.050.

P

Residential care facilities

C

Temporary manufactured home to allow for care of an aged or infirmed relative, provided that adequate water, sewage, disposal and fire protection are available, and that tongue, undercarriage and axles remain intact on the unit. Undercarriage wheels and supporting base must be covered with a full ground length sign-obscuring skirting around the entire circumference of the manufactured home.

C

Home occupation, complying with the requirements of Section 16.69.020

P

Institutional/Utilities

 

Public and semi-public buildings and functions

C

Public utility substations or other function

C

Cemeteries

C

Church, synagogue, temple or other place of worship

C

Public or private schools

C

Commercial daycare facilities

C

Other

 

Agriculture and related activities, not to include the commercial processing for any type of agricultural products, whether animal or vegetable

P

Open space in a natural state

P

Fish and wildlife management programs

P

Public and private conservation areas and structures for the conservation of water, soil, forest, or other wildlife habitat resources

P

Private parks or recreation facilities

C

Temporary use of a trailer, mobile home, or other building for a use incidental to construction work; provided that:

C

The maximum time period is six months, with a maximum extension for another six months;

The trailer, mobile home, or other building is connected to an approved sewage disposal system;

A building permit for a permanent structure has been issued;

The temporary home or building shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction; and

No reasonable alternative, such as the availability of nearby rental housing exists.

Personal use helicopter pads

C

Any accessory structure which is customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, on the same lot

P

 

D.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.22.010-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the FU-10 District. The purpose of these dimensional standards is to:

1.   Provide for fire safety and protection of all structures;

2.   Provide for privacy and livability of dwellings and yard areas; and

3.   Preserve, within urban growth boundaries, large parcels of land for future development at urban densities.

E.  Adjustments to Dimensional Requirements. The dimensional standards in Table 16.22.010-2 may be modified under the procedures provided by Chapter 16.63. If the adjustment exceeds ten (10) percent of the applicable dimensional standard of this subsection, the matter shall be reviewed under the standards for a variance under Chapter 16.71. If the adjustment is less than ten (10) percent of the applicable dimensional standard of this subsection, the criteria shall be the purpose provisions of subsection (D)(1) through (3) of this section.

 

Table 16.22.010-2 Development Standards for FU-10

 

 

Standard

FU-10

Residential density (maximum)1

One unit for each 10 acres

Average lot size (minimum)

10 acres

Lot width (minimum)

100 feet

Lot depth (minimum)

200 feet

Lot coverage(maximum)

20% for all structures

Building setbacks (minimum)

 

Front

32 feet

Side

12 feet

Rear

32 feet

Street side (corner lot)

15 feet

Building height (maximum)

45 feet2

NOTES:

1 Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F).

2 The single-family residential building height maximum is forty-five (45) feet at the front elevation; side and rear elevations may not exceed forty-nine (49) feet.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.22.020 Very low density residential zones.
A.  Purpose.

1.   Residential—Forty Thousand (40,000) Square Feet (R-40). This district reflects the first developmental step in the conversion of agricultural or open space land to residential purposes. Through benefit of available public services and faculties, land in this district is capable of supporting lower densities, yet constraints may still exist which would limit present and future carrying capacities. This district provides the transition to the more fully urban development of higher districts while expressing physical limitations on the potential of the land. The district may be applied in sloped areas where clustering and other hillside protection standards are applied. The numerical designation R-40 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one primary dwelling unit per forty thousand (40,000) square feet of lot area.

2.   Residential—Twenty Thousand (20,000) Square Feet (R-20). This low density urban residential district responds to development patterns already established in the City and perpetuates those patterns in recognition of the potential for infilling and the overall carrying capacity of the land. Single-family detached dwellings on larger lots are encouraged in this district which seeks to maintain “elbow room and breathing space” within the urban framework of the City. This district is a buffer between the low density and undeveloped areas and the higher density, more typical urban residential districts. It is within this district that uses and standards begin to change to reflect the desired urban trends and patterns. The district may be applied in sloped areas where clustering and other hillside protection standards are applied. The numerical designation of R-20 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one primary dwelling unit per twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area.

3.   Residential—Fifteen Thousand (15,000) Square Feet (R-15). This low density urban residential district responds to the continuing urbanization of the City due to the availability of public sanitary sewers in areas previously zoned R-40 or R-20. Single-family detached dwellings are encouraged in this district which seeks to maintain “estate development” within the urban framework of the City. This district is a buffer between the densities allowed in the lower density R-20 district and the densities allowed in the medium density, more typical urban residential districts. The numerical designation of R-15 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one primary dwelling unit per fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of lot area.

 

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.22.020-1 identifies the land uses allowed in the R-40, R-20 and R-15 Districts.

 

Table 16.22.020-1 Very Low Density Residential (R-40, R-20, R-15) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

R-40

R-20

R-15

Residential

 

 

 

One single-family frame dwelling, modular dwelling unit or manufactured home per lot

P

P

P

Single-family attached dwelling units, duplexes, multiple family units or manufactured housing, approved as part of a PUD application pursuant to Section 16.63.130

P

P

P

Accessory dwelling units complying with Section 16.44.050

P

P

P

Temporary manufactured home to allow for care of an aged or infirmed relative, provided that adequate water, sewage, disposal and fire protection are available, and that tongue, undercarriage and axles remain intact on the unit. Undercarriage wheels and supporting base must be covered with a full ground length sign-obscuring skirting around the entire circumference of the manufactured home.

C

C

C

Residential care home

P

P

P

Residential care facilities

C

C

C

Home occupation as defined in Section 16.12.030, per the provisions of Section 16.69.020

P

P

P

Rooming houses

X

X

X

Commercial

 

 

 

Commercial daycare facilities

C

C

C

Special event centers for hosting functions such as weddings, anniversary celebrations, corporate parties and similar events

C

C

C

Institutional/Utilities

 

 

 

Public and semi-public buildings and functions

C

C

C

Public utility substations or other function

C

C

C

Cemeteries

C

C

C

Church, synagogue, temple or other place of worship

C

C

C

Public or private school(s)

C

C

C

Other

 

 

 

Agriculture and related activities, not to include the commercial processing of any type of agricultural products, whether animal or vegetable

P

P

P

Public or private open spaces, parks and playgrounds, tennis courts and similar outdoor recreational activity areas and recreational buildings, facilities and grounds, which include fully or partially enclosed structures for the primary or secondary use

P

P

P

Large scale recreational facilities such as golf courses, aquatic centers, aquariums, amusement parks and similar uses

C

C

C

Temporary use of a trailer, mobile home, or other building for a use incidental to construction work provided that:

C

C

C

The maximum time period is six months, with a maximum extension for another six months;

The trailer, mobile home, or other building is connected to an approved sewage disposal system;

A building permit for a permanent structure has been issued;

The temporary home or building shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction; and

No reasonable alternative, such as the availability of nearby rental housing exists.

Wireless communication facilities, not to include antenna support structures, subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.020 of this title

C

C

C

Construction of new streets and roads, including the extensions of existing streets and roads, that are included with the adopted transportation system plan

P

P

P

Helipad1

C

C

C

Any accessory structure which is customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, located on the same lot

P

P

P

NOTES:

1Subject to applicable FAA rules and regulations.

 

C.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.22.020-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the R-40, R-20 and R-15 Districts.

 

Table 16.22.020-2 Development Standards for R-40, R-20, R-15

 

 

Standard

R-40

R-20

R-15

Residential density (maximum)1

1 unit/40,000 sq. ft.

1 unit/20,000 sq. ft.

1 unit/15,000 sq. ft.

Lot width (minimum)

100 feet

80 feet

70 feet

Lot depth (minimum)

200 feet

100 feet

90 feet

Street frontage (minimum)

 

 

 

Lots fronting on cul-de-sac

70 feet

50 feet

50 feet

All other lots

100 feet

80 feet

60 feet

Lot coverage (maximum)

20%

30%

35%

Building setbacks (minimum):

 

 

 

Front

22 feet

22 feet

22 feet

Rear

22 feet

22 feet

22 feet

Interior side

15 feet

10 feet

7 feet

Street side (corner lot)

15 feet

15 feet

15 feet

Building height (maximum)

45 feet2

Shared outdoor recreation areas

400 sq. ft./unit provided in accordance with Section 16.42.080

 

 

NOTES:

1 Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F).

2 The single-family residential building height maximum is forty-five (45) feet at the front elevation; side and rear elevations may not exceed forty-nine (49) feet.

(Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.22.030 Low density residential zones.
A.  Purpose.

1.   Residential—Ten Thousand (10,000) Square Feet (R-10). This urban residential district is a means by which the densities are increased to make efficient use of available facilities and services in an environment of single-family dwellings. Variations in dwelling types and lot sizes should provide for a necessary flexibility in the City which will prevent typical appearances created by the traditional subdivision of land. Standards in this district are strictly urban oriented and are designed to develop and perpetuate urban trends and patterns. The numerical designation R-10 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one primary dwelling unit per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area.

2.   Residential—Eight Thousand Five Hundred (8,500) Square Feet (R-8.5). This urban residential district responds to the continuing urbanization of the City. Single-family detached dwellings are encouraged, but multifamily development is allowed in this district, as part of a PUD, which seeks to maximize the development potential in hillside areas. This district serves as a buffer between the R-10 and R-7 development districts. The numerical designation of R-8.5 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one primary dwelling unit per eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet.

3.   Residential—Seven Thousand (7,000) Square Feet (R-7). This development district will allow more urban residential density within the City through the use of small lots and a variation in dwelling types. Trends which were originated in lower density districts are continued and strengthened in this district and the patterns of the Comprehensive Plan are reinforced. Sanitary sewer and water are the most essential of urban services, but all Level I services and facilities are necessary and required for development at full density. The numerical designation R-7 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one primary dwelling unit per seven thousand (7,000) square feet of lot area.

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.22.030-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the R-10, R-8.5 and R-7 Districts.

 

Table 16.22.030-1 Low Density Residential (R-10, R-8.5, R-7) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

R-10

R-8.5

R-7

Residential

 

 

 

One single-family frame dwelling, modular dwelling unit or manufactured home per lot

P

P

P

Single-family attached dwelling units, duplexes, multiple-family units or manufactured housing, approved as part of a PUD application pursuant to Section 16.63.130

P

P

P

Two-family attached dwelling units (duplexes) in a subdivision not approved as a PUD and not to exceed the allowable density of the district1

P

P

P

Multifamily dwellings not approved as a PUD. Density calculation as defined in Section 16.63.020 may be used where applicable

X

X

X

Accessory dwelling units complying with Section 16.44.050

P

P

P

Temporary manufactured home to allow for care of an aged or infirmed relative, provided that adequate water, sewage, disposal and fire protection are available, and that tongue, undercarriage and axles remain intact on the unit. Undercarriage wheels and supporting base must be covered with a full ground length sign-obscuring skirting around the entire circumference of the manufactured home.

C

C

C

Residential care home

P

P

P

Residential care facilities

C

C

C

Rooming houses

X

X

X

Manufactured home parks, subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.040

P

P

P

Home occupation as defined in Section 16.12.030, per the provisions of Section 16.69.020

P

P

P

Commercial

 

 

 

Commercial daycare facilities

C

C

C

Special event centers for hosting functions such as weddings, anniversary celebrations, corporate parties and similar events

C

C

C

Institutional/Utilities

 

 

 

Public utility substations or other function

C

C

C

Church, synagogue, temple or other place of worship

C

C

C

Public or private school(s)

C

C

C

Other

 

 

 

Public or private open spaces, parks and playgrounds, golf courses, tennis courts and similar outdoor recreational activity areas and recreational buildings, facilities and grounds, which include fully or partially enclosed structures for the primary or secondary use

P

P

P

Large scale recreational facilities such as golf courses, aquatic centers, aquariums, amusement parks and similar uses

C

C

C

Temporary use of a trailer, mobile home, or other building for a use incidental to construction work provided that:

C

C

C

The maximum time period is six months, with a maximum extension for another six months;

The trailer, mobile home, or other building is connected to an approved sewage disposal system;

A building permit for a permanent structure has been issued;

The temporary home or building shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction; and

No reasonable alternative, such as the availability of nearby rental housing exists.

Wireless communication facilities, not to include antenna support structures, subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.020 of this title

C

C

C

Helipad2

C

C

C

Construction of new streets and roads, including the extensions of existing streets and roads, that are included with the adopted transportation system plan

P

P

P

Any accessory structure which is customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, located on the same lot

P

P

P

NOTE:

1 Location: Duplexes and triplexes must be located on a corner lot or adjacent to the intersection of two streets.

2 Subject to applicable FAA rules and regulations.

 

C.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.22.030-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the R-10, R-8.5 and R-7 Districts.

 

Table 16.22.030-2 Development Standards for R-10, R-8.5 and R-7

 

 

Standard

R-10

R-8.5

R-7

Residential density (maximum)1

1 unit/10,000 sq. ft.

1 unit/8,500 sq. ft.

1 unit/7,000 sq. ft.

Lot width (minimum)

60 feet

50 feet

50 feet

Lot depth (minimum)

80 feet

70 feet

70 feet

Street frontage (minimum)

 

 

 

Lots fronting on cul-de-sac

35 feet

35 feet

35 feet

All other lots

50 feet

50 feet

50 feet

Lot coverage (maximum)

40%

45%

50%

Building setbacks (minimum):

 

 

 

Front

22 feet

22 feet

22 feet

Rear

22 feet

22 feet

22 feet

Interior side

7 feet

5 feet

5 feet

Street side (corner lot)

15 feet

15 feet

15 feet

Building height (maximum)

45 feet2

Shared outdoor recreation areas

400 sq. ft./unit provided in accordance with Section 16.42.080

 

 

NOTES:

1 Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F).

2 The single-family residential building height maximum is forty-five (45) feet at the front elevation; side and rear elevations may not exceed forty-nine (49) feet.

(Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.22.040 Medium density single-family residential zones.
A.  Purpose.

1.   Residential—Five Thousand (5,000) Square Feet (R-5). This development district will allow single-family (attached and detached) as well as duplexes, triplexes within the City. Sanitary sewer and water are the most essential of urban services, but all Level I services and facilities are necessary and required for development at full density. In this district, there is an average lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet.

2.   Mixed Use Residential—Single-Family (MUR-S). Mixed use residential will promote compact form, and residential and commercial or residential and office mixed vertically, in addition to across the district. Minimum densities are provided to comply with the Urban Growth Management Functional Plan, Title 1 requirements. MUR-S has a minimum density of six units per net acre and a minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet.

B.  Permitted Uses Table 16.22.040-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the R-5 and MUR-S Districts.

 

Table 16.22.040-1 Medium Density Single-Family Residential (R-5 and MUR-S) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

R-5

MUR-S

Residential

 

 

One single-family frame dwelling or modular dwelling unit per lot

P

P

Two-family attached dwelling units (duplexes), and multiple-family dwellings up to a triplex. Single-family attached dwelling units, duplexes, multiple-family units or manufactured housing, approved as part of a PUD application pursuant to Section 16.63.130. Density calculation as defined in Section 16.12.030 may be used where applicable.1

P

P

Accessory dwelling units, complying with Section 16.44.050

P

P

Residential care home

P

P

Residential care facilities

C

C

Manufactured home parks subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.040

C

P

Rooming houses

X

X

Commercial

 

 

Commercial daycare facilities

C

C

Home occupation as defined in Section 16.12.030, per the provisions of Section 16.69.020

P

P

Special event centers for hosting functions such as weddings, anniversary celebrations, corporate parties and similar events

C

C

Neighborhood Commercial Uses

 

 

Coffee shops, cafés, sandwich shops and delicatessens, restaurants (no drive-through service allowed)

X

P2, 3

Florists

X

P2, 3

Grocery, food, specialty foods, and produce stores

X

P2, 3

Laundromats and dry cleaners

X

P2, 3

Personal services (e.g., barbershops, hair salons, spas)

X

P2, 3

Yogurt and ice cream stores

X

P2, 3

Video rental stores

X

P2, 3

Retail and service commercial uses similar to those above but not listed elsewhere in this section upon administrative determination through the design review process

X

P2, 3

Institutional/Utilities

 

 

Church, synagogue, temple or other place of worship

C

C

Public or private school(s)

C

C

Utility facilities (telecommunication, pump stations, substations)

C

C

Other

 

 

Public or private open spaces, parks and playgrounds, tennis courts, and similar outdoor recreational activity areas and recreational buildings, facilities and grounds, which include fully or partially enclosed structures for the primary or secondary use

P

P

Large scale recreational facilities such as golf courses, aquatic centers, aquariums, amusement parks and similar uses

C

C

Wireless communications facilities not to include antenna support structures, subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.020 of this title

P/C

P/C

Helipad

X

X

Construction of new streets and roads including the extensions of existing streets and roads, that are included with the adopted transportation system plan

P

P

Any accessory structure, which is, customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, located on the same lot

P

P

Uses similar to those upon administrative determination by the Planning Official

P/C

P/C

NOTES:

1 Location: Duplexes and triplexes must be located on a corner lot or adjacent to the intersection of two streets.

2 Neighborhood commercial uses subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.080.

3 Neighborhood commercial uses are permitted within the Happy Valley Town Center Plan Area.

 

C.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.22.040-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the R-5, MUR-S Districts.

 

Table 16.22.040-2 Development Standards for R-5 and MUR-S

 

 

Standard

R-5

MUR-S

Residential density (maximum)1

 

 

Single-family dwelling (attached or detached)

1 unit/5,000 sf

1 unit/5,000 sf

Duplex2

1 duplex/7,000 sf

1 duplex/6,000 sf

Triplex2

1 triplex/10,000 sf

1 triplex/9,000 sf

Residential density (minimum)1

None

6 du/net acre

Lot width (minimum)

40 feet

Variable4

Lot depth (minimum)

60 feet

Variable4

Street frontage (minimum)

 

 

Single-family (attached or detached)

 

 

Lots fronting on cul-de-sac

35 feet

Variable4

All other lots

40 feet

Variable4

Duplex

 

 

Lots fronting on cul-de-sac

80 feet

Variable4

All other lots

80 feet

Variable4

Triplex

 

 

Lots fronting on cul-de-sac

100 feet

Variable4

All other lots

100 feet

Variable4

Lot coverage (maximum)

 

 

Single-family (attached or detached)

50%

Variable4, 5

Duplex or triplex

60%

Variable4, 5

Building setbacks (minimum)

 

 

Front (street access garage)

20 feet

20 feet

Front (alley access garage)

10 feet

10 feet4

Rear

20 feet

20 feet4

Interior side

5/0 feet3

5/0 feet3, 4

Street side (corner lot)

8 feet

8 feet4

Garage and carport entrances

 

 

Entrances not facing an alley

20 feet

20 feet4

Entrances facing an alley

6 feet

6 feet4

Building height (maximum)

45 feet6

65 feet6

Shared outdoor recreation areas

400 sq. ft./unit provided in accordance with Section 16.42.080

 

 

NOTES:

1  Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F).

2 Location: Duplexes and triplexes must be located on a corner lot or adjacent to the intersection of two streets.

3 Side yard setbacks for attached single-family residential may be reduced to zero in compliance with applicable sections of the adopted Uniform Building Code.

4 Standards may be proposed for amendment by Master Plan, PUD or Design Review land use applications.

5 Pursuant to Section 16.42.030, twenty (20) percent of the net developable area must be usable open space.

6 The single-family residential building height maximum is forty-five (45) feet at the front elevation; side and rear elevations may not exceed forty-nine (49) feet.

 

(Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.22.050 High density residential—Attached.
A.  Purpose.

1.   Single-Family Attached Residential (SFA). This district is intended to promote the livability, stability and improvement of Happy Valley’s new neighborhoods and to provide opportunities for a variety of medium density residential housing types with a density range of ten (10) to fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre, as well as certain neighborhood commercial uses. The district is intended to:

a.     Make efficient use of land and public services, and implement the Comprehensive Plan, by providing minimum and maximum density standards for housing.

b.     Accommodate a range of housing needs, including owner-occupied and rental housing.

c.     Provide for compatible building and site design at an appropriate neighborhood scale.

d.     Reduce reliance on the automobile for neighborhood travel and provide options for walking and bicycling.

e.     Provide direct and convenient access to schools, parks and neighborhood services.

2.   Mixed Use Residential—Attached (MUR-A). Mixed use residential will promote compact form, and residential and commercial or residential and office mixed vertically, in addition to across the district. Minimum densities are provided to comply with the Urban Growth Management Functional Plan, Title 1 requirements. MUR-A has a maximum density of fifteen (15) units per net acre and a minimum density of ten (10) units per net acre.

3.   Village Townhouse District (VTH). This district is based on the Village Townhouse District in the Clackamas County Zoning and Development Ordinance. It was adopted by the City of Happy Valley to provide consistent land use regulations for areas recently annexed to the City.

a.     A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) shall be submitted with each development application pursuant to the City’s Traffic Impact Study Guidelines. The TIA shall address, but is not limited to, the following traffic management mechanisms: physical site controls on existing traffic, p.m. peak hour existing traffic limitations, traffic monitoring, restrictions on the number of parking spaces, transportation/transit information center; flextime, staggered working hours, car and van pool spaces, and similar ride share programs.

b.     The procedures and application requirements under Chapter 16.63 (Design Review) and Article 16.4 (Community Design Standards) shall apply to all development in the Village Townhouse District. If language within these sections conflicts with specific requirements and standards of the village townhouse district, the standards within the village townhouse district shall prevail.

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.22.050-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the SFA, MUR-A and VTH Districts.

 

Table 16.22.050-1 High Density Attached Residential (SFA, MUR-A, VTH) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

SFA

MUR-A

VTH

Residential

 

 

 

Single-family detached dwellings (existing)

P

P

P1

Single-family detached dwellings (new)

X

X8

X

Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses, rowhouses)

P

P

P

Two-family dwelling (duplex)

P

P

P

Three-family dwelling (triplex)

P

P

P

Multifamily dwellings containing four or more dwelling units or condominiums

X

X

X

Senior housing, congregate housing or nursing homes

X

P

X

Rooming houses

X

X

X

Accessory dwelling units (per Section 16.44.050)

P

P

P2

Home occupation (per Section 16.69.020)

P

P

P3

Bed and breakfast residencies

C

C

C

Rental information offices

P

P

P3

Neighborhood Commercial Uses

 

 

 

Coffee shops, cafés, sandwich shops and delicatessens, restaurants (no drive through service allowed)

P4, 7

P4, 7

X

Florists

P4, 7

P4, 7

X

Grocery, food, specialty foods, and produce stores

P4, 7

P4, 7

X

Laundromats and dry cleaners

P4, 7

P4, 7

X

Personal services (e.g., barbershops, hair salons, spas)

P4, 7

P4, 7

X

Yogurt and ice cream stores

P4, 7

P4, 7

X

Video rental stores

P4, 7

P4, 7

X

Retail and service commercial uses similar to those above but not listed elsewhere in this section upon administrative determination through the design review process

P4, 7

P4, 7

X

Commercial—Offices

 

 

 

Professional and administrative offices

C4

C4

X

Medical and dental office, clinics and laboratories

C4

C4

X

Institutional/Utilities

 

 

 

Churches, synagogues, temples or places of worship

C

C

C5

Private and public schools

C

C

C

Commercial daycare facilities

C

C

C

Utility facilities (telecommunication, pump stations, substations, utility carrier cabinets)

C

C

C

Other

 

 

 

Public or private open spaces, parks and playgrounds, tennis courts and similar outdoor recreational activity areas and recreational buildings, facilities and grounds, which include fully or partially enclosed structures for the primary or secondary use

P

P

P6

New streets and roads, including the extensions of existing streets and roads, that are included with the adopted transportation system plan

P

P

P

Wireless telecommunication facilities

P/C

P/C

P

Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to a primary use

P

P

P3

Temporary storage of recyclables/reuseables: The temporary storage within an enclosed structure of source-separated recyclable/reusable materials generated and/or used on-site prior to on-site reuse or removal by the generator or licensed or franchised collector to a user or broker

P

P

P3

Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work subject to the provisions of Section 16.69.010—Such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work

P

P

P3

Bus shelters, bicycle facilities, street furniture, drinking fountains, kiosks, art works and other pedestrian and transit amenities

P

P

P3

Helipad

X

X

X

Uses similar to those upon administrative determination by the Planning Official

P/C

P/C

P/C

NOTES:

1 Preexisting single-family dwellings and residential homes may be altered or expanded.

2 Permitted as an accessory use and subject to the provisions of Section 16.22.050(D)(3).

3 Permitted only as an accessory use.

4 Neighborhood commercial use subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.080.

5 Alteration or expansion of a religious facility which was lawfully established prior to July 1, 1993. The use shall not extend beyond the property which was under the ownership of, or occupied by, the preexisting religious facility and associated facilities prior to July 1, 1993.

6 Public parks, playgrounds, recreational and community buildings and grounds, tennis courts, and similar recreational uses, all of a noncommercial nature, are permitted; provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any other lot in a residential district.

7 Neighborhood commercial uses are permitted within the Happy Valley Town Center Plan Area.

8 Single-family detached units with a maximum floor area of two thousand (2,000) square feet are permitted in the MUR-A zone within the Happy Valley Town Center Plan Area.

 

C.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.22.050-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the SFA, MUR-A and VTH Districts.

 

Table 16.22.050-2 Development Standards for SFA, MUR-A and VTH Districts

 

 

Standard

SFA

MUR-A

VTH

Residential density (maximum)1

15 du/net acre2

15 du/net acre2

2,000 sf/primary unit9

Residential density (minimum)1

10 du/net acre2

10 du/net acre

3,000 sf/primary unit9

Lot size (minimum)

2,000 sf

3,000 sf9

2,000 sf

Lot width (minimum)

None

None

None

Lot depth (minimum)

None

None

None

Lot coverage (maximum)

75%12

75%12

65%

Lot landscaping (minimum)

15%7

15%7

25%

Setbacks (minimum):

 

 

 

Front

10 feet3

10 feet3

10 feet10, 11

Rear

15 feet3, 4

15 feet3, 4

15 feet10, 11

Interior side

5 feet3, 4, 5

5 feet3, 4, 5

5 feet5, 10

Street side

8 feet3

8 feet3

5 feet10, 11

Garage and carport entrances

 

 

 

Entrances not facing an alley

20 feet

20 feet

20 feet10

Entrances facing an alley

20 feet to base floor (foundation only, not including posts or other support mechanisms)

 

6 feet to upper floors (wall face)

20 feet to base floor (foundation only, not including posts or other support mechanisms)

 

6 feet to upper floors (wall face)

 

Between groupings of residential buildings on the same lot

10 feet

10 feet

10 feet

Setback (maximum from street right-of-way or designated accessway)

None

None

18 feet

Building height (maximum)

45 feet8

65 feet8

35 feet

Shared outdoor recreation areas

400 sq. ft./unit provided in accordance with Section 16.42.080

NOTES:

1 Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F).

2 Residential care homes/facilities and accessory dwellings are exempt from the density standards.

3 The minimum front, rear, side and street side building setbacks for public and institutional uses in the SFA district is twenty (20) feet.

4 Where the SFA district abuts lower density residential districts, the abutting yards shall have a ten (10)-foot landscaped buffer area.

5 Side yard building setbacks for attached single-family may be reduced to zero in compliance with applicable sections of the adopted Uniform Building Code.

7 Pursuant to Section 16.42.030, twenty (20) percent of the gross developable area of the greater development project must be usable open space—the fifteen (15) percent landscaping standard is applicable to individual lots.

8 Maximum building height for single-family detached/attached is forty-five (45) feet at the front elevation; side and rear elevations may not exceed forty-nine (49) feet in height.

9 Each lot for an attached single-family dwelling shall have a minimum size of two thousand (2,000) square feet and a maximum size of three thousand (3,000) square feet, or each lot shall have a minimum size of two thousand (2,000) square feet and the average size of all lots shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Lots created for congregate care facilities, two- and three-family dwellings, or multifamily dwellings are not subject to minimum, maximum, or average lot size standards. However, the density provisions of Section 1012 are applicable. A new lot created for a preexisting single-family dwelling shall have a minimum lot size of three thousand (3,000) square feet, and a maximum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet. A lot created for a preexisting dwelling shall not be included in the gross site area used to determine the maximum density for the remaining lot.

10 Preexisting dwellings and their accessory structures shall comply with the Clackamas County VR-4/5 setback standards.

11 On a corner lot, one of the required front yard building setbacks may be reduced to eight feet when abutting a local or connector street. Awnings, porches, bays, and overhangs may extend up to four feet into this setback.

12 Lot coverage maximum for existing, or where allowed, proposed single-family detached units is fifty (50) percent.

 

D.  Special Standards for Certain Uses.

1.   Special Standards for Public and Institutional Uses.

a.     Minimum Setbacks.

i.      Front. Twenty (20) feet.

ii.     Rear. Twenty (20) feet.

iii.    Side. Twenty (20) feet.

iv.    Street Side. Twenty (20) feet.

2.   Attached Single-Family Dwellings in the VTH District.

a.     Configuration and Façades.

i.      Attached single-family dwellings shall orient to and line streets with a series of attached “rowhouse” units.

ii.     Front façades shall be designed with balconies and/or bays. Façades facing a street right-of-way or designated accessway shall not consist of a blank wall.

iii     Window trim shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb, head, and sill.

b.     Entries and Porches.

i.      Primary entries shall be accessed directly from a street right-of-way and must be visible from the street.

ii.     Porches are required for each unit and must be located immediately adjacent to the primary entry. Porches must cover a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the primary façade (not including the garage) with a minimum net depth of six feet.

c.     Roofs. Hipped, gambrel, or gabled roofs are required. Flat roofs are prohibited.

3.   Accessory Structures in the VTH District. The following standards apply to accessory structures:

a.     A maximum of two accessory structures, including one accessory dwelling unit, may be permitted on a lot.

b.     An accessory structure and its projections shall be detached and separated from other structures by a minimum of three feet.

c.     Only one accessory structure per lot may exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area.

d.     Accessory structures greater than one hundred (100) square feet in area shall comply with the following requirements:

i.      The accessory structure shall be constructed with similar exterior building materials as that of the primary dwelling.

ii.     The square footage of the ground floor of the accessory structure shall not exceed either five hundred (500) square feet or the square footage of the ground floor of the primary dwelling, whichever is less. An accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size.

iii.    The detached accessory structure shall have a maximum building height of twenty-five (25) feet or the building height of the primary dwelling, whichever is less.

e.     The front yard setback shall be no less than the front façade of the primary dwelling unit (not including porches, bays, garages, and architectural features). Garages shall comply with the front yard setback standards of Clackamas County ZDO Subsection 1604.06(F).

f.      No side or rear yard setback shall be required for any detached accessory structure that is one hundred (100) square feet or less in area and does not exceed a height of feet.

g.     For structures that exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area or eight feet in height, rear and side yard setbacks shall be as follows, except where a rear or side lot line is adjacent to a street, pedestrian path, sidewalk, or accessway, in which case a minimum setback of five feet is required:

i.      For structures greater than eight feet and up to twenty (20) feet in height, the minimum side yard setbacks shall be zero on one side and three feet on the other side. The minimum rear yard setback where the rear property line abuts an alley shall be six feet. The minimum rear yard setback where the rear property line does not abut an alley shall be three feet.

ii.     For structures greater than twenty (20) feet in height, the minimum side yard setbacks shall be zero on one side and five feet on the other side. The minimum rear yard setback where the rear property line abuts an alley shall be six feet, except that a second-level accessory dwelling unit may cantilever up to four feet. The minimum rear yard setback where the rear property line does not abut an alley shall be five feet.

4.   Garages in the VTH District.

a.     A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be located in a garage and no required parking or loading space shall be used for storing a recreational vehicle, camper, or boat.

b.     A detached garage may be placed at the rear of a lot.

c.     A front-access garage attached to the dwelling structure shall be recessed a minimum of two feet behind the front façade (not including porches, bays, and architectural features) and a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way.

d.     A minimum two-foot deep trellis or bay window shall be placed above the garage opening. The trellis shall extend the full width of the garage, and the bay window shall be a minimum of eight feet in width.

e.     If located in the front, the garage opening and the driveway shall not exceed a width of ten (10) feet.

f.      If an alley adjoins a lot, then garage access from the street is prohibited.

5.   Fences and Sight-Obscuring Plantings in the VTH District.

a.     Fences and sight-obscuring plantings shall comply with intersection sight distance requirements.

b.     The maximum height of a fence or sight-obscuring planting shall be six feet along the side and rear yards behind the front building line, and four feet forward of the front building line.

6.   Manufactured Dwelling Parks in the VTH District.

a.     Existing manufactured dwelling parks shall not be redeveloped with a different use until a plan for relocation of the existing tenants is submitted and approved by the Planning Official or designee.

7.   Variances. The requirements of this section may be modified pursuant to Chapter 16.71.

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.22.060 Mixed use residential—Multifamily (MUR-M and MUR-X).
A.  Purpose.

1.   Mixed use residential will promote compact form, and residential and commercial or residential and office mixed vertically, in addition to across the district. The multifamily sub-area provides for a range of densities, each of which should be shown on the master plan map. The multifamily sub-areas allow for retail uses that are meant to provide services to local residents, not attract outside traffic. The density requirements and minimum/maximum lot sizes are meant as a guide, and will vary based on the amount of unbuildable lands removed from gross acres. The density is calculated by averaging density for the residential district area identified in the master plan. Therefore, some lots may be smaller than the lot sizes given below. Minimum densities are provided to comply with the Urban Growth Management Functional Plan, Title 1 requirements.

2.   MUR-X Mixed Use Buildings with Residential Emphasis. Residential and retail combinations with the primary use of the building being residential. Permitted commercial uses shown on Table 16.22.060-1.

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.22.060-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the MUR-M and MUR-X Districts.

 

Table 16.22.060-1 Mixed Use Residential—Multifamily (MUR-M and MUR-X) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

MUR-M Multifamily

MUR-X Mixed Buildings

Residential

 

 

Single-family detached dwellings

X

X

Attached dwellings, (townhouses, attached duplex, rowhouses)

P

P

Multifamily dwellings

 

 

Low

P

P

Medium

P

P

High

P

P

Senior housing

P

P

Skilled nursing facility

C

C

Congregate housing

C

C

Rooming houses

X

X

Accessory dwelling units (per Section 16.44.050)

X

X

Home occupation (per Section 16.69.020)

P

P

Neighborhood Commercial Uses

 

 

Coffee shops, cafés, sandwich shops and delicatessens, restaurants (no drive-through service allowed)

P1

 

Florists

P1

 

Grocery, food, specialty foods, and produce stores

P1

 

Laundromats and dry cleaners

P1

 

Personal services (e.g., barbershops, hair salons, spas)

P1

 

Yogurt and ice cream stores

P1

 

Video rental stores

P1

 

Retail and service commercial uses similar to those above but not listed elsewhere in this section upon administrative determination through the design review process

P1

 

Commercial—Retail Uses

 

 

Art and craft supply stores, studios

 

P

Bakeries

 

P

Banks, savings and loan associations, loan companies, ATM (not drive-in or drive-through)

 

P

Bicycle sales, supplies, repair service

 

P

Book stores

 

C

Coffee shops, cafés, sandwich shops and delicatessens (no drive-through service allowed)

 

P

Drug stores

 

P

Dry cleaners and tailors

 

P

Florists

 

P

Gift stores

 

P

Grocery, food, specialty foods, and produce stores

 

P

Hotels

 

P

Indoor health and recreation facilities, such as racquetball court, gymnasiums, health and exercise spas, swimming pools, and similar uses and associated facilities

 

C

Interior decorating shops, sales and service

 

P

Laundromats

 

P

Marijuana retailing

X

X

Music shops, sales and service

 

P

Optometry and optical goods, sales and service

 

P

Personal services (e.g., barbershops, hair salons, spas)

 

P

Photo finishing, photography studios

 

P

Post offices

 

P

Rental stores, without outdoor storage

 

P

Restaurants, full service

 

C

Shoe sales and repair stores

 

P

Sporting goods, sales and service

 

P

Stationery stores

 

P

Taverns, bars and cocktail lounges (1,500 feet from school uses, public parks and churches)

 

C

Yogurt and ice cream stores

 

P

Video rental stores

 

C

Retail and service commercial uses similar to those above but not listed elsewhere in this section upon administrative determination through the design review process

 

P2

Commercial—Offices

 

 

Professional and administrative offices

C1

P

Medical office buildings

C1

P

Institutional

 

 

Churches, synagogues, temples or places of worship

C

C

Public park, usable open space

C

C

Private and public schools (includes day care)

C

C

Other

 

 

Utility facilities (telecommunication, pump stations, substations)

C

C

Helipad

X

X

Marijuana processing, production and wholesaling

X

X

New streets and roads, including the extensions of existing streets and roads, that are included with the adopted transportation system plan

P

P

NOTES:

1 Neighborhood commercial use subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.080.

2 Where scale and trip generation are compatible with residential development.

 

C.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.22.060-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the MUR-M and MUR-X Districts.

 

Table 16.22.060-2 Development Standards for MUR-M1, MUR-M2 and MUR-M3 Districts

 

 

Standard

MUR-M1

MUR-M2

MUR-M3

Residential density (maximum)1

24 du/net acre

34 du/net acre

50 du/net acre

Residential density (minimum)1

15 du/net acre

25 du/net acre

35 du/net acre

Lot size (minimum)

Variable2

Variable2

Variable2

Lot width (minimum)

Variable2

Variable2

Variable2

Lot depth (minimum)

Variable2

Variable2

Variable2

Lot coverage (maximum)

Variable2, 3

Variable2, 3

Variable2, 3

Landscaping (minimum)

Variable3

Variable3

Variable3

Building setbacks (minimum)

Variable2

Variable2

Variable2

Building height (maximum)

65 feet4

65 feet4

65 feet4

NOTES:

1 Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F).

2 Standards are flexible and shall be determined through the master plan process or design review application.

3 Pursuant to Section 16.42.030, twenty (20) percent of the net developable area must be usable open space.

4 Building height is measured pursuant to Chapter 16.12 Definitions. Maximum building height for single-family (attached) is forty-five (45) feet at the front elevation; the building height may not exceed forty-nine (49) feet at the side and rear elevations.

(Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.23 COMMERCIAL AND EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
16.23.010 Mixed Use Commercial and Employment Districts.
A.  Purpose.

1.   Mixed Use Commercial (MUC). Mixed use commercial will provide for convenience commercial needs of residential neighborhoods and office workers in locations adjacent to and mixed in with residential and office areas. The location of services and offices near residential units and major transportation networks should promote use of alternative modes of transportation such as bus ridership, bicycle and pedestrian activity. Retail uses should be primarily located on the ground floor to encourage an interesting and active streetscape. Buildings should be oriented toward the street or accessway with clearly marked entrances. Blank frontage walls at street level are discouraged. Development boundaries and patterns are not defined by type of use (i.e., retail and office); instead the district allows a variety of permitted uses to occur throughout the commercial district. The commercial uses are meant to provide a concentration of commercial and office uses to create an active area.

2.   Mixed Use Employment (MUE). The mixed use employment district will provide for development of office, employment and low density multifamily residential uses. The MUE neighborhood commercial subdistrict provides for neighborhood scale retail needs.

3.   Regional Center Mixed Use (RCMU). The regional center mixed use district will provide for urban development within the boundaries of the Clackamas Regional Center. A wide range of uses is permitted within the district. The district is intended to create a quantifiable sustainable mixed use area with high employment and housing densities, structured parking, and significant amenities in an urban design that is accessible by a range of transportation modes. To ensure that the mix of uses and urban form are consistent with the objectives of the district, master plan approval is required prior to development. The RCMU District implements the planned mixed use policies of the Clackamas Regional Center Area Design Plan.

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.23.010-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the MUC, MUE and RCMU Districts.

 

Table 16.23.010-1 Mixed Use Districts (MUC, MUE, RCMU) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Use

MUC

MUE

RCMU1

Commercial—Retail Uses

 

 

 

Art and craft supply stores, studios

P

P

P

Bakeries

P

P

P

Banks, savings and loan associations, loan companies, ATMs

P

P

P

Barber shops, beauty salons

P

P

P

Bed and breakfast inns

P

P

P

Bicycle sales, supplies, repair service

P

P

P

Book stores

P

P

P

Camera stores

P

P

P

Coffee shops, cafés, sandwich shops and delicatessens

P

P

P

Drug stores

P

P

P

Dry cleaners and tailors

P

P

P

Florists

P

P

P

Hardware and garden supplies

P

P

P

Home furnishing stores

P

P

P

Gift stores

P

P

P

Grocery, food, specialty foods, and produce stores

P

P

P

Hotels

P

P

P

Indoor health and recreation facilities, such as racquetball court, gymnasiums, health and exercise spas, swimming pools, and similar uses and associated facilities

P

P

P

Exercise and tanning studios

P

P

P

Interior decorating shops, sales and service

P

P

P

Laundromats

P

P

P

Marijuana retailing

P6

P6

X

Music shops, sales and service

P

P

P

Mobile food units

P5

P5

P5

Optometry and optical goods, sales and service

P

P

P

Photo finishing, photography studios

P

P

P

Rental stores, without outdoor storage

P

P

P

Restaurants full service

P

P

P

Restaurants—Drive-through

P

C

P

Apparel and secondhand stores

P

P

P

Shoe sales and repair stores

P

P

P

Sporting goods, sales and service

P

P

P

Stationery stores

P

P

P

Taverns, bars and cocktail lounges (prohibited 1,500 feet from school uses)

C

C

C

Theaters or assembly halls

C

C

P

Yogurt and ice cream stores

P

P

P

Vehicular service/fueling stations

P

P

P

Veterinarian services and pet supplies

P

P

P

Retail and service commercial uses similar to those above but not listed elsewhere in this section upon administrative determination through the design review process

P

P

P

Commercial—Offices

 

 

 

Professional and administrative offices

P

P

P

Medical office buildings

P

P

P

Residential

 

 

 

Low density multifamily

P2, 3

P

P

Medium density multifamily

P2, 3

X

P

High density multifamily

P2, 3

X

P

Senior housing

P

P

P

Skilled nursing facility

P

P

P

Congregate housing

P

P

P

Home occupation (Section 16.69.020)

P

P

P

Industrial

 

 

 

Manufacturing and production

X

P

C

Industrial services

X

P

X

Flex-space

X

P

X

Marijuana processing, production and wholesaling

X

X

X

Wholesale sales

X

P

X

Institutional

 

 

 

Churches, synagogues, temples or places of worship

C

C

P

Public park, usable open space

C

C

P

Public and private schools (includes day care)

C

C

P

Commercial day care centers (adult and child care facilities)

P

P

P

Community service

P

P

P

Hospitals, including helipads4

P

C

P

Civic Uses

 

 

 

Libraries, post offices, community centers, etc.

P

P

P

Other

 

 

 

Construction of new streets and roads, including the extensions of existing streets and roads, that are included with the adopted transportation system plan

P

P

P

Self-storage facilities

P7

X

X

Wireless communication facilities

Per Section 16.44.020

Per Section 16.44.020

Per Section 16.44.020

 

 

NOTES:

1 Uses in the RCMU district are subject to additional standards in Section 16.23.010(D).

2 Residential uses on upper floors of mixed use buildings are permitted. In such cases, Note 3 below does not apply.

3 Freestanding residential uses at densities greater than the minimum SFA density of ten (10) du/acre and not to exceed the maximum MUR-M2 density of thirty-four (34) du/acre (ten (10) to thirty-four (34) du/acre) may be permitted in the MUC zone when nonresidential uses occupy the street side(s) of the parcel. The footprint of such freestanding residential uses (including associated parking and accessory uses) may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the MUC zoned area of the parcel or subject property.

4 Subject to applicable FAA rules and regulations.

5 Pursuant to Section 16.69.030.

6 Pursuant to Chapter 16.49.

7 Self-storage facilities shall be limited to a single vertical mixed-use building with office or commercial uses on the ground floor facing the higher classification roadway and where individual storage units are only accessed from within the building and are constructed within a single structure. Not more than one self-storage facility, limited to eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of gross floor area, shall be permitted within the MUC zone, and only on lots or parcels at the intersection of a major arterial facility and a local facility or higher classification.

 

C.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.23.010-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the MUC, MUE and RCMU Districts.

 

Table 16.23.010-2 Development Standards for MUC, MUE and RCMU Districts

 

 

Standard

MUC

MUE

RCMU

Residential density:1

 

 

 

Low density (maximum)

24 du/net acre

24 du/net acre

24 du/net acre

Low density (minimum)

15 du/net acre2

15 du/net acre2

15 du/net acre2

Medium density (maximum)

34 du/net acre

NA

34 du/net acre

Medium density (minimum)

25 du/net acre2

NA

25 du/net acre2

High density (maximum)

50 du/net acre

NA

50 du/net acre

High density (minimum)

35 du/net acre2

NA

35 du/net acre2

Lot size (minimum)

Variable3

Variable3

Variable3

Lot width (minimum)

Variable3

Variable3

Variable3

Lot depth (minimum)

Variable3

Variable3

Variable3

Floor area ratio

 

 

 

Nonresidential FAR (minimum)

0.25:14

0.25:14

0.25:14

Nonresidential FAR (maximum)

5:1

2:1

5:1

FAR for mixed use building with residential uses (minimum)

0.25:1

0.25:1

0.25:1

FAR for mixed use building with residential uses (maximum)

5:1

3:1

5:1

Landscaping (minimum)

Variable5

Variable5

Variable5

Building setbacks (minimum)

Variable3

Variable3

Variable3

Building height (maximum)

65 feet3

65 feet3

Variable3

NOTES:

1 Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F).

2 Minimum density of eighty (80) percent of each sub-area is required.

3 Building height is measured pursuant to Chapter 16.12, Definitions. Standards are flexible and shall be determined through the master plan process or a design review.

4 Must include a shadow plan to establish future development.

5 Pursuant to Section 16.42.030, fifteen (15) percent of the net developable area must be usable open space.

 

D.  Additional Standards for the RCMU District.

1.   Location. The RCMU District may only be located within the boundaries of the Clackamas Regional Center and may only be applied to land within the Eagle Landing Plan Area (areas designated RCMU and PMU6) as designated on Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan Map X-CRC-2.

2.   Master Plan Required.

a.     The RCMU District is a planned mixed use area and is subject to the master plan requirements of Chapter 16.65 except as modified by this section.

b.     A master plan shall be required for development of any land within the Eagle Landing Plan Area (areas designated RCMU and PMU 6) as designated on Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan Map X-CRC-2.

3.   Mix of Uses Required. A mix of uses is required. At a minimum, the following uses shall be accommodated within the Eagle Landing Plan Area:

a.     Five hundred eighty-four (584) dwelling units within the Eagle Landing Plan Area.

b.     Six hundred thousand (600,000) square feet of office or commercial development within the RCMU District.

4.   Phasing Plan. For multi-phased developments where the required mix of uses is proposed to be achieved in phases, a Development Phasing Plan shall be submitted as a part of a master plan application.

a.     The Development Phasing Plan shall demonstrate:

i.      How the required mix of uses will be provided through phasing, including the approximate locations, amount in square feet (a size range may be provided), and timing of each use.

ii.     How on-site circulation, parking, landscaping and other on-site improvements will function, after the completion of each phase and following complete build-out of the development site.

iii.    If a size range(s) for a use(s) is provided, the Development Phasing Plan shall demonstrate how both the minimum and maximum amounts enabled by the range meet the requirements of this section.

b.     The Development Phasing Plan shall also identify in what order and how proposed public utilities, public facilities and other improvements and amenities necessary to support the project will be constructed, dedicated or reserved.

5.   Development Standards. A master plan for development within the Eagle Landing Plan Area shall be designed to implement the policies and elements of the adopted Clackamas Regional Center Area Design Plan.

In addition, a master plan and subsequent development within the RCMU District shall be subject to the following standards:

a.     Buffering. When existing residential uses are located adjacent to a RCMU master plan site, such uses shall be buffered from an RCMU master plan site with landscaped buffers or by the location of streets, parks, plazas, greenways, or lower density residential uses in an RCMU master plan.

b.     Access and Circulation. Circulation on site must meet the minimum requirements shown on the Urban Design Elements map, and in addition:

i.      Internal Circulation. An internal circulation system shall include a network of public, private and internal streets. Private streets shall function like local streets, with curbs, sidewalks or raised walking surfaces on both sides, street trees, pedestrian scale lighting, and connections to state, county or public streets. This internal street network shall create developable sites defined by streets. In addition, the internal circulation system may include a range of secondary facilities, including service roads, driveways, drive aisles, and other similar facilities. The overall intent is to provide a pattern of access and circulation that provides a clear and logical network of primary streets that have pedestrian orientation and amenities. A secondary network of pedestrian ways and vehicular circulation will supplement this system.

ii.     Driveways. Internal driveways shall not be located between buildings and the streets to which building entrances are oriented.

iii.    On-Street Parking. Parking in the travel way may be provided on private or internal streets. This parking will not count as surface parking under the maximum parking ratio requirements of Section 16.43.030, but may be counted toward minimum parking requirements.

iv.    Off-Street Paths. The internal circulation system may provide for off-street bicycle paths, pedestrian paths, and greenway paths to link civic spaces, retail centers, and neighborhoods.

c.     Pedestrian-Oriented Areas. A master plan shall include pedestrian-oriented areas which do not front solely on arterial streets and parking fields. The purpose of this standard is to enhance the pedestrian experience and “village feel” of the centers. As part of a master plan review, applicants shall demonstrate compliance with this standard by using a combination of the following, or similar, concepts and guidelines:

i.      Provision of a “main street” and/or village center area that is framed by buildings oriented to both sides of the street or center.

ii.     On-street parking.

iii.    Storefront character, with entries oriented to the street, large display windows, and front façades broken into divided bays.

iv.    Public plazas and promenades.

v.     Strong corners, as described in Happy Valley Style Architectural Design Standards.

vi.    Residential uses on upper stories.

vii.   Public uses in prominent locations.

d.     Building Height. Permitted minimum and maximum building heights shall be established by an approved master plan for all subsequent development. Building heights should emphasize creating a compact urban form in a context-sensitive and sustainable manner.

e.     Building Orientation. New buildings shall have at least one public entrance oriented to a state, county, public, or private street. Buildings shall have first floor windows with views of internal activity or display cases, and the major entrance on the building façade facing the street the building is oriented to. Additional major entrances may also be allowed facing minor streets and parking areas.

f.      Structured Parking Adjacent to Pedestrian Facilities. Parking structures located within twenty (20) feet of pedestrian facilities including public or private streets, pedestrian ways, greenways, a transit station or shelter, or plaza, shall provide a quality pedestrian environment on the façade facing the pedestrian facility. Techniques to use include, but are not limited to:

i.      Provide retail, office or similar uses on the ground floor of the parking structure with windows and activity facing the pedestrian facility; or

ii.     Provide architectural features that enhance the first floor of the parking structure adjacent to the pedestrian facility, such as building articulation, awnings, canopies, building ornamentation, and art; or

iii.    Provide pedestrian amenities in the transition area between the parking structure and the pedestrian facility, including landscaping, trellises, trees, seating areas, kiosks, water features with a sitting area, plazas, outdoor eating areas, and drinking fountains;

iv.    The above listed techniques and features, and others of similar nature, must be used so that blank walls are not created.

g.     Parking and Loading. Parking and loading shall meet the requirements of Chapter 16.43 and the landscaping requirements of Chapter 16.42.

h.     Drive-Through Window Facilities. Drive-through window facilities are allowed subject to the standards in Section 16.44.090.

i.      Gateways. Provide for a gateway at a key intersection with special design and landscape treatment that are intended to provide a visual announcement that people are entering a special area.

j.      Public Facilities. The city may require the provision of, or participation in, the development of public facility improvements to implement the Clackamas Regional Area Plan. Such improvements include, but are not limited to, the following:

i.      Road dedications and improvements;

ii.     Traffic signals;

iii.    Transit facilities;

iv.    Sidewalks, crosswalks, bump-outs and other pedestrian improvements;

v.     Storm drainage facilities;

vi.    Sewer and water service lines and improvements;

vii.   Underground utilities;

viii.  Street lights;

ix.    Street trees, landscaping; and

x.     Open space, greenways, plazas and parks.

k.     Maintenance Mechanisms. The city may require the formation of a maintenance agreement or other suitable mechanism to assure that the following maintenance responsibilities are adequately addressed:

i.      To improve, operate, and maintain common facilities, including open space, landscaping, parking and service areas, streets, recreation areas, signing, and lighting.

ii.     To maintain landscaping, street furniture, storm drainage and similar streetscape improvements developed in the public right-of-way.

l.      Open Space. A master plan shall contain a minimum of ten (10) percent useable open space. Open space shall be integral to the master plan. Plans shall emphasize public gathering places such as plazas, neighborhood parks, trails, and other publicly accessible spaces that integrate land use and transportation and contribute toward a sense of place. Where public or common private open space is designated, the following standards apply:

i.      The open space area shall be shown on the final plan and recorded with the final plat or separate instrument; and

ii.     The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

(A)   By dedication to a public agency as publicly owned and maintained open space. Open space proposed for dedication must be acceptable to the planning official with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition;

(B)   By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, home association or other legal entity. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions (e.g., maintenance, property tax payment, etc.) suitable to the city.

m.    Other Applicable Provisions. With respect to the adjacent properties lying south of the proposed RCMU District and east of SE Stevens Road (“Adjacent Properties”), the provisions of the following Clackamas County land use decisions, including conditions of approval, which benefit the adjacent properties and apply or relate to buffering, required setbacks, drainage, and location of any bicycle and pedestrian path, shall remain in effect. The master plan and subsequent development within the RCMU District shall comply with those provisions.

i.      Comprehensive Plan and Zone Change, File Nos. Z0531-98-CP/Z0532-98-Z, dated December 23, 1998;

ii.     Modification of Conditions of Approval of Comprehensive Plan Amendment and Zone Change, Order No. 2203-29, File No. Z0802-02-CP, Z0803-02-Z, dated February 20, 2003;

iii.    Decision on Master Plan Review, File No. Z0227-03-AA (Eagle Landing), dated May 29, 2003;

iv.    Final Order for Eagle Landing Golf Clubhouse, Case No. Z0840-03-SL, dated February 25, 2004;

v.     Final Plat Approval for Eagle Landing PUD as evidenced by the Plat of Eagle Landing filed in Plat Book 126, Page 018, Document No. 2004 60414; and

vi.    Final Order on Remand Approving Mt. Scott Village (now known as Eagle Landing Phase II), File No. Z0563-99-SL, dated April 23, 2003.

n.     Design Review. New development in the district shall be subject to Chapter 16.62, Design Review (including Section 16.46.010 and Appendix B, Happy Valley Style).

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 533 § 1, 2017; Ord. 527 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 424 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.23.020 Village Commercial and Village Office Districts.
A.  Purpose.

1.   Village Commercial District (VC). This section provides for a mixture of retail/office, commercial and business park uses. These uses are located in areas where suitable services and facilities are currently provided or can be provided as development occurs. In addition, this district allows for pedestrian friendly development with good connections via the sidewalks, trails and street system from residential areas to parks, open spaces, commercial and office uses.

2.   Village Office District (VO). This section provides for a mixture of retail/office, commercial and business park uses. These uses are located in areas where suitable services and facilities are currently provided or can be provided as development occurs. In addition, this district allows for pedestrian friendly development with good connections via the sidewalks, trails and street system from residential areas to parks, open spaces, commercial and office uses.

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.23.020-1 identifies the land uses allowed in the VC and VO Districts.

 

Table 16.23.020-1 Village Office and Village Commercial (VO and VC) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

VO

VC

Residential

 

 

Pre-existing dwellings. Pre-existing dwellings may be allowed to remodel or expand and shall not be subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.72

P

P

Apartments or owner-occupied housing are permitted on upper stories. Up to two stories of apartments may be conditionally permitted as infill on surface parking lots, oriented toward the east-west street facing the Village Green. Any dwelling unit located on the second floor must have its own outside door; exterior staircases are not permitted

X

P

Commercial—Retail Uses

 

 

Antique and secondhand store

X

P

Art supply stores

X

P

Bakery

X

P

Bank teller, but not drive-in or drive-through service

P

P

Banks, credit unions, savings and loan, brokerage, and other financial institutions, including drive-thru facilities

C

C

Barber shop, beauty salon

X

P

Bars and cocktail lounge/tavern with OLCC IV or IV-A Minor posting where food service is included, if all activities and operations (except off-street parking and loading) are confined, contained, and conducted wholly within completely enclosed buildings and not located closer than one hundred (100) feet from a residential district or closer than five hundred (500) feet from a school

X

C

Bicycle sales, supplies, repair service

X

P

Book store

X

P

Camera store

X

P

Cafés and delicatessens which serve at least breakfast and/or lunch; catering services. No drive-through window service shall be allowed

P1

P

Clothing store

X

P

Coffee shop

P1

P

Confectionery stores

X

P

Drugstore

X

P

Dry cleaner, laundry, tailoring and alterations shop

X

P

Electrical/electronic equipment sales, service, repair

X

P

Fabric and dry goods stores

X

P

Florist

X

P

Gallery (art and craft)

X

P

General merchandise store

X

P

Gift store

X

P

Grocery and produce stores

X

P

Hardware and garden supplies store

X

P

Health club, gym

P

P

Helipad

X

X

Home furnishings; interior decorating sales, service

X

P

Indoor commercial amusements including bowling alleys with no more than twelve (12) lanes, billiard halls with no more than six tables, and game rooms which provide no more than twenty (20) mechanical or electric games of science and skill, or any combination thereof

X

C

Jewelry store

X

P

Laundromat

X

P

Locksmith

X

P

Marijuana retailing

X

X

Meat and fish markets

X

P

Mobile food units

X

P2

Novelty store

X

P

Optometry and optical goods, sales, service

X

P

Office supplies

X

P

Personal services

X

P

Pet store

X

P

Photo finishing, photography studios

X

P

Plumbing shops, retail sales, repairs, service

X

P

Post office

X

P

Printing and copying services, telecommuting center

P

P

Graphic arts, printing, blueprinting, photo processing or reproduction labs, publishing and bookbinding services

P

P

Business services such as duplicating, photocopying, mailing and stenographic services, fax and computer facilities, employment agencies, office management services, notary public, business and communications equipment and service, and real estate offices

P

P

Radio, TV, music stores, sales, service

X

P

Restaurant (III Minor Posting OLCC)

X

P

Schools-commercial, instruction studio

X

P

Service stations; banks with a drive-through window; car washes; or any other drive-through service, provided that they are located on the north end of the village commercial district adjacent to Sunnyside Road

X

C

Shoe and shoe repair stores

X

P

Small appliance sales, service, repair

X

P

Small theaters (seating capacity up to five hundred (500))

X

P

Soda fountain

X

P

Specialty food

X

P

Sporting goods

X

P

Supermarket

X

P

Stationery store

X

P

Tailor

X

P

Personal services: answering service, travel agent, etc.

P

P

Toy store

X

P

Upholstery shop

X

P

Variety store

X

P

Vehicle supply store

X

P

Veterinarian services and pet supplies

X

P

Video rental

X

P

Commercial—Offices

 

 

Business and professional offices, including legal, financial, architectural, engineering, governmental, manufacturer’s representatives, property management, corporate and administrative office

P

P

Professional office: doctors, dentists, chiropractors, service personnel, small clinics or community health care programs

P

P

Medical and dental services, clinics or community health care programs, counseling services, and associated pharmacies

P

P

Testing laboratories and facilities, provided no operation shall be conducted or equipment used which would create hazards and/or noxious or offensive conditions

P

X

Light manufacturing, assembly, artisan, research and development uses which have physical and operational requirements which are similar to other office uses allowed in this district

P

X

Meeting facilities, cafeterias, and recreation/exercise facilities provided for employees within the same structure with a primary use

P2

P

Institutional

 

 

Daycare facilities shall be permitted, provided they are integrated within office buildings and do not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or serve more than thirteen (13) children each

P1

P

Institutional uses; educational institutes and trade schools; art, music, or dance studios; radio and television studios, excluding transmission towers

C

C

Cultural/public use; galleries and museums; small-scale (seating capacity up to five hundred (500)) assembly or convention facilities and theaters for performing arts; exhibition halls; libraries; senior centers; and fraternal organizations

C

C

Skilled nursing facility and memory care facilities

P

P

Congregate housing

P

P

Other

 

 

Marijuana processing, production and wholesaling

X

X

Wireless telecommunication facilities: wireless telecommunication facilities are subject to the requirements of Chapter 16.44.020 (Wireless Communication Facilities).

P/C

P/C

Bus shelters, bike racks, street furniture, drinking fountains, and other pedestrian and transit amenities.

P2

P2

Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work

P2

P2

Utility carrier cabinets

P2

P

The temporary storage within an enclosed structure of source-separated recyclable/reusable materials generated and/or used on site prior to on-site reuse or removal by the generator or licensed or franchised collector to a user or broker

P2

P2

Building and landscape maintenance offices and enclosed storage areas for maintenance equipment

P2

P

Satellite dishes

P2

P2

Recyclable drop-off sites

P2

P2

Any accessory use or structure, not otherwise prohibited, that the planning official or designee finds to be customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use

P2

P2

Any use that the planning official or designee finds to be similar to one or more of those specified above

P/C

P/C

NOTE:

1 Permitted service commercial uses may be provided within an office development, up to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the development.

2 Pursuant to Section 16.69.030.

 

C.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.23.020-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the VC and VO Districts.

 

Table 16.23.020-2 Development Standards for VC and VO Districts

 

Standard

VC

VO

Residential density

 

 

(maximum)

None

NA

(minimum)

None

NA

Lot size (minimum)

None

None

Lot width (minimum)

None

None

Lot depth (minimum)

None

None

Lot coverage (maximum)

50%

50%

Landscaping (minimum)

15%

15%

Setbacks (minimum)

Variable1

Variable1

Building height (maximum)

45 feet

45 feet

NOTES:

1 Standards are flexible and shall be determined through the master plan process or a design review.

 

(Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.23.030 Commercial districts.
A.  Purpose.

1.   Community Commercial Center District (CCC). The Community Commercial Center (CCC) District is intended to provide locations or “nodes” for a relatively wide range of small businesses, services and mixed use adjacent to residential areas as a convenience to nearby residents. The CCC District is to be located and developed in a manner consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. In order to limit impacts to residential areas, new community commercial center nodes are intended to be limited in size to not more than five acres of contiguous land.

Building size is also limited to a thirty thousand (30,000) square foot footprint, and measured in accordance with requirements of Table 16.23.030-2 (Footnote 5). Appropriate locations for community commercial center nodes are at the intersection of two arterial streets (major and minor), an arterial street and a collector street, or two collector streets, and within the Happy Valley Town Center Plan Area.

2.   Mixed Commercial Center District (MCC). This zone is intended to establish locations for the development of mixed use commercial centers providing a broad range of shopping and service requirements to meet neighborhood and city-wide needs. The Mixed Commercial Center (MCC) District, as applied in the East Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan Area, corresponds to the Damascus/Boring Concept Plan’s designation of Neighborhood Centers. These mixed-use centers in the East Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan area accommodate retail services with a focus on meeting resident’s daily shopping needs. They are planned to be well served by transit and be integrated with mixed use and higher density housing, thus supporting less auto-dependent lifestyles. These centers are also appropriate locations for civic uses such as post offices and branch libraries. Their design is intended to be highly pedestrian-oriented.

New mixed commercial centers are limited to an area of up to fifteen (15) acres of contiguous land and shall be developed in a manner consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, except as described in Table 16.23.030-2 (Footnote 6), within the East Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan Area. Single-use retail buildings are limited to a maximum square footage of sixty thousand (60,000) square feet as specified in Table 16.23.030-2 (Footnote 6). Appropriate locations for mixed commercial centers are at the intersection of two arterial streets or an arterial and a major collector, preferably on streets served by transit.

All MCC developments involving twenty (20) acres or more of land shall be subject to master plan approval prior to development.

In the MCC District, buildings should be oriented towards the street or accessway with clearly marked entrances. Blank frontage walls at street level are discouraged. Development boundaries and patterns are not defined by type of use (for example, retail and office); instead the district allows a variety of permitted uses to occur throughout the commercial district. The commercial uses are meant to provide a concentration of commercial and office uses to create an active area.

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.23.030-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the CCC and MCC Districts.

 

Table 16.23.030-1 Community Commercial Center and Mixed Commercial Center (CCC, MCC) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

CCC

MCC

Residential

 

 

Pre-existing dwellings. Pre-existing dwellings may be allowed to remodel or expand and shall not be subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.72

P

P

Medium to high density residential

P1, 2

P1, 3

Senior housing

P

P

Skilled nursing facility

P

P

Congregate care

P

P

Home occupations (per Section 16.69.020)

P

P

Home occupations, subject to a conditional use review (per Section 16.69.020)

C

C

Commercial—Retail Uses

 

 

Art and craft supply stores, studios

P

P

Bakeries

P

P

Banks, savings and loan associations, loan companies, ATM (without drive-through)

P

P

Banks, savings and loan associations, loan companies, ATM (with drive-through) (per Section 16.44.090)

P/X4

P

Barber shops, beauty salons

P

P

Bicycle sales, supplies, repair service

P

P

Book stores

P

P

Camera stores

P

P

Coffee shops, cafés, sandwich shops and delicatessens

P4

P4

Drug stores

P4

P4

Dry cleaners and tailors

P4

P4

Florists

P

P

Home furnishing stores

P

P

Gift stores

P

P

Grocery, food, specialty foods, and produce stores

P4

P4

Hotels

C

P

Helipads

X

X

Indoor health and recreation facilities, such as racquetball courts, gymnasiums, health and exercise spas, swimming pools, and similar uses and associated facilities

C

P

Interior decorating shops, sales and service

P

P

Laundromats

P

P

Marijuana retailing

P6

P6

Music shops, sales and service

P

P

Mobile food units

P5

P5

Optometry and optical goods, sales and service

P

P

Photo finishing, photography studios

P

P

Rental stores, without outdoor storage

P

P

Restaurants—full-service (without drive-through)

P

P

Restaurants—drive-through (per Section 16.44.090)

P/X4

P

Secondhand stores

C

C

Shoe sales and repair stores

P

P

Sporting goods, sales and service

P

P

Stationery stores

P

P

Taverns, bars and cocktail lounges (a minimum distance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from school uses)

C

C

Theaters or assembly halls

C

C

Vehicular service/fueling stations

P

P

Yogurt and ice cream stores

P

P

Retail and service commercial uses similar to those above but not listed elsewhere in this section upon administrative determination by the Planning Official

P4

P4

Commercial—Offices

 

 

Professional and administrative offices

P

P

Medical office buildings, clinics and laboratories

P

P

Institutional

 

 

Churches, synagogues, temples or places of worship

C

C

Library, post office, community center, etc.

P

P

Public parks, usable open space

C

C

Public and private schools (includes commercial day care, dancing and music schools)

C

C

Other

 

 

Marijuana processing, production and wholesaling

X

X

Self-storage facilities

X

P7

NOTES:

1 Residential uses on upper floors of mixed use buildings are permitted. In such cases, Notes 2 and 3 below do not apply.

2 Freestanding residential uses at densities greater than the minimum SFA density of 10 du/acre and not to exceed the maximum MUR-M2 density of 34 du/acre (10—34 du/acre) may be permitted in the CCC zone when nonresidential uses occupy the street side(s) of the parcel. The footprint of such freestanding residential uses (including associated parking and accessory uses) may not exceed 25% of the CCC zoned area of the parcel or subject property.

3 Residential uses at MUR-M2 densities (25—34 du/acre) in conjunction with nonresidential uses are permitted by this code. The footprint of such freestanding residential uses (including associated parking and accessory uses) may not exceed 25% of the MCC zoned area of the parcel or subject property.

4 Drive-through facilities not permitted for these uses, and all other uses, within the CCC zoned areas of the Happy Valley Town Center Plan Area.

5 Pursuant to Section 16.69.030.

6 Pursuant to Chapter 16.49.

7 Self-storage facilities shall be limited to a single building where individual storage units are only accessed from within the building and are constructed within a single structure. Not more than one self-storage facility, limited to 60,000 square feet of building footprint, shall be permitted within the MCC zone, and only on lots or parcels within the Happy Valley Town Center area and abutting Rock Creek.

C.  Location Criteria.

1.   Appropriate locations for mixed commercial center development occurs within one-quarter mile from the following types of major intersections:

a.     Major or minor arterial streets;

b.     Major or minor arterial street and collector street.

2.   Appropriate locations for community commercial center nodes are at intersections of the following types of streets:

a.     Arterial street and arterial street (any combination of major and minor);

b.     Major or minor arterial street and collector street;

c.     Collector street and collector street.

D.  Development Standards.

1.   The development standards in Table 16.23.030-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the CCC and MCC Districts.

 

Table 16.23.030-2: Development Standards for CCC and MCC Districts

 

 

Standard

CCC

MCC

Residential density1 (minimum—maximum)

10 to 34 du/acre

25 to 34 du/acre

Lot size (minimum)

None

None

Lot width (minimum)

None

None

Lot depth (minimum)

None

None

Lot coverage (maximum)

75%

75%

Landscaping (minimum)

None

None

Building setback (minimum):

 

 

Front

0 ft.

0 ft.

Rear

None2

None2

Interior side

None3

10 ft.4

Street side

0 ft.

0 ft.

Building setback (maximum):

 

 

Front

None

20 ft.

Rear

None

None

Side

None

None

Building height (maximum)

35 ft.7

60 ft.7

Building size

30,000 s.f.5

60,000 s.f.6

NOTES:

1 Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F).

2 Except when a rear lot line is abutting a lot in a residential zone and then the rear setback shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. The required rear setback shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds twenty (20) feet.

3 Except when a side lot line is abutting a lot in a residential zone and then the side setback shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. The required side setback shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds twenty (20) feet.

4 Except when a side lot line is abutting a lot in a residential zone and then the side setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. The required side setback shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds twenty (20) feet.

5 Maximum building square footage for single use retail buildings is limited to thirty thousand (30,000) square-foot building footprint per structure. For the purposes of measuring maximum building footprint, measurement is taken from outside wall to outside wall of the ground level.

6 Maximum building square footage for single use retail buildings is limited to a sixty thousand (60,000) square-foot building footprint per structure. However, as illustrated within the East Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan Map, one MCC zoned center may exceed the fifteen (15) acre limit noted above but shall not exceed twenty (20) acres of contiguous property. In this center, the maximum building footprint size is limited to one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet per structure, provided the entire contiguous twenty (20) acre is master planned prior to new development. If the entire contiguous twenty (20) acre area is not master planned together, the maximum building footprint size shall remain sixty thousand (60,000) square feet. An area is not considered to be contiguous if it is separated from an adjacent MCC District by a public right-of-way. Further, as part of demonstrating compliance with master plan requirements, design review to the Happy Valley Style, and other code criteria, applicants shall demonstrate how:

a. The visual impact of larger scale development has been mitigated;

b. The streetscape is pedestrian-oriented and varied to create visual interest;

c. Public amenities are provided and scaled appropriately;

d. Transitions to adjacent areas and future development are provided;

e. Adequate infrastructure is provided; and

f. Overall design excellence aligns justifies the larger than normal scale of the project.

7 Building height is measured pursuant to Chapter 16.12, Definitions.

 

2.   Off-Street Parking and Loading (Vehicle and Bicycle). Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required in Chapters 16.41 and 16.43.

3.   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as required in Chapter 16.42.

4.   Pedestrian Access and Circulation. Adequate pedestrian access and circulation systems shall be provided as required in Chapter 16.41.

E.  Special Standards.

1.   Design Review. New development in the Mixed Commercial Center and Community Commercial Center Districts shall be subject to Chapter 16.62, Land Use and Design Review, and Chapter 16.46, Happy Valley Style Design Standards. Development in the Mixed Commercial Center District involving twenty (20) acres or more of land shall be subject to Chapter 16.65, Master Planned Developments.

2.   Pedestrian Oriented Areas. MCC zoned centers shall include pedestrian oriented areas which do not front solely on arterial streets and parking fields. The purpose of this standard is to enhance the pedestrian experience and “village feel” of the centers. As part design review and/or master plan review, applicants shall demonstrate compliance with this standard by using a combination of the following, or similar, concepts and guidelines:

 

a.     Provision of a “main street” and/or village center area that is framed by buildings oriented to both sides of the street or center;

b.     On-street parking;

c.     Storefront character, with entries oriented to the street, large display windows, and front façades broken into divided bays;

d.     Public plazas and promenades;

e.     Strong corners, as described in Happy Valley Style;

f.      Residential uses on upper stories;

g.     Public uses in prominent locations.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 534 § 1, 2017; Ord. 523 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.24 INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS
16.24.010 Institutional and Public Use (IPU) District.
A.  Purpose. The IPU District proposes to serve the need for the designation of areas for necessary institutional uses such as schools and churches, and public and semipublic uses such as parks, a local government center and other governmental and public service uses. This district may be located at any place throughout the City, based on a determination by the City that such areas are required. The Comprehensive Plan identifies the need for such uses throughout the City, with that need being fulfilled through this district.

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.24.010-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the IPU District.

 

Table 16.24.010-1 Institutional and Public Use (IPU) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

IPU

Commercial—Retail Uses

 

Commercial daycare facilities

C

Institutional

 

Cemeteries, mortuaries and funeral homes

C

Church, synagogue, temple or cathedral or other places of worship

P

Schools, public or private

P

Service district functions and operations, including but not limited to fire district facilities, water district facilities, radio and television station production facilities, sanitary sewer and stormwater management facilities and road building and maintenance facilities, not to include fuel or other liquid or non-solid combustible material storage

P

Parks, public or private, but not including commercial recreation facilities

P

Public buildings, functions or operations, including all military uses or activities

P

Public utility substations or other functions

P

Other

 

Broadcast towers or other antennae, not including wireless communication facilities1

C

Construction of new streets and roads, including the extensions of existing streets and roads, that are included with the adopted transportation system plan

P

Temporary use of a trailer, mobile home or other building for a use incidental to construction work, provided that:

C

The maximum time period is six months, with a maximum extension for another six months;

The trailer, mobile home or other building is connected to an approved sewage disposal system;

A building permit for a permanent structure has been issued;

 

The temporary home or building shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction; and

No reasonable alternative, such as the availability of nearby rental housing, exists.

Wireless communication facilities subject to Section 16.44.020

C

Any permitted use which will include the storage of fuel or any form of combustible materials which exists in a liquid or non-solid form

C

Helipad2

C

NOTES:

 

1 The base of towers or other antennae may not be closer to any residential property line or street right-of-way than a distance equal to the height of the tower.

2 Subject to applicable FAA rules and regulations.

 

 

C.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.24.010-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development in the IPU District.

 

Table 16.24.010-2 Development Standards for IPU District

 

 

Standard

IPU

Lot size (minimum)

None

Lot width (minimum)

None

Lot depth (minimum)

None

Street frontage (minimum)

50 ft.

Lot coverage (maximum)

None, provided that all setback and parking requirements are met

Landscaping (minimum)

None

Building setbacks (minimum):

 

Front

20 ft.

Rear

20 ft.

Interior side

10 ft.

Street side (corner lot)

15 ft.

Building height (maximum)1

50 ft.

NOTES:

1 Building height is measured pursuant to Chapter 16.12, Definitions.

(Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.25 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
16.25.005 Rock Creek Mixed Employment (RC-ME) District.
A.  Purpose. The Rock Creek Mixed Employment (RC-ME) District permits land uses with high job densities that provide stable, family-wage employment within the City. This district provides a mix of uses that are compatible with nearby residential, institutional and commercial uses and provides a buffer between residential and more formally “light industrial” areas to the east. Permitted uses in the Rock Creek Mixed Employment District include office, creative arts, small-scale manufacturing, research and development, and medical centers. Commercial uses are limited to those serving the primary uses of the district. A limited number of residential uses, including pre-existing dwelling units, are permitted by right.

B.  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the RC-ME District.

 

Table 16.25.005-1 Rock Creek Mixed Employment (RC-ME) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

RC-ME

Residential

 

Single-family dwellings, when pre-existing as of June 1, 2008

P1

Home occupations in pre-existing dwellings

P

Assisted living facilities, congregate housing, continuing care retirement community and skilled nursing facilities

C2

Commercial—Retail

 

Commercial day care

C

Indoor health and recreation facilities, such as racquetball court, gymnasiums, health and exercise spas, swimming pools, and similar uses and associated facilities

C

Marijuana retailing

X

Parking lot (when not an accessory use)

X

Restaurant—Full service

P3

Retail—Sales

P9

Retail—Personal services

P4

Commercial—Office

 

Professional and administrative offices

P

Medical office buildings

P

Industrial

 

Industrial services—Fully enclosed

P5

Manufacturing and production—Fully enclosed

P

Marijuana processing, production and wholesaling

X

Fabrication

P

Energy recovery systems

 

Research and development facilities

P

Laboratories

P

Repair, finishing, and testing

P

Assembly

P

Distribution center

P6

Warehouse

P6

Institutional

 

Basic utilities

P

Colleges

P7

Emergency services

P

Medical centers

P

Hospitals, including helipads10

P

Postal service facilities

P8

Public parks and open space—Pedestrian amenities

P

Public parks, usable open space

P

Public schools, parks, and open space—Parks and recreation facilities

C

Other

 

Agriculture—Animals/horticulture when pre-existing as of June 1, 2008

P

Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction, in accordance with the City’s Transportation System Plan)

P

Wireless telecommunication facilities. Wireless telecommunication facilities are subject to the requirements of Section 16.44.020 (Wireless communications facilities)

P/C

Any accessory use or structure, not otherwise prohibited, that the Planning Official or designee finds to be customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use

P

Any use that the Planning Official or designee finds to be similar to one or more of those specified above

P/C

NOTES:

1 Pre-existing dwellings are allowed to remodel or expand.

2 Assisted living and senior housing may include a range of housing type including single-family detached, single-family attached, assisted-living multifamily units, and congregate care facilities permitted on a single property to provide for a variety of dwelling units and continuous care for seniors of varying levels of health and independence.

3 Drive-through facilities are not permitted.

4 Maximum building size of twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet.

5 Outdoor storage or outdoor fleet storage not permitted.

6 Permitted as an accessory use—May not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total site area.

7 Use limited to public and nonprofit institutions providing technology, health sciences or creative arts education and job training. No dormitories permitted.

8 Fleet parking or mail processing centers not allowed. Permitted use limited to direct consumer services.

9 Retail sales uses may not exceed sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of gross lease area in a single building; or commercial retail uses with a total of more than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of retail sales area on a single lot or parcel; or, on contiguous lots or parcels, including those separated only by transportation right-of-way.

10 Subject to applicable FAA rules and regulations.

 

C.  Master Plan Required. Within the RC-ME District, uses will provide high densities of employment. This district encourages creative development patterns that achieve these densities in a well-planned, urban environment. Development on sites of ten (10) acres or larger shall require preparation of a master plan pursuant to subsection E of this section. On sites smaller than ten (10) acres, the preparation of a master plan shall be optional. However, if a master plan is not prepared, the development shall be subject to Chapter 16.62 (Land Use Review and Design Review). As part of the design review application, the applicant shall provide a traffic impact analysis (TIA) as required by the City Engineer. The traffic impact analysis shall be consistent with the requirements of OAR 660-012-0060(1)—(3) and the requirements of subsection (E)(4)(b)(ix) of this section. Development will not be approved prior to submission and review of this analysis.

D.  Development Standards.

1.   Compliance Required. All of the applicable development standards contained in the underlying zoning district, except where the applicant has obtained variances pursuant to Chapter 16.71 (Variances), or adjustments in accordance with the RC-ME Master Plan process as contained in subsection E.

2.   Development Standards. Development in the RC-ME District shall comply with all of the development standards in the table below and all other applicable standards in this title, except as modified through the RC-ME Master Plan provisions in subsection (E)(4)(b)(iv).

 

Table 16.25.005-2 Development Standards for RC-ME District

 

 

Standard

RC-ME

Minimum lot size

1 acre1

Minimum lot width

100 ft.

Minimum lot depth

100 ft.

Minimum/maximum floor area ratio (FAR)

Maximum of 2:0 unless increased through a Master Plan

Minimum setbacks

 

Front and side facing street on corner and through lots

50 feet when abutting a major arterial, highway or expressway, otherwise, setback equals zero feet

Side/rear yard

50 feet when abutting a residential zoning district, otherwise, setback equals zero feet

Maximum building height

Established through Master Plan except for a maximum height of 70 ft. within 100 ft. of an abutting residential district

Minimum landscape/open space

15% of net site area shall be landscaped. Up to 1/3 of the required landscaped area may be used for active or passive recreational use or pedestrian amenities. Examples include walking/running paths, play areas, plazas, picnic areas, water quality facilities, open recreational facilities and natural existing landscaping

NOTES:

1 Legal lots of record of less than one acre created prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be conforming for purposes of development.

 

E.  Master Plan Requirements Specific to the RC-ME District.

1.   Purpose. The purpose of the RC-ME Master Plan is to allow large-scale, multiphased developments to obtain approval of several projects at one time within the RC-ME District. The RC-ME Master Plan process allows the review authority to evaluate the cumulative impacts associated with the full build-out of the overall development, to ensure that the impacts of such development are mitigated to the extent practicable and to coordinate the provision of future infrastructure.

2.   Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all development on parcels ten (10) acres in size or larger within the RC-ME District and may be used voluntarily for parcels smaller than ten (10) acres.

3.   Components of RC-ME Master Plans and Detailed Phasing Plans.

a.     Concept Master Plan. A proposed plan for development of the site at full build-out of the concept plan that contains the approximate building envelopes by use within a conceptual framework including pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation, open space/natural resource and on-site utility plans. The concept plan also includes minimum and maximum development standards; architectural, landscaping and pedestrian design standards; building and landscaping materials lists; and other information that will illustrate planned development. The plan also shall include a phasing plan and proposed schedule of development. For each phase of development and at full build-out, the applicant shall identify the total square footage by type of use; development density; parking and traffic generation; on-site utility requirements; and required off-site capital improvements for roads and other public infrastructure. A detailed traffic impact analysis (TIA) detailing traffic volumes at each phase of development and at full build-out is required.

b.     Detailed Phasing Plans. At the time of development of each phase of development, the applicant shall present a detailed development plan including, but not limited to, the maximum size, location and use of specific buildings; size and location of parking facilities; building and parking structure elevations; location and design of on-site pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle circulation; design and location of open space and natural resource protection; and detailed utility plan. The applicant also shall confirm traffic impacts for the phase originally identified in the overall TIA required at the time of the concept plan approval. The proposed development shall substantially conform to the architectural and site design standards approved in the Concept Master Plan.

4.   RC-ME Concept Master Plan Submittal Requirements.

a.     Existing Conditions Plan.

i.      Legal description of all parcels on the proposed site within the applicant’s ownership or control.

ii.     Vicinity map that identifies abutting uses. For the purposes of these regulations, “abutting” means those properties sharing one or more property lines with the subject site.

iii.    Zoning map that identifies base and overlay zoning designations for the proposed site and abutting properties.

iv.    Site description for all property in the applicant’s ownership and/or control including the following information provided in narrative, tabular and/or graphic formats:

(A)   Topography and natural resources including 100-year flood plain; drainage patterns and courses; wetlands, rivers, springs and other water bodies; significant stands of trees and individual trees with a caliper greater than six inches as measured four feet above grade; significant fish and wildlife habitat, and natural hazards such as steep slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent and unstable, impermeable or weak soils. The application must include a site plan with no greater than two-foot contours for slopes of zero to ten (10) percent and no greater than five-foot contours for slopes greater than ten (10) percent;

(B)   Inventory of Goal 5 resources, including natural, cultural, historic and/or archeological resources on the site, if any;

(C)   Existing building inventory including use, location and size, noting whether any existing buildings will be retained and incorporated into the final build-out of the site;

(D)   Location and size of all public and private utilities on and immediately abutting the site including water, sanitary sewer, storm water retention/treatment facilities, and electrical, telephone and data transmission lines; and

(E)   Location of all public and private easements.

v.     Detailed description of the existing roadway system within and adjacent to the site including:

(A)   Street classification of all internal and adjacent streets;

(B)   Transit service availability;

(C)   Baseline traffic impact study within the vicinity of the site prepared by a licensed civil engineer to include information as required by the City’s Engineer.

vi.    Description and evaluation of capacity of existing infrastructure on and in the vicinity of the site.

b.     Concept Master Plan.

i.      A proposed plan for development of the site at full build-out at the conceptual level including:

(A)   Master plan boundary;

(B)   Approximate location and building envelopes by use;

(C)   Pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation plan;

(D)   Open space/natural resource plan;

(E)   On-site utility plan.

ii.     Phasing plan and tentative schedule that establishes the likely order in which the site will develop. Such a phasing plan is presented for purposes of estimating roadway and public utility capacity, with the understanding that phases may be developed out of order and that timing is approximate.

iii.    Calculations for each phase and at total build-out of the following:

(A)   Gross and net acreage, with the latter including deductions for public streets, natural resource corridors and other non-private development activities;

(B)   Maximum number of employees and anticipated number of patient and related visits on typical weekday;

(C)   Maximum development area, as expressed in gross square feet;

(D)   Maximum total floor-to-area (FAR) ratio;

(E)   Maximum building coverage, as expressed in percentage of total net site area;

(F)    Minimum open space, as expressed in percentage of total net site area;

(G)   Total number of employee and visitor parking spaces required.

iv.    Minimum and maximum development standards, including, but not limited to, and as appropriate:

(A)   Minimum and maximum lot size;

(B)   Minimum and maximum setbacks;

(C)   Maximum height, which may vary throughout the site;

(D)   Maximum FAR at full build-out;

(E)   Maximum building coverage at full build-out;

(F)    Minimum open space requirements at full build-out;

(G)   Minimum and maximum vehicular and bicycle parking ratios by use;

(H)   Minimum number of loading bays.

v.     Design standards including, but not limited to:

(A)   Architectural design standards, including design illustrations and building materials boards;

(B)   Landscaping, including design standards and standardized plant list. Native plant materials are preferred where practicable;

(C)   Pedestrian facilities, including development standards, materials and street furniture;

(D)   Bicycle parking facilities, including specifications;

(E)   Signage plan including prototypical examples, color palette and materials board.

vi.    Graphic illustrations of proposed development at full build-out including, but not limited to:

(A)   Density “block” and other three-dimensional concept studies;

(B)   Illustrative color “typical” street perspectives that portray the proposed architectural style and urban design elements to be used throughout the development, in recognition that these are still conceptual in nature.

vii.   Goal 5 resource protection plan, if needed.

viii.  Public utility capacity analyses/infrastructure plans for each phase and total build-out, as required by the City Engineer.

ix.    Traffic impact analysis (TIA) for each phase and total build-out, as required by the City Engineer. The traffic impact analysis shall be sufficient to demonstrate compliance with OAR 660-012-0060(1)—(3). Development of the site will not be approved without this analysis. The traffic impacts will be reviewed against, and any mitigation must be consistent with, the function, capacity and performance standards of affected transportation facilities. The following criteria apply only when compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule is deferred to the master plan stage, in which case the TIA shall identify whether the plan or proposed development significantly affects a transportation facility by:

(A)   Changing the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility;

(B)   Changing the standards implementing the street classification system;

(C)   Allowing types or levels of development that would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the level of service of a transportation facility;

(D)   Reducing the performance of a transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the City of Happy Valley Transportation System Plan; or

(E)   Reduce the performance of a transportation facility that is otherwise performing below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the City Transportation System Plan.

x.     A proposed Concept Master Plan or Detailed Phasing Plan that will significantly affect a transportation facility must ensure that the proposed uses or development are consistent with the identified function, capacity and performance standards of the transportation facility by:

(A)   Limiting the proposed uses or development to be consistent with the function, capacity, and performance standards of the transportation facility;

(B)   Altering densities or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes; or

(C)   Providing or improving transportation facilities sufficient to support the proposed uses or development.

5.   RC-ME Detailed Phasing Plan Submittal Requirements.

a.     Detailed Phasing Plan of Subsequent Phases. The following information shall be required for each Detailed Phasing Plan:

i.      Schedule for initiating and completing construction of phase.

ii.     Anticipated utilization at completion of the phase, including the total number of employees, daily visitors and other indicators of full utilization of the structure(s) within the phase.

iii.    Detailed description of all proposed development presented in narrative, tabular and/or graphic formats as follows:

(A)   Description of new buildings anticipated, including size, location, approximate footprint and use;

(B)   All other site improvements including new surface and structured parking facilities; bicycle parking facilities; on-site pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation; transit stops; pedestrian/transit amenities; and open space and landscaped areas;

(C)   The location of new and/or expanded existing public and private infrastructure including water, sanitary sewer, storm water retention/treatment facilities, and electrical, telephone and data transmission lines;

(D)   Landscaping plan;

(E)   Goal 5 resource protection plan, if required;

(F)    Sign plan;

(G)   Lighting plan;

(H)   Grading and erosion control plans.

iv.    Building elevations.

v.     Summary of development intensity at completion of the phase including average FAR and lot coverage for the development area and for the site as a whole.

vi.    Calculation of minimum vehicular and bicycle parking spaces based on parking ratios established in the Concept Master Plan.

vii.   Reconfirmation of traffic impacts associated with completion of the phase first described in the TIA prepared for the Concept Master Plan.

viii.  Neighborhood communication and coordination plan to ensure that the applicant implements an on-going process for communicating and problem resolution with neighbors.

ix.    Narrative that demonstrates how the Detailed Phasing Plan for the specific project or groups of projects within a phase are consistent with the phase as conceptually approved in the Concept Master Plan. If there is some aspect of the phase that does not comply, the applicant may request a Detailed Phasing Plan modification as described in subsection H.

6.   RC-ME Concept Master Plan and Detailed Phasing Plan Approval Process.

a.     Initial Approval. The initial application for a Concept Master Plan shall be reviewed as a Type III-PC quasi-judicial action at a public hearing before the Planning Commission and subsequently, with regard to architectural standards, by the Design Review Board, pursuant to the requirements of this section and using the approval criteria contained in subsection (E)(7). The application also may include a request for a use that is permitted conditionally in Table 16.25.005-1 subject to the requirements of Chapter 16.64 of this title. As part of the review process for the Concept Master Plan, the Design Review Board shall consider alternative design standards for institutional development in the Rock Creek Mixed Employment area in lieu of the “Happy Valley Style” design standards that govern the design of development elsewhere in the City.

b.     Detailed Phasing Plans. Prior to construction of one or more projects within a phase of development approved in the Concept Master Plan, the applicant shall submit a Detailed Development Plan that contains all of the information listed in the submittal requirements for review and approval by the Community Development Director or designee, using the approval criteria in subsection (E)(7). This review shall be undertaken in lieu of the City’s formal design review process.

c.     Concurrent Review. An applicant may submit applications for initial review of the Concept Master Plan and review of the first and subsequent Detailed Phasing Plan(s) to be reviewed concurrently. In this case, the Detailed Phasing Plan for one or more phases of development shall be reviewed at the public hearing before the Planning Commission and Design Review Board at which the Concept Master Plan is reviewed. The Detailed Phasing Plan shall require no further review, providing the phase is built out in a manner that is substantially consistent with that which was approved.

7.   RC-ME Concept Master Plan and Detailed Phasing Plan Approval Criteria.

a.     Concept Master Plan. An application for a Concept Master Plan must demonstrate compliance with the following criteria:

i.      Content. The Concept Master Plan must contain all of the components required in subsection (E)(4).

ii.     Compliance With all Applicable Standards. The proposed development and uses must comply with all applicable standards of this title, except where modifications are being approved as part of the Concept Master Plan.

iii.    Traffic System Capacity. There is either sufficient capacity in the transportation system to safely support the development proposed in all future phases, or there will be adequate capacity by the time each phase of development is completed, as demonstrated by a TIA that conforms with the requirements of subsection (E)(4)(b).

iv.    Availability of Public Services. There is either sufficient capacity for public services such as water supply, police and fire services, and sanitary waste and storm water disposal, to support adequately the development proposed in all future phases, or there will be adequate capacity available by the time each phase of development is completed.

v.     Protection of Designated Resources. Resources such as historic landmarks, significant trees and sensitive natural resources identified on the City’s Goal 5 inventories are protected and enhanced in compliance with the regulations in this and other titles of the Municipal Code.

vi.    Internal Design Compatibility With Adjacent Uses. The Concept Master Plan must contain building design, landscaping, parking and circulation elements that minimize conflict with adjacent uses to the greatest extent practicable.

vii.   Mitigation of Off-Site Impacts. All potential off-site impacts including litter, noise, shading and glare shall be identified and mitigated to the greatest extent practicable.

b.     Detailed Phasing Plans. To obtain an approval of one or more subsequent phases of development, the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all of the following criteria:

i.      Consistency. A Detailed Phasing Plan shall be substantially consistent with the phase as approved in the Concept Master Plan.

ii.     Content. A Detailed Phasing Plan shall contain all of the information required in the submittal requirements in subsection (E)(5).

iii.    Numerical Development Standards. A Detailed Phasing Plan shall adhere to all of the numerical development standards approved in the Concept Master Plan. However, as part of the review of a Detailed Phasing Plan, the applicant may introduce modifications necessary for a specific project or projects subject to the approval criteria without the requirement for a variance, if the proposed modification is equal to or less than a twenty (20) percent increase or decrease in the numerical standard. If the proposed modification involves a change in a numerical standard of greater than twenty (20) percent, the review of the Detailed Phasing Plan shall be accompanied by a concurrent variance request consistent with the requirements of Chapter 16.71 of this title.

iv.    Design and Nonnumerical Development Standards. A Detailed Phasing Plan shall adhere to all of the design and nonnumerical development standards approved in the Concept Master Plan. However, as part of the review of a Detailed Phasing Plan, the applicant may introduce any modifications necessary to a specific project or projects subject to the approval criteria and the provisions of subsection H.

8.   Conditions of Approval. In approving the Concept Master Plan and subsequent Detailed Phasing Plans, the appropriate Review Authority may impose any conditions it deems necessary to mitigate potentially adverse impacts on surrounding properties to the greatest extent practicable.

F.  Vesting.

1.   Applicability. A complete application for a Concept Master Plan shall be reviewed under this Chapter and the zoning, development and other land use ordinances in the Happy Valley Municipal Code, including any uncodified ordinances modifying the same, in effect on the date the Concept Master Plan is submitted. An approved Concept Master Plan may be implemented by means of Detailed Phasing Plans for subsequent phases under the zoning, development and land use ordinances applied by the City in its review of the Concept Master Plan, provided the phases are implemented in substantial compliance with the Concept Master Plan. An approved Concept Master Plan shall govern subsequent phases for the period described in subsection G.

2.   Vesting of Infrastructure Capacity. An approved Concept Master Plan may include a list of on-site and off-site transportation improvements and other public infrastructure needed to support each proposed phase of development. In the event that the applicant agrees to install public improvements or infrastructure in excess of the capacity needed for a particular Detailed Phasing Plan, and in conformance with an approved Concept Master Plan, the City, through a development agreement or the formation of a reimbursement district, or both, shall accommodate future uses and building square footages based on the extent of the overbuilt infrastructure and consistent with the approved Concept Master Plan.

3.   Loss of Vesting. A Detailed Phasing Plan for which modification is sought under subsection (H)(4) or (H)(5) is not subject to the laws in effect when the Concept Master Plan was submitted as described in subsection (F)(1). An application for a Detailed Phasing Plan that is subject to subsection (H)(4) or (H)(5) shall comply with the land use regulations in effect at the time the Phasing Plan is submitted. Post-approval modifications that require only a minor review pursuant to subsection (H)(3) do not result in the loss of the vesting described in subsection (F)(1).

G.  Term.

1.   General. The term of a Concept Master Plan shall not exceed fifteen (15) years. An extension may be granted in accordance with the criteria and procedures provided in subsection (G)(2).

2.   Extension. If all phases of development in the approved Concept Master Plan are not built within the approved term, the applicant may request an extension in writing to the Community Development Director. Two one-year extension requests may be approved subject to the following criteria:

a.     The applicant has pursued in good faith completing the build-out of the approved Concept Master Plan;

b.     There have been no changes to the comprehensive plan, development code or other applicable governing documents that are inconsistent with the approved Concept Master Plan;

c.     There are no other significant changed conditions that would render the extension of the Concept Master Plan contrary to the public health, safety or general welfare.

3.   An extension request shall be filed in writing with the Community Development Director at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the initial fifteen (15) year period or any subsequently approved extensions.

H.  Post-Approval Modification of a Detailed Phasing Plan.

1.   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to address instances in which the applicant may not be able to construct a phase of the development exactly as approved in an approved Detailed Phasing Plan. This subsection permits the applicant to seek post-Concept Master Plan approval changes using a review process that is determined by the magnitude of the proposed change or changes. As noted in subsection F, post-approval modifications that require a quasi-judicial review by either the Community Development Director or Planning Commission or Design Review Board, procedure result in a loss of vesting in the approval criteria for that specific phase of development.

2.   Modifications Allowed by Right. The following modifications are permitted by right and are allowed upon issuance of a building permit, if required:

a.     Interior improvements;

b.     Exterior improvements associated with existing buildings that do not involve an expansion of floor area, subject to all applicable base zone development and design standards, as modified in the approved Concept Master Plan, and relevant conditions of approval thereto;

c.     Installation of new or modification of existing mechanical or electrical equipment, subject to all applicable base zone development and design standards, as modified in the approved Concept Master Plan, and relevant conditions of approval thereto;

d.     Maintenance of existing facilities when a building permit is required.

3.   Minor Decision. The following modifications shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director or designee, pursuant to the City’s administrative decision-making procedure:

a.     Modification of the location of an approved building or building addition, providing the modification complies with the development and design standards, as approved in the Concept Master Plan and as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan, including all relevant conditions of approval thereto;

b.     Modification of use, design, or development standards including architecture, landscape architecture, pedestrian and bicycle facilities; signs and/or lighting elements approved in the approved Concept Master Plan as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval, including all relevant conditions of approval thereto;

c.     A new building of any size in any location that replaces a building approved but not constructed, providing there is: (i) no net increase in total building coverage, and (ii) compliance with the approved Concept Master Plan as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval, and all relevant conditions of approval thereto;

d.     New buildings or building additions up to ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet (gsf) not anticipated and, therefore, not contained in the approved Concept Master Plan as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval. Construction of such unanticipated buildings or building additions shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) gsf in any one year, and shall not exceed thirty thousand (30,000) gsf in any four years. As part of this review, the applicant shall provide information on the amount of floor area built to date for the year in which the application is submitted, and the amount of floor area built within the four-year period preceding the request;

e.     Adjusting the sequence of buildings within a phase of development provided that there is no net increase in traffic impacts.

4.   Quasi-Judicial Review by the Community Development Director. The following modifications shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director or designee, pursuant to the City’s quasi-judicial decision-making procedure:

a.     A change in the approved site boundary resulting in the exchange of properties where the total amount of land in the approved boundary remains the same or is decreased;

b.     A new building or building addition exceeding ten thousand (10,000) gsf but less than fifty thousand (50,000) gsf, not anticipated and, therefore, not contained in the approved Concept Master Plan as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval. For new buildings or building additions exceeding twenty-five thousand (25,000) gsf under this provision, the applicant shall provide traffic and parking analyses of the proposal as part of the application;

c.     An increase or decrease of up to ten (10) percent in the total number of parking spaces approved in the Concept Master Plan approval as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval. The applicant shall provide a parking analysis related to the proposal as part of the application.

5.   Quasi-Judicial Review by the Planning Commission or Design Review Board. The following modifications shall be reviewed in a public hearing before the Planning Commission or Design Review Board, pursuant to the City’s quasi-judicial decision-making procedure:

a.     Expansion of the master plan boundary beyond that contained in the approved Concept Master Plan as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval;

b.     New building or building additions of fifty thousand (50,000) gsf or more, not anticipated and, therefore, not contained in the initial Concept Master Plan approval as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval;

c.     Proposals that result in an increase of ten (10) percent or more of site-generated vehicular trips approved in the Concept Master Plan approval as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval;

d.     An increase or decrease greater than ten (10) percent in the total number of parking spaces approved in the Concept Master Plan approval as modified in the applicable Detailed Phasing Plan approval;

e.     A proposed use or development that was denied in the approved Concept Master Plan.

(Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 491 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 395 § 2, 2009; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.25.010 Industrial districts.
A.  Purpose.

1.   Employment Center (EC). The purpose of the Employment Center (EC) District is to provide for a mix of employment opportunities, located where they are accessible by a variety of transportation modes, including transit services and safe and convenient pedestrian connections. These areas provide sites suitable for business and office parks, campus and light industrial uses, professional and corporate offices, medical offices and clinics, tech/flex businesses, creative arts and services, technical/vocational schools and other related businesses. Building types range from large single user campuses, multiple tenant business parks to multistory mixed-use buildings. Quality design and a connected and walkable character of the surrounding environment will be provided. Housing is allowed when combined in vertical mixed-use buildings.

2.   Industrial Campus (IC). Pursuant to Metro’s Urban Growth Management Functional Plan Title 4 for Regionally Significant Industrial Areas (RSIA) the purpose of the Industrial Campus District is to provide a ready supply of developable industrial land for the City of Happy Valley and the southeast metropolitan area. It seeks to promote economic development, job creation, sustainable businesses and green building practices, jobs-housing balance, land optimization and freight mobility by preserving large contiguous areas for industrial clusters near existing and planned residential areas and transportation corridors. In order to protect the viability and integrity of industrial land, this district is not intended for residential use and shall allow only limited retail and commercial components. The Industrial Campus District is intended to be a mix of, but not limited to, the following industries:

 

a.     Green building products and design;

b.     Advanced materials;

c.     Medical devices;

d.     Specialized software applications;

e.     Forestry and agricultural biotechnology;

f.      Nanotechnology;

g.     Recreational equipment/recreation technology;

h.     Corporate headquarters;

i.      Professional services;

j.      Specialty food processing;

k.     Transportation equipment/technology;

l.      Logistics.

B.  Permitted Uses. Table 16.25.010-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the EC and IC Districts.

 

Table 16.25.010-1 Industrial (EC, IC) Permitted Uses

 

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

 

Land Use

EC

IC

Residential

 

 

Pre-existing dwellings. Preexisting dwellings may be allowed to remodel or expand and shall not be subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.72

P

P

Home occupations in pre-existing dwellings

P

P

New residential uses

P1

X

Commercial—Retail

 

 

Commercial day care

C

C

Entertainment, major event

X

X

Hotels

C

X

Indoor health and recreation facilities, such as racquetball court, gymnasiums, health and exercise spas, swimming pools, and similar uses and associated facilities

C

C

Mobile food units

P3, 12

P3, 12

Outdoor recreation, commercial

X/C9

X

Parking lot (when not an accessory use)

X

C/X7

Quick vehicle servicing or vehicle repair

C

P

Retail sales—Includes used homes, trailers, motor homes and recreational vehicles

P2, 7

P3, 7

Commercial service

P2

P3

Self-service storage—Includes mini-storage and recreational vehicle storage facilities

X

P/X7

Marijuana retailing

X

X

Commercial—Office

 

 

Offices

P

P4

Industrial5

 

 

Industrial services—Fully enclosed

P

P

Industrial services—Not enclosed

C

P

Manufacturing and production and fabrication and assembly—Fully enclosed

P

P

Research and development activities and laboratories—Fully enclosed

P

P

Research and development activities and laboratories—Not fully enclosed

C5

P5

Repair, finishing and testing—Fully enclosed

P

P

Repair, finishing and testing—Not fully enclosed

C5

P5

Distribution center and warehouse

P6

P8

Waste-related

X

C/X7

Helipads or heliports11

P

P

Wholesale activities

P2

P3

Institutional

 

 

Basic utilities

P

P

Colleges

C2

X

Institutional uses; educational institutes and trade schools; art, music, or dance studios; radio and television studios, excluding transmission towers

C2

C

Public parks and open space—Pedestrian amenities

P

P

Public parks and open space—Parks and recreation facilities

C

P

Public parks, usable open space

P

P

Churches, synagogues, temples or places of worship, library, post office, community center, etc.

C2

X

Public and private schools (includes commercial day care, dancing and music schools)

X/C2, 7

X

Other

 

 

Agriculture—Animals, when an existing use as of May 5, 2009

P

P

Agriculture—Animals, when accessory to a permitted industrial use

X

P

Agriculture—Animals, when new use

X

X

Agriculture—Nurseries and similar horticulture (See also wholesale and retail uses)

C

P

Agriculture—Vegetative processing/recycling, log processing—Not enclosed

C

C

Buildings and structures exceeding the height limits in Table 16.25.010-2

C

C

Marijuana processing, production and wholesaling

P10, 13

P10, 13

Radio frequency transmission facilities—Within height limit of district

P

P

Radio frequency transmission facilities—Exceeds height limit (freestanding or building-mounted facilities)

C

C

Rail lines and utility corridors

P

P

Temporary uses (limited to “P” and “C” uses), per Section 16.69.010

C

C

Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the City’s Transportation System Plan)

P

P

Wireless telecommunication facilities: wireless telecommunication facilities are subject to the requirements of Section 16.44.020 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

P/C

P/C

Any accessory use or structure, not otherwise prohibited, that the Planning Official or designee finds to be customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use

P

P

Any use that the Planning Official or designee finds to be similar to one or more of those specified above

P/C

P/C

NOTES:

1 Residential uses on upper floors of mixed use buildings are permitted.

2 New commercial retail uses shall not exceed sixty thousand (60,000) square feet gross leasable area on a single lot or parcel or contiguous lots or parcels. For the purposes of this limitation, parcels or lots separated by only a transportation right-of-way are considered to be contiguous. The use of any building, structure or land that was existing on or before July 17, 2012 or which was a legal use at the time of annexation may continue and may expand to add up to twenty (20) percent more floor area and ten (10) percent more land area on a site.

3 Uses are subject to the following limitations:

a. New uses:

1. No single store, branch, agency or other outlet shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in area (including buildings and outdoor storage and sales areas); and

2. On sites with multiple outlets, the cumulative area dedicated to these uses shall not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet (including buildings and outdoor storage and sales areas);

b. Existing uses and buildings: Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the use of any building, structure or land that was existing on or before July 17, 2012 or which was a legal use at the time of annexation may continue and may expand to add up to twenty (20) percent more floor area and ten (10) percent more land area on a site.

4 Permitted as an accessory use—Executive and administrative offices must relate to the operation of the industrial use and may not exceed forty (40) percent of the total gross floor area.

5 If not fully enclosed, must be located more than two hundred (200) feet from residential districts and petroleum storage and refining.

6 Permitted as an accessory use—May not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total site area.

7 Use is prohibited within the Rock Creek Employment Center Subdistrict as defined in subsection (G). Specific to retail sales, prohibition is on sale of used homes, trailers, motor homes and recreational vehicles.

8 Within the Rock Creek Employment Center Subdistrict as defined in subsection (F), use is permitted only as an accessory use—May not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total site area except as noted in subsection (F)(3).

9 Outdoor recreation facilities without permanent buildings are allowed as a conditional use within the EC zone.

10 Use is prohibited within the Rock Creek Employment Center Subdistrict as defined in Section 16.25.010(F).

11 Subject to applicable FAA rules and regulations.

12 Pursuant to Section 16.69.030.

13 Pursuant to Chapter 16.49.

 

C.  Conditional Uses Approval Criteria.

1.   Conditional uses may be allowed subject to review pursuant to Chapter 16.64 (Conditional Use). In addition to the criteria for approval listed in that chapter, conditional uses in the EC and IC Districts shall be reviewed against the following criteria:

a.     If a service-related use, buildings shall have existing employment or industrial users as their primary market;

b.     Uses shall not undermine the ability of the district to retain and attract employment and industrial uses; and

c.     Uses shall not create substantial use incompatibilities or significantly alter the overall industrial campus character of the area based on the existing proportion of industrial to non-industrial uses.

D.  Additional General Provisions for the Employment Center and Industrial Campus Districts.

1.   The procedures and application requirements under Chapter 16.62 (Design Review) and Chapter 16.48 (Industrial Design Standards) shall apply to all development in the EC and IC Districts. If language within these sections conflicts with specific requirements and standards of the districts, the standards within the design review and general site design standards chapters shall prevail.

E.  Development Standards. The development standards in Table 16.25.010-2 apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development within the EC and IC Districts.

 

Table 16.25.010-2 Development Standards for EC and IC Districts

 

 

Standard

EC

IC

Residential density (maximum)

NA

NA

Lot size (minimum)

None

None1

Lot width (minimum)

None

None

Lot depth (minimum)

None

None

Lot coverage, including all impervious surfaces (maximum)

85%

75%

Open space (minimum)

15%

15%

Landscaping (minimum)

The requirements of Chapter 16.42 apply, including the screening provisions of Section 16.42.060(G). In addition, the approval authority may require landscaping, fences, walls or other buffering that exceed the landscaping standards when it finds that more or different buffering is necessary to mitigate adverse noise, light, glare, and/or aesthetic impacts to adjacent properties

Building setbacks (minimum):

 

 

Front

10 ft.

10 ft.

Rear (abutting a nonresidential district)

10 ft.

20 ft.

Rear (abutting a residential district)

20 ft.

20 ft.

Side

0 ft./10 ft.2

0 ft./20 ft. 2

Building setbacks (maximum):

 

 

Front

None

None

Rear

None

None

Side

None

None

Building height (maximum)

45 ft.

45 ft.

NOTES:

1 Lots or parcels larger than fifty (50) acres may be divided into smaller lots and parcels pursuant to a master plan approved by the City so long as the resulting division yields at least one lot or parcel of at least fifty (50) acres in size.

2 The minimum required side and rear building setbacks shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which building height exceeds twenty (20) feet. Zero lot lines area allowed along interior side lot lines where both parcels are within the EC or IC zones subject to approval by the building official and Clackamas fire district.

 

F.  Rock Creek Employment Center Subdistrict.

1.   The boundaries of the Rock Creek Employment Center Subdistrict are shown on Figure 16.25.010-1.

2.   Subarea A—Trip Limitation Requirement. The standards in this subsection apply to all development proposed within Subarea A identified on Figure 16.25.010-1.

a.     The cumulative total p.m. peak hour trips for the subarea shall not exceed two hundred seventeen (217) trips except as permitted by subsection (F)(3).

b.     Development applications within the subarea shall include a trip generation estimate demonstrating that proposed development will not cause the subarea to exceed two hundred seventeen (217) total cumulative p.m. peak hour trips.

c.     The trip limitation of two hundred seventeen (217) p.m. peak hour trips may be exceeded if an applicant can demonstrate that there are funded transportation projects in the area to accommodate the additional trips or if a subsequent traffic analysis shows that additional traffic will not have a significant effect on the transportation system.

3.   Subarea B—Distribution Center and Warehouses. Distribution centers and warehouses are permitted as primary uses within the area identified as Subarea B on Figure 16.25.010-1 and are exempted from the provisions of Chapter 16.65 (Master Planned Developments) provided:

a.     At least eight percent but not more than forty (40) percent of the gross floor area square footage of the distribution center or warehouse facility is executive and/or administrative offices related to the operation of the distribution center or warehouse; or,

b.     The distribution center or warehouse is intended and designed to accommodate at least one employee per two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area.

 

Figure 16.25.010-1 Rock Creek Employment Center Subdistrict



 

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 491 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 443 § 1, 2013; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 ARTICLE 16.3 SPECIFIC AREA PLAN DISTRICTS AND OVERLAY ZONES
Chapter 16.31 ROCK CREEK PLANNED MIXED USE DISTRICT (PMU)
16.31.010 Purpose.
A.  In conjunction with the development of the Rock Creek Comprehensive Plan to establish an area outside of the City core (i.e., outside the 1992 UGMA) that allows a mixture of land use types, including attached housing, retail sales, offices, commercial services and encourages linked transportation trips among these uses, this district is guided by a master plan approved by the City that outlines the general and specific land uses and permits phasing of development. The district is intended to provide flexibility to anticipate local needs and market changes for City residents. Development in the Planned Mixed Use (PMU) District encourages public spaces, for better pedestrian and bicycle travel as well as a transition between high traffic streets and local residential neighborhoods. The Planned Mixed Use District in Happy Valley reinforces the concentration and intensity of uses planned in the 2040 Framework Plan. The district encourages efficient site utilization, including use of gross average density, reduced yard setbacks, and shadow plans.

B.  The PMU District requires development over five acres to submit a master plan for approval. Once a master plan is approved for the PMU District, detailed development plans will be reviewed through the subdivision, PUD and/or design review process as described in Chapter 16.62.

C.  For all properties located within the Rock Creek Comprehensive Plan Area, whether illustrated with an underlying Clackamas County zone, PMU designation or City zone on the City’s Comprehensive Plan map/zoning map, the master plan or individual Comprehensive Plan map amendment/zone change will establish districts to demarcate the general location of commercial, employment and residential areas (mixed use commercial (MUC); mixed use employment (MUE); neighborhood commercial subdistrict (MUE-NC); and mixed use residential (MUR) through a Comprehensive Plan map amendment/zone change process, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 16.67 of the LDC. For any parcel less than five acres in size, and thus not requiring a master plan, application of a mixed use commercial, employment or residential district shall also be the subject of a Comprehensive Plan map amendment/zone change, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 16.67 of the LDC. The master plan shall further distinguish the general location of sub-areas within the residential district that will indicate where there will be a mixture of uses and residential areas by intensity of residential density. The commercial district does not require the identification of sub-areas. The general type of commercial uses are limited to retail, office and mixed use centers, all of which are permitted within the MUC District and to a limited extent within the MUR District. The master plan process is directed by Section 16.31.020. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.31.020 Master plan required.
The PMU District encourages creative development patterns and well planned provision of infrastructure and uses. The district allows a variety of commercial uses and residential dwelling types and densities. The flexibility that is built into the Rock Creek Comprehensive Plan and PMU zone requires a property owner to prepare a detailed plan and study of property resulting in a master plan, which delineates residential and commercial boundaries and provides for phasing of development that can be implemented over time. The master plan process also provides certainty for the City and neighbors who will know with some detail, the amount of open space, location of commercial activity areas, major transportation routes and planned densities and housing types allowed in the Rock Creek Comprehensive Plan Area.

A.  A master plan in accordance with the process outlined in Chapter 16.65 is required for mixed use developments over five acres.

B.  Criteria for Approval.

1.   Master plan is consistent with the purpose of this section, and meets the requirements Chapter 16.65;

2.   Master plan is consistent with the applicable provisions of the Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code;

3.   If a master plan is proposed for a portion of contiguous ownership, then master plan must show transportation connections and other major functions on the contiguous land not included in the master plan;

4.   A development agreement(s) is in place, or is part of the conditions of approval for a master plan. Development agreements provide a legal contract between the property owner and the City to provide for on-site and off-site improvements and development costs.

C.  Site plan and platting as needed are required for development (if not completed during the master plan process). Once a master plan is approved, the applicant shall prepare a site plan and go through the design review process, and/or go through the land division process in order to develop land. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.31.030 Planned mixed use development standards.
A.  Setbacks and Yards.

1.   Standards are flexible and shall be determined through the master plan or a design review process.

2.   Criteria for Review. The master plan shows commercial and mixed use buildings fronting the public right-of-way or private accessways where possible and provides for small front yard setbacks to create a more active streetscape.

B.  Width and Depth.

1.   Standards are flexible and shall be determined through the master plan process or a design review.

2.   Criteria for Review. The general standards outlined in Chapter 16.63.

C.  Tree Removal. Tree removal is not permitted in conjunction with a master plan, but rather must be applied for in compliance with Section 16.42.050 in conjunction with a concurrent or subsequent land division or site design review application.

D.  Landscaping, Street Trees and Buffering.

1.   The mixed use district shall have street trees and landscaping to create attractive developments, especially in the residential areas. Use of existing mature trees shall be utilized pursuant to Chapter 16.42. Standards are flexible and shall be determined where detail is available through the master plan. Hardscaping, such as plazas, and courtyards can count as landscaped areas if they are accessible to all users of a particular development.

2.   Criteria for Review.

a.     Within fifty (50) feet of established single-family residential uses, there will be a vegetative buffer of at least ten (10) feet in depth, planted with evergreen trees or other screening materials to screen adjacent uses from development that is more intense than the existing residential uses. Where possible, existing evergreen vegetation will be left in the vegetative buffer area.

b.     Landscape plans are required in the master plan process, and they shall use the standards in Chapter 16.42 as a guideline for basic landscaping features, planting materials, and provisions. Where future development areas are indicated on the master plan, detailed landscape plans shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter 16.42 during the design review process.

c.     Due to the increased intensity of development in the Planned Mixed Use District, hardscaping is allowed to be included in the landscaping calculations, but not in the vegetative buffer, described in subsection (D)(1) of this section.

E.  Land Division Processes.

1.   PMU lands require a master planning process that includes a public hearing in front of the Planning Commission for consideration and approval. Concurrent or subsequent partitions, subdivisions or PUDs may be filed by the applicant, pursuant to the provisions of this title.

2.   Partitions, subdivisions, and PUDs covered by a master plan shall be in conformance with the approved master plan.

F.  Design Review Process for Master Planned Areas.

1.   Development on PMU lands requires an extensive master planning process that includes a public hearing before the Planning Commission for consideration and approval. Consideration of the master plan for approval involves examination of design elements such as landscaping, typical building elevations, pedestrian pathways, and identification of open space within the greater subject site area. However, development subject to a design review application submitted with a master plan shall be coordinated with the master plan approval under the Design Review II process pursuant to the review criteria and process described in Chapters 16.46 and 16.62.

2.   Design Review II Concurrent with Master Plan Approval. The master plan process gives the applicant the opportunity to submit development applications at the same time and request coordinated reviews. At the applicant’s request, a site specific design review process and review as described in Chapter 16.62 shall be concurrent with the master plan process.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.32 STEEP SLOPES DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
16.32.010 Purpose.
Slope constrained lands are regulated by the steep slopes development overlay (SSDO). The purpose of the SSDO is to:

A.  Contribute to compliance with Statewide Planning Goal 7 (Areas Subject to Natural Disasters and Hazards). For Goal 7, with exceptions, the SSDO specifically minimizes seismic and landslide hazards and soil erosion associated with development on steep or unstable slopes.

B.  Regulate development and provide special protection on lands within “conservation slope areas” and “transition slope areas” as follows:

1.   Except as exempted pursuant to Section 16.32.045, development activities on conservation slope areas are prohibited. Except as allowed by Section 16.32.040(D)(1), conservation slope areas include:

a.     Slopes twenty-five (25) percent and greater (for designation as conservation slope area, the minimum contiguous extent for slopes twenty-five (25) percent and greater shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet);

b.     Potentially Hazardous Analysis Areas (lands within twenty-five (25) feet of the top or toe of slopes twenty-five (25) percent and greater) identified by a certified geotechnical engineer;

c.     Areas containing potentially rapidly moving landslide hazard areas mapped by the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI).

2.   Within transition slope areas, conservation and development are balanced. Except as allowed by Section 16.32.040(D)(2), transition slope areas include:

a.     Slopes 15 to 24.99 percent (for designation as transition slope area, the minimum contiguous extent for slopes 15 to 24.99 percent shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet and the land must not be otherwise designated as a conservation slope area).

C.  Limit the potential residential density and facilitate transfer of development away from slope constrained lands. Within conservation slope areas and transition slope areas, a maximum density of two dwelling units per acre applies.

D.  Slope constrained lands in Happy Valley require special protection because they:

1.   Are generally more difficult and expensive to serve with urban infrastructure as compared to less steep lands;

2.   Provide wildlife habitat, tree canopy, and other environmental benefits;

3.   Are located at the headwaters of watersheds that provide clean drinking water to downstream users, including Happy Valley residents;

4.   Contribute to the scenic landscape of Happy Valley which is a strong part of the City’s identity and livability;

5.   Are often adjacent to regulated natural resource areas and/or public green spaces; and

6.   Can, if developed, cause harm to persons and/or structures via stormwater runoff, landslide, mudslide, tree windthrow and other natural actions that may pose a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.020 Applicability.
Unless excepted by the provisions of Section 16.32.045 of this title, the regulations of the steep slopes development overlay shall apply to any existing lot of record with slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent (with a minimum contiguous extent greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet), potentially hazardous analysis areas identified by a certified geotechnical engineer, and/or DOGAMI landslide hazard areas except as allowed by Section 16.32.040(D). This section shall apply only to activities and uses that require a building, grading, tree removal and/or land use permit and per ORS 92.040, shall not apply to parcels or lots created between April 21, 1999 and April 21, 2009. The steep slopes development overlay will be overlaid on any and all applicable parcels within the City limits at the time of development application and, upon being overlaid, will take precedence in density calculations over the base zoning district illustrated on the City’s Comprehensive Plan map/zoning map, and actual site specific conditions shall take precedence over any aerial topography mapping or other non-survey specific datum. (Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.030 General provisions.
No person shall develop property in areas within the steep slopes development overlay without first demonstrating compliance with this section.

A.  As a condition of permit issuance or land use approval, the applicant shall agree to implement the recommendations of approved studies and to allow all inspections to be conducted.

B.  Where a bond, letter of credit, or other guarantee is required, the permit shall not be issued until the bond or guarantee has been obtained and approved. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.040 Designation of buildable lands.
A.  For the purposes of the SSDO, buildable lands include:

1.   Lands not designated conservation slope area or transition slope area;

2.   Buildable portions of transition slope areas according to the sliding scale as described in Section 16.32.040(C);

3.   Isolated conservation slope or transition slope areas as described in Section 16.32.040(D), below.

B.  In addition to the Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map, the text provisions of this section shall be used to determine whether applications may be approved within the SSDO. The following maps and documents may also be used as references for identifying areas subject to the requirements of this section:

1.   Locally adopted studies or maps;

2.   City of Happy Valley slope analysis maps;

3.   Mapped DOGAMI potentially rapidly moving landslide hazard areas.

C.  Sliding Scale. Transition slope areas are intended to provide for limited development in balance with slope protection measures, therefore, the amount of development within transition slope areas shall be based on a sliding scale of impact intended to allow limited development within those parcels that are more encumbered with sloped lands. The sliding scale determines the amount of buildable and unbuildable transition slope area for a given site as follows:

1.   If a parcel has fifty (50) percent or more of its total site area in transition slope area and conservation slope area, a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the transition slope area is designated buildable and may be developed;

2.   If a parcel has 20—49.99 percent of its total site area in transition slope area and conservation slope area, a maximum of forty (40) percent of the transition slope area is designated buildable and may be developed;

3.   If a parcel has 0—19.99 percent of its total site area in transition slope area and conservation slope area, a maximum of thirty (30) percent of the transition slope area is designated buildable and may be developed.

D.  Designation of Isolated Conservation Slope or Transition Slope Areas as Buildable. Through a Type II Environmental Review, an isolated pocket of conservation slope or transition slope Area on a property may be designated as buildable land. The applicant must demonstrate the following:

1.   For Conservation Slope Areas:

a.     The contiguous extent of the area is three thousand (3,000) square feet or less;

b.     There are no other conservation slope areas or transition slope areas within fifty (50) feet; and

c.     The required special studies and reports have been prepared in accordance with Section 16.32.080, evaluating the site conditions and determining that the conservation slope area can be safely developed.

2.   For transition slope areas or for areas with a combination of conservation slope area and transition slope area:

 

a.     The contiguous extent of the area is six thousand (6,000) square feet or less and less than fifty (50) percent of the area is within a conservation slope area;

b.     There are no other conservation slope areas or transition slope areas within fifty (50) feet; and

c.     The required special studies and reports have been prepared in accordance with Section 16.32.080, evaluating the site conditions and determining that the transition slope area can be safely developed.

(Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.045 Exceptions.
A.  An activity that avoids conservation slope areas and transition slope areas.

B.  The following activities, regardless of location:

1.   An excavation that is less than three feet in depth, or which involves the removal of a total of less than fifty (50) cubic yards of volume;

2.   A fill that does not exceed three feet in depth or a total of fifty (50) cubic yards of fill material;

3.   New construction or expansion of a structure resulting in a net increase in ground floor area of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet that does not involve grading;

4.   Emergency actions required to prevent an imminent threat to public health or safety, or prevent imminent danger to public or private property, as determined by the public works director; or

5.   Any land use or activity that does not require a building permit or grading permit, or land use approval.

C.  Development of employment, industrial or commercial uses on Employment, Industrial or Commercial designated lands that are not otherwise encumbered by the City’s Natural Resource Overlay Zone (NROZ) and that abut an existing or planned Collector or Arterial roadway as illustrated within the City’s Transportation System Plan (TSP).

D.  Development of lands within the Aldridge Road Subarea Comprehensive Plan that are not otherwise encumbered by the City’s Natural Resource Overlay Zone (NROZ) to the envisioned density and approximate development pattern illustrated within Plan “E” of the Aldridge Road Subarea Comprehensive Plan.

E.  Transition or conservation slope areas that are “man-made” or caused by past soil fill/removal and grading activities so long as required special studies and reports have been prepared in accordance with Section 16.32.070, evaluating the site conditions and determining that the slope area can be safely developed.

F.  A building, grading, or tree removal permit on a lot or parcel created after April 21, 2009 which received approval of an environmental review permit pursuant to Section 16.32.080 or a proposed building permit on a lot in an existing subdivision or parcel in an existing partition that was finalized prior to City of Happy Valley record-keeping processes.

G.  An activity that is determined by the planning official to be reasonably similar to the exceptions listed in this section. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.050 Permitted uses.
A.  Unless excepted or exempt, permitted uses within unbuildable slope areas are limited to the following:

1.   Open space and trails constructed consistent with the provisions of Title 16 of the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual;

2.   Removal of refuse and permitted fill;

3.   Planting of native vegetation and removal of non-native/invasive species, dead or dying trees or vegetation that is hazardous to the public;

4.   Construction, re-construction or expansion of public utilities and infrastructure (including both public roads and private streets) that is necessary to support permitted development;

5.   Construction, re-construction or expansion of a single-family residence on a legal lot of record under the following prescribed conditions:

a.     The applicant must demonstrate that the lot has received prior planning approval from either the City of Happy Valley, or if annexed, from Clackamas County, and that there is insufficient buildable land on the same lot to allow the proposed construction or expansion;

b.     The engineering, building permit, erosion control, water quality, and re-vegetation standards of this title have been fully satisfied;

c.     The residence or addition has been sited so as to minimize excavation and disturbance to native vegetation within the steep slopes development overlay area;

d.     The maximum impervious surface coverage from development shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. This standard may be exceeded to allow a private driveway design and location that reduces adverse impacts to protected areas if the applicant demonstrates that a longer driveway will facilitate driveway construction that will either more closely follow hillside contours, and thereby reduce overall cut and fill area by at least twenty (20) percent; or avoid tree clusters and thereby reduce by at least twenty (20) percent the number of trees (six-inch caliper at breast height or greater) that must be removed; and

6.   Development shall not result in cuts or fills in excess of three feet except for basement construction unless specifically approved by the Building Official and City Engineer;

7.   Repair or stabilization of unstable slopes.

B.  Permitted uses within the buildable lands, as defined by this title are limited to the following:

1.   All uses listed in subsection A above; and

2.   Uses permitted in the base zone in approved buildable areas.

(Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.060 Platting of new parcels or lots.
Unless exempted in Section 16.32.045, no new parcel or lot shall be platted or approved for development exclusively within conservation slope areas. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.070 Required maps, studies, and reports.
A.  Maps. To determine the location of potentially slope constrained areas, the applicant shall submit a scaled topographic map at two-foot contour intervals for the subject property (site) for lands less than fifteen (15) percent in slope, and at five-foot contours for lands fifteen (15) percent and greater in slope and for land within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the site perimeter. This map shall be prepared by a licensed, professional engineer or land surveyor and shall show:

1.   Slopes of twenty-five (25) percent and greater;

2.   Potentially hazardous analysis areas identified by a certified geotechnical engineer, including the analysis area parallel to and within twenty-five (25) feet of the top of the twenty-five (25) percent slope break and the analysis area parallel to and within twenty-five (25) feet of the toe of the slope;

3.   Mapped DOGAMI potentially rapidly moving landslide hazard areas;

4.   Transition slope areas; and

5.   The area (in square feet) for each category listed above for the subject property.

B.  Studies and Special Reports. The City Engineer may require, when known or perceived site or area circumstances indicate such particular need, the submittal of one or more of the following studies and/or special reports for any permit or development located within the SSDO. The requirement for such studies will be in writing and will be tied to specific code standards, criteria and/or requirements:

1.   Studies.

a.     Geological Assessments. Geological assessments are prepared and stamped by a Certified Engineering Geologist and describe the surface and subsurface conditions of a site, delineate areas of a property that may be subject to specific geologic hazards, and assess the suitability of the site for development. Geological assessments shall be conducted and prepared according to the requirements and recommendations of the Oregon State Board of Geologist Examiners, and shall make recommendations as to whether further studies are required, and may be incorporated into or included as an appendix to the geotechnical report;

b.     Engineering Geology Reports. Engineering geology reports are prepared and stamped by a Certified Engineering Geologist and provide detailed descriptions of the geology of the site, professional conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geological conditions on the proposed development, and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the site to be developed. Engineering geology reports shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Guidelines for Preparing Engineering Geology Reports in Oregon adopted by the Oregon State Board of Geologist Examiners and may be incorporated into or included as an appendix to the geotechnical report; and

c.     Geotechnical Reports. Geotechnical reports are prepared and stamped by a Geotechnical Engineer, evaluate site conditions, and recommend design measures necessary to reduce the development risks and facilitate safe and stable development. Geotechnical reports shall be conducted and prepared according to the requirements and recommendations of the Oregon State Board of Geologist Examiners, and may be incorporated into or included as an appendix to the Engineering Geology Report.

2.   Special Reports.

a.     Hydrology and Soils Report. This report shall include information on the hydrological conditions on the site, the effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development, the proposed development’s impact on surface and groundwater flows to wetlands and streams, and any hydrological or erosion hazards. This report shall also include soils characteristics of the site, their suitability for development, carrying capacity, and erosion or slumping characteristics that might present a hazard to life and property, or adversely affect the use or stability of a public facility or utility. Finally, this report shall include information on the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils; the adequacy of the site for development purposes; and an assessment of grading procedures required to impose the minimum disturbance to the natural state. A licensed, professional engineer registered in Oregon shall prepare the hydrology and soils report;

b.     Grading Plan. The grading plan shall be specific to a proposed physical structure or use and shall include information on terrain (two-foot intervals of property), drainage, direction of drainage flow, location of proposed structures and existing structures which may be affected by the proposed grading operations, water quality facilities, finished contours or elevations, including all cut and fill slopes and proposed drainage channels. Project designs, including but not limited to, locations of surface and subsurface devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs, and other protective devices, shall form part of the submission. The grading plan shall also include: (i) construction phase erosion control plan consistent with the provisions of Title 15 of the City’s Municipal Code; and (ii) schedule of operations. A licensed, professional engineer registered in Oregon shall prepare the grading and erosion control plan; and

c.     Native Vegetation Report. This report shall consist of a survey of existing vegetative cover, whether it is native or introduced, and how it will be altered by the proposed development. Measures for re-vegetation with native plant species will be clearly stated, as well as methods for immediate and long-term stabilization of slopes and control of soil erosion. A landscape architect, landscape designer, botanist or arborist with specific knowledge of native plant species, planting and maintenance methods, survival rates, and their ability to control erosion and sedimentation shall prepare the vegetation report. The applicant shall be responsible for replacing any native plant species that do not survive the first two years after planting, and for ensuring the survival of any replacement plants for an additional two years after their replacement.

C.  Compliance with Study Conclusions and Recommendations.

1.   Professional Standards. The City Engineer shall determine whether Geological Assessments, Engineering Geology Reports, or Geotechnical Reports have been prepared in accordance with this title. The City Engineer may require additional information or analysis necessary to meet study requirements.

2.   Peer Review. The City Engineer may require peer review of any required report, in which case regulated activities and uses shall be reviewed and accepted through the peer review process before any regulated activity will be allowed. The cost of such peer review shall be borne by the applicant. If peer review is required, the City Engineer shall provide the applicant, in writing, the reasons for the peer review.

a.     A professional or professional firm of the City’s choice that meets the qualifications listed in this chapter shall perform the review.

b.     The review shall be at the applicant’s expense.

c.     Review of report submittals shall determine whether required elements are completed, geologic report procedures and assumptions are accepted, and all conclusions and recommendations are supported and reasonable.

3.   Review Criteria. The approval authority shall rely on the conclusions and recommendations of the required reports, as modified by peer review, as well as any rebuttal material supplied by the applicant, to determine compliance with this section.

 

4.   Conditions of Approval. After review of the peer review report(s) and any rebuttal materials submitted by the applicant, conclusions and recommendations stated in approved reports shall be directly incorporated as permit conditions or provide the basis for conditions of approval for the regulated activity or use.

5.   Expiration. Where an approved assessment or report as defined by this chapter has been prepared within the last five years for a specific site, and where the proposed land use activity and surrounding site conditions are unchanged, that report may be utilized and a new report is not required. Should environmental conditions associated with the site or surrounding the site change, or if the proposed land use activity or development has materially changed, the applicant shall submit an amendment to the required assessment or report, which may be reviewed and approved through the peer review process.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.080 Environmental review permit.
Development proposals that are subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.32 require an environmental review permit application. Environmental review permits will be reviewed through a Type II procedure, pursuant to Section 16.61.030. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.090 Density and density transfers.
Within conservation slope areas and transition slope areas, a maximum density of two dwelling units per acre applies. Except as exempted pursuant to Section 16.32.045, development activities on conservation slope areas are prohibited. Density calculations shall be made pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F). Density may be transferred from conservation slope areas and unbuildable transition slope areas to buildable portions of the parcel in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.63.020(F). (Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.32.100 Site design criteria.
Development within the SSDO shall comply with the following site design criteria:

A.  Development is sited on lands less than fifteen (15) percent slope lands within the same parcel or on other parcels which are a part of the application, to the greatest degree practicable;

B.  Significant trees and other resources are protected and/or incorporated into the site design;

C.  Lands that remain undeveloped are coordinated with open space in adjacent parcels and natural resource areas, so that such areas, in combination, form as continuous an open space system as is practicable;

D.  Opportunities for linking wildlife corridors and pedestrian trails are implemented;

E.  Provision of access and internal circulation routes are as short as possible and designed to work with the natural topography, maintain minimum grades and require minimum cut and fill;

F.  Creation of open space tracts between proposed developments and existing developed parcels or open space tracts shall be coordinated so that such areas, in combination, will form as continuous an open space system as is practicable; and

G.  Opportunities for shared access are utilized wherever practicable, and if possible may be required by the City Engineer pursuant to Section 16.41.030, Vehicular access and circulation. A variance to vehicular access and circulation standards may be granted pursuant to Section 16.71.040, Class B variances. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.33 HISTORIC PROPERTIES OVERLAY ZONE
16.33.010 Purpose.
The description and purpose of this overlay zone is to keep and protect features within the City that reflect the City’s special and historical heritage in order to:

A.  Safeguard the City’s heritage as embodied and reflected in such features;

B.  Encourage public awareness and knowledge of the City’s history and culture;

C.  Foster pride and a sense of identity with Happy Valley as a place;

D.  Identify and resolve conflicts between the preservation of cultural resources and alternative land uses. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.33.020 Review authority.
The review of applications identified in this section shall be conducted by the Planning Commission or, if necessary, the City Council. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.33.030 Evaluation.
A.  The Historic Properties Overlay Zone shall be applied to specific features through the plan amendment process.

B.  An inventory of cultural/historical features shall match that of the Oregon State Historic Preservation Office inventory. Each feature shall be evaluated according to subsection C of this section and classified as either “worthy of protection” or “not worthy of protection.”

C.  A decision of the Planning Commission to designate a feature “worthy of protection” shall be accompanied by findings which include:

1.   A brief description of the resource;

2.   Whether the feature:

a.     Exemplifies or reflects special elements of the City’s history;

b.     Is identified with persons or events significant in local history;

c.     Embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period or method of construction, or is a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship;

d.     Is included in the official register of the Oregon State Historic Preservation Office inventory of historic and cultural resources;

e.     Is owned or controlled by a public, semipublic or not-for-profit entity; or

f.      Has already received significant effort to preserve, restore and/or maintain.

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.33.040 Designated resources.
When a resource is designated by the City, the structure or feature shall be encumbered with a Historic Properties Overlay Zone designation. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.33.050 Permits.
A.  Any alteration of the exterior of a designated historic feature, or any relocation of such a resource, shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission.

B.  No development permit shall be issued for exterior alteration or relocation of any designated feature or any potential resource which is under consideration for designation while a public hearing or any appeal thereof is pending.

C.  No demolition of any designated feature or any potential resource shall occur unless approved by the City Council in an advertised public hearing. (See subsection 16.33.050(E) of this section.)

D.  Approval of a development permit to alter the exterior of or relocate a designated feature shall be based on findings of adherence to the following guidelines:

1.   Retention of Original Construction. All original exterior details shall be preserved unless economic unfeasibility can be demonstrated. Where possible, original exterior materials shall be preserved;

2.   Height. Additional stories (vertical additions) may be added to historic buildings provided:

a.     The added height complies with requirements of the LDC;

b.     The added height does not exceed that which was traditional for the style of the building;

c.     The added height does not alter the traditional scale and proportions of the building style;

d.     The added height is visually compatible with any historic building which is adjacent or within two hundred fifty (250) feet in any direction.

3.   Bulk. Horizontal additions may be added to historic buildings provided:

a.     The bulk of the addition does not exceed that which was traditional for the building style;

b.     The addition maintains the traditional scale and proportion of the building style;

c.     The addition is visually compatible with any historic building which is adjacent or within two hundred fifty (250) feet in any direction.

4.   Visual Integrity of Structure. The lines of columns, piers, spandrels or other primary structural elements shall be maintained so far as is practicable;

5.   Scale and Proportion. The scale and proportion of altered or added building elements and the relationship of voids to solids (window to wall) shall be visually compatible with the traditional architectural character of the historic building;

 

6.   Material, Color and Texture. The materials, colors and textures used in the alteration or addition shall be visually compatible with the traditional architectural character of the historic building;

7.   Signs and Lighting. Signs, lighting and other artificial or nonoriginal appurtenances shall be avoided where possible. However, use of such signs, lighting and other artificial or nonoriginal appurtenances, plus walls, fences, awnings and landscaping, shall be visually compatible with the traditional architectural character of the historic building.

E.  Removal of a designation or approval of a permit to demolish a designated historic feature shall be based on findings of adherence to the following:

1.   Compelling evidence that the original designation was in error;

2.   The resource has ceased to exist or is no longer of significance to the public, based on a reevaluation of the criteria in Section 16.33.030 or

3.   The property owner is bearing an unfair economic burden to maintain the historic or cultural resource. If the City Council finds evidence of the latter criterion (economic burden), it shall continue the hearing on the matter to a date certain no longer than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the application was accepted. During this period, the City shall explore all reasonable means of protecting the resource, including exploring informational and financial assistance for the property owner or public or private acquisition and/or relocation. If, by the second hearing date a method has not been found assuring the protection of the resource, and the application has not been withdrawn, it shall be approved. If alteration or demolition of the resource is intended, a condition of approval shall be that insofar as feasible and as funds are available, the City shall obtain a pictorial and graphic history of the resource, and artifacts from the resource it deems worthy of preservation.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.34 NATURAL RESOURCES OVERLAY ZONE
16.34.010 Purpose.
A.  The Natural Resources Overlay Zone (NROZ) is intended to be used with any underlying base zone as shown on the City of Happy Valley Zoning Map. The purpose of the Natural Resources Overlay Zone is to implement the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan relating to natural resources, open space and the environment. In addition, the purposes of these regulations are to achieve compliance with that portion of Statewide Planning Goal 5 relating to significant natural riparian, wildlife, and wetland resources and Title 13 of Metro’s Urban Growth Management Functional Plan and water quality resources under statewide planning Goal 6 and Sections 1—4 of Title 3 of Metro’s Urban Growth Management Functional Plan.

B.  The NROZ is intended to protect and improve the following natural resource functions and values that contribute to water quality and fish and wildlife habitat in urban streamside areas. These functions and values include, but are not limited to:

1.   Vegetated corridors to separate protected water features from development;

2.   Microclimate and shade;

3.   Natural stream corridors;

4.   Stream flow moderation and water storage;

5.   Provide filtration, infiltration and natural water purification;

6.   Bank stabilization, sediment and pollution control;

7.   Large wood recruitment and retention and channel dynamics; and

8.   Organic material resources.

C.  Further, the intent and purpose of this section is to protect and improve the following functions and values that contribute to upland wildlife habitat:

1.   Large habitat patches;

2.   Interior habitat;

3.   Connectivity and proximity to water;

 

4.   Connectivity and proximity to other upland habitat areas.

D.  It is also intended to allow and encourage nature-friendly development, where appropriate while minimizing the impact on fish and wildlife habitat and water quality functions, and to provide mitigation standards for the replacement of ecological functions and values lost through development in natural resource areas. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.34.020 Applicability and administration.
A.  The regulations of this Natural Resources Overlay Zone shall apply to any parcel which is within two hundred (200) feet of a Protected Water Feature (creeks, rivers, streams, wetlands, natural lakes, and springs) or which contains land identified and protected under Metro’s UGMFP Title 13 Habitat Conservation Areas, as currently configured, or other significant wetlands, riparian corridors, wildlife habitat, that is inventoried and mapped on the Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map.

B.  Unless otherwise exempted by these regulations, any development on parcels subject to this chapter must comply with the regulation contained herein. Activities subject to the review process shall include all development on properties, including:

1.   Partitioning and subdividing of land;

2.   New structural development;

3.   Fills, excavations and modifications of drainage patterns;

4.   Exterior expansion of any building or structure, or increases in impervious surfaces or storage areas;

5.   Site modifications including excavation or fill, installation of new above or below ground utilities;

6.   Removal of trees or the cutting or clearing of any native vegetation;

7.   Resource enhancement activities.

C.  The Natural Resources Overlay Zone is generally described by boundary lines shown on the City of Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map. Where a development application proposes development entirely outside of the NROZ, but within one hundred (100) feet of the NROZ, applicants must verify the natural resource boundaries via the procedures outlined in Section 16.34.060.

D.  On the City of Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map land within the NROZ is designated as follows:

1.   Water Quality Resource.

a.     Protected Water Feature. The general location of Protected Water Features is indicated on the Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map; however, the text provisions of Section 16.34.060(B) shall be used to determine the exact location.

b.     Vegetated Corridor—Maximum Extent. The Vegetated Corridor (buffer) is a facility required to prevent damage to the Protected Water Feature caused by development impacts. The boundary of the NROZ is defined by the maximum potential extent of a Vegetated Corridor, which is two hundred (200) feet from a Protected Water Feature. However, the actual width of the Vegetated Corridor area varies depending on the type of protected water feature; upstream drainage area served; and slope adjacent to the Protected Water Feature, as specified in Table 16.34.060-1.

2.   Habitat Conservation Area (HCA). In some cases, additional land around a Protected Water Feature is protected on the basis of its value as riparian habitat. Habitat Conservation Areas are further designated as follows:

a.     High. These areas include Habitat Conservation Areas designated as “high” on the UGMFP Title 13 Habitat Conservation Area maps, as currently configured, and all locally significant wetlands, riparian corridors, and wildlife habitat.

b.     Moderate. These areas include Habitat Conservation Areas designated as “moderate” on the UGMFP Title 13 Habitat Conservation Area maps.

c.     Low. These areas include Habitat Conservation Areas designated as “low” on the UGMFP Title 13 Habitat Conservation Area maps.

E.  In addition to the Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map, the text provisions of this section shall be used to determine whether applications may be approved within the NROZ. The following maps and documents may also be used as references for identifying areas subject to the requirements of this section:

1.   Metro’s UGMFP Title 13 Habitat Conservation Areas maps;

2.   Metro’s UGMFP Title 3 Water Quality Resource Area maps;

3.   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM);

4.   City of Happy Valley Local Wetland Inventory (LWI) (2008);

5.   City of Happy Valley significant wetlands and riparian corridors map as indicated on the local wetland inventory and adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan;

6.   Locally adopted studies or maps;

7.   City of Happy Valley slope analysis maps;

8.   Clackamas County soils surveys;

9.   Water Environment Services (WES) stream and wetland inventories; and

10. Wetland or riparian corridor studies and delineations provided by property owners or developers by a qualified wetland scientist, biologist or engineer.

F.  The requirements of this chapter apply in addition to all applicable local, state, regional and Federal development, including those for water quality resource areas and flood management areas. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.34.030 Exemptions.
The following uses and activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

A.  A use or activity that avoids any impact to a Water Quality Resources and/or HCA provided that the location of the Water Quality Resource and/or HCA have been verified by the City in accordance with Section 16.34.060 and a Construction Management Plan pursuant to Section 16.34.070(B) has been submitted that demonstrates that there will be no impacts to the Water Quality Resource and/or HCA during construction.

B.  A building permit for a lot platted prior to local adoption of the NROZ or a phased development project for which the applicant has previously met the application requirements, so long as the building site for new construction was identified on the original permit and no new portion of the NROZ will be disturbed.

C.  Development of a property that has previously satisfied the mitigation and conservation easement requirements of this chapter or a residential property that was platted prior to September 29, 2005, may proceed in areas outside of the boundaries of the recorded conservation easement or open space tract without further review. Uses listed as exempt pursuant to a recorded conservation easement shall also be exempted from application of this chapter.

D.  Farming practices and farm uses on land within an exclusive farm use zone established under ORS 215.203, within an area designated as marginal land under ORS 197.247 (1991 Edition), or on other agricultural lands, except that this exemption does not apply to buildings associated with farm practices or farm uses. “Farming practice” as used in this subsection shall have the meaning set out in ORS 30.930. “Farm use” as used in this subsection shall have the meaning set out in ORS 215.203.

E.  Emergency procedures or activities undertaken which are necessary to remove or abate hazards and nuisances or for the protection of public health, safety and welfare; provided that such remedial or preventative action must take place within a timeframe too short to allow for compliance with the requirements of this Code. After the emergency, the person or agency undertaking the action shall fully restore any impacts to the natural resources resulting from the emergency action. Hazards that may be removed or abated include those required to maintain aircraft safety.

F.  Maintenance, alteration, expansion, repair and replacement of existing structures provided that the building footprint is not increased.

G.  Routine repair and maintenance of existing roadways, driveways, utility facilities, manmade water control facilities, stormwater pretreatment facilities, accessory uses and other development when no additional incursion into the NROZ is proposed and any disturbed areas within the NROZ are restored.

H.  Maintenance of existing gardens, pastures, lawns and landscape perimeters, including the installation of new irrigation systems within existing gardens, pastures, lawns, and landscape perimeters.

I.   Removal of plants identified as nuisance or prohibited plants on the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A) and the planting or propagation of plants identified as native plants on the Happy Valley Plant List. Handheld tools must be used to remove nuisance or prohibited plants, and after such removal all open soil areas greater than twenty-five (25) square feet must be replanted.

J.   Projects with the sole purpose of restoring or enhancing wetlands, streams, or fish and wildlife habitat areas, provided that the project is part of an approved local, State, or Federal restoration, enhancement or mitigation plan.

K.  In addition to the activities and uses listed above, the following additional uses and activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter within those areas of the NROZ that are not Water Quality Resources as defined in Section 16.34.060(B):

1.   Where construction of a residence was completed before January 1, 2006, the owners or residents shall not be restricted from engaging in any development that was allowed prior to September 29, 2005, unless said development required obtaining a land use decision, a building permit, or an erosion control/grading permit.

2.   The alteration, expansion, or replacement of existing structures, provided that:

a.     The alteration, expansion, or replacement of a structure will not intrude more than five hundred (500) square feet into the NROZ in addition to the area defined as the building footprint as of January 1, 2006; and

b.     The new intrusion into the NROZ is no closer to the protected water feature than the pre-existing structure or improvement.

3.   Minor encroachments not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet of impervious surface such as accessory buildings, eave overhangs, exterior building improvements for access and exiting requirements, or other similar features.

4.   Existing water-dependent uses that can only be carried out on, in, or adjacent to water because they require access to the water for waterborne transportation or recreation.

5.   Temporary and minor clearing not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet for the purpose of site investigations and pits for preparing soil profiles, provided that such areas are restored to their original condition when the investigation is complete.

6.   Low-impact outdoor recreation facilities for public use, including, but not limited to, multi-use paths, access ways, trails, picnic areas, or interpretive and educational displays and overlooks that include benches and outdoor furniture, provided that the facility meets the following requirements:

a.     It contains less than five hundred (500) square feet of new impervious surface; and

b.     Its trails shall be constructed using nonhazardous, pervious materials, with a maximum width of four feet.

(Ord. 552 § 1, 2020; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.34.040 Prohibited uses and activities.
Except as otherwise allowed or exempted by this chapter, the following uses and activities shall not be permitted within the NROZ:

A.  New structures, development and construction.

B.  Application of chemicals, uncontained areas of hazardous materials as defined by DEQ, domestic animal waste, dumping of materials of any kind, or other activities.

C.  Unauthorized land clearing or grading of a site to alter site conditions (including placement of new gardens and lawns) is not allowed, and may result in the maximum requirement of mitigation/enhancement regardless of pre-existing conditions.

D.  Prohibited Maintenance and Management Activities.

1.   The removal of native vegetation shall not be permitted from a natural resource area unless:

a.     A permit has been issued by the City in accordance with the Land Development Code; or

b.     Species to be removed are identified as nuisance or prohibited plants on the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A).

2.   No stockpiling of fill materials, parking, or storage of equipment shall be allowed within a significant natural resources or its buffer. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.34.050 Adjustments to site design standards and density transfer.
A.  Adjustments to Site Design Standards. In order to avoid or minimize impacts to natural resources, the following adjustments to the site design standards of the underlying zoning shall be allowed for development on parcels that are partially or wholly within the NROZ:

1.   The minimum building setback of the base zone may be reduced to any distance between the base zone minimum and zero, unless this reduction conflicts with applicable fire or life safety requirements.

2.   Landscaping requirements, apart from those required for parking lots or street berms, may be met by preserving the Water Quality Resources and/or HCA.

3.   Stormwater facilities that detain, retain or infiltrate stormwater onsite, including the associated piping, may be placed within an HCA, which is not a Water Quality Resource, so long as the disturbance to forest canopy and the areas within the driplines of the trees is minimized. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, detention ponds, vegetated swales, rain gardens, vegetated filter strip, and vegetated infiltration basins. Only native vegetation may be planted in these facilities.

4.   Pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F), all area within a Water Quality Resource or HCA, or any portion of it, are subtracted from the calculations of net size for purposes of determining the minimum number of units that must be built on the property.

B.  Density and Density Transfer. Density may be transferred from areas made unbuildable by provisions in this Chapter pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F). (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.34.060 Map verification to establish natural resource boundaries.
A.  The preparation of the City of Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map did not include specific field observations of every individual property. The map is designed to be specific enough to determine whether further environmental review of a development proposal is necessary. If any portion of the development or alteration of the land (except those exempted by this Chapter) is located within the Natural Resources Overlay Zone boundary, then map verification is required before any development permit can be issued.

1.   The map verification requirements described in this section shall be met at the time an applicant proposes a nonexempt use or activity or requests a building permit, grading permit, tree removal permit, land division approval, or some other land use decision. Where it can be clearly determined by the Planning Official that development is at least one hundred (100) feet from the NROZ and there is no impact to the Significant Resource, development may be permitted without map verification.

2.   A property owner, or another person with the property owner’s consent, may request to verify the location of Water Quality Resources and/or HCAs on a real property lot or parcel pursuant to this section, but said request for information shall be at the Planning Official or designee’s sole discretion, based on staff availability, funding resources, and policy priorities and shall require the submittal of a public information request and resultant fee. If a person receives a verification separate from a simultaneous request for a building permit, grading permit, tree removal permit, land division approval, or some other land use decision, then the person may use the verification to satisfy the requirements of this section at any time up until five years after the date the verification was issued.

3.   Map verification shall not be used to dispute whether identified resources provide the ecological functions that they are assumed to provide based on the ecological criteria used to identify them.

4.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of Section 16.34.060, for utility projects undertaken by public utilities across property that is not owned by the utility, the utility shall not be required to map or provide any information about the property except for the area within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the proposed disturbance area of the utility’s project.

5.   Review Procedures.

a.     The Planning Official or designees making a map verification decision pursuant to Section 16.34.060(B) or 16.34.060(C) shall use the Type I administrative procedure described in Section 16.61.020.

b.     The Planning Official’s decision shall be based on consideration of the information submitted by the applicant, any information collected during a site visit to the lot or parcel, any information generated by prior map verifications that have occurred on adjacent properties, and any other objective factual information that has been provided to the Planning Official or designee.

c.     The Planning Official or designees making a map verification decision pursuant to Section 16.34.060(D) shall use the Type II administrative procedure described in Section 16.61.030. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Official or designee shall provide notice of the map verification application to Metro; to the owners of record of property on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property; to any neighborhood or community planning organization recognized by the City and whose boundaries include the property; and to any watershed council recognized by the Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board and whose boundaries include the property. The Planning Official or designee shall apply the verification criteria in Section 16.34.060(D)(2) to confirm the location of any HCAs based on the HCA map, the information submitted by the applicant, any information received during the public comment period, and any additional information readily available, including information collected during a site visit to the lot or parcel. The applicant and all persons that submitted written comments shall be provided with a written explanation of the Planning Official or designee’s decision.

d.     Verification of the location of Water Quality Resources and HCAs as described in this section shall not be considered a Comprehensive Plan amendment.

B.  Water Quality Resources—Map Verification. Water Quality Resources include the Protected Water Features and the Vegetated Corridors as specified in Table 16.34.060-1, and include all land identified and protected under Metro’s UGMFP Title 3 Water Quality Resource Areas.

1.   Protected Water Features include creeks, rivers, streams, wetlands, natural lakes, and springs. The general location of identified Protected Water Features is indicated on the Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map; however, the text provisions of this section shall be used to determine the exact location of the Protected Water Feature.

 

2.   The Vegetated Corridor (buffer) is a facility required to prevent damage to the Protected Water Feature caused by development impacts. The width of the Vegetated Corridor area varies depending on the type of Protected Water Feature; upstream drainage area served; and slope adjacent to the Protected Water Feature, as specified in Table 16.34.060-1. The Vegetated Corridor (buffer) is based on the horizontal distance measured perpendicular to the Protected Water Feature boundary, not the slope distance from it. To establish the size of Vegetated Corridor, the starting point for measurements from the Water Feature is the edge of bankful flow or two-year storm level or the delineated edge of a wetland. At least three slope measurements along the water feature, at no more than one hundred (100) foot increments, shall be made for each property for which development is proposed. Depending on the width of the property, the width of the vegetated corridor will vary. The Vegetated Corridor (buffer) width is determined based on the slope of the land adjacent to the Protected Water Feature in twenty-five (25) or fifty (50) foot increments. Where the slope of the land varies within the measurement area, an Area Weighted Average slope shall be calculated. The calculation for the Area Weighted Average slope is shown in Figure 16.34.060-1; note that A, B, and C indicate different slope areas, measured horizontally.

 

Table 16.34.060-1 Water Quality Resources

 

 

Protected Water Feature

Upstream Drainage Area

Slope Adjacent to Sensitive Area

Width of Vegetated Corridor (Buffer)

Intermittent creeks, rivers, streams

Less than 50 acres

Any slope

25 feet

50 to 100 acres

<25%

25 feet

50 to 100 acres

≥25%

50 feet

Greater than 100 acres

<25%

50 feet

Greater than 100 acres

≥25%

100 to 200 feet depending on adjacent slope—see Figure 16.34.060-2

Perennial creeks, rivers, streams

Any upstream area

<25%

50 feet

Any upstream area

≥25%

100 to 200 feet depending on adjacent slope—see Figure 16.34.060-2

Wetlands, lakes (natural), and springs.

Any drainage

<25%

50 feet

Any drainage

≥25%

100 to 200 feet depending on adjacent slope—see Figure 16.34.060-3

 

 

Figure 16.34.060-1 Calculating Area Weighted Average Slope

 



 

Figure 16.34.060-2 Vegetated Corridors (Buffers) for Intermittent and Perennial
Creeks, Rivers, Streams*

 



 

*       Streams are considered perennial until proven intermittent with adequate field documentation (photos, field data), or determination by Oregon Division of State Lands.

Figure 16.34.060-3 Vegetated Corridors (Buffers) for Lakes, Springs or Wetlands

 



 

3.   Delineation of Water Quality Resources. Applicants shall delineate the boundaries of the protected water feature as follows:

a.     Lakes, Springs, and Wetlands.

i.      Delineate boundaries using the methods described in the 1987 US Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual.

ii.     Survey and map all wetland boundaries on the site base map.

b.     Intermittent and/or Perennial Streams.

i.      Identify whether the stream is perennial or intermittent. Streams are considered perennial until proven intermittent with adequate field documentation (photos, field data) or determination by Oregon Division of State Lands.

ii.     For all intermittent and/or perennial streams, delineate protected water feature boundaries by identifying the top of bank of the defined channel, or the surface elevation of a two-year, twenty-four (24) hour storm event. If determining the surface elevation of a two-year, twenty-four (24) hour storm event is not possible, then the outside edge of the stream feature is determined by identifying the aerial extent of:

(A)   Water marks on fixed objects (vegetation, buildings, etc.);

(B)   Drift lines (deposited waterborne twigs, litter, etc.); or

(C)   Waterborne sediment deposits on the soil surface or fixed objects (vegetation, buildings, etc.);

(D)   Use the indicator that provides the greatest aerial cover.

c.     Vegetated Corridors.

i.      Follow procedures outlined in Section 16.34.060(B)(3) for determining vegetated corridor (buffer).

ii.     Stake, survey, and map the boundaries of the sensitive areas and the vegetated corridor on the project site and adjacent properties within two hundred (200) feet of the property line on the base map (if access is possible) and flag them on the project site.

4.   Letter of Map Amendment. The purpose of this section is to provide a process for acknowledging inaccuracies in the City of Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map and to officially recognize and record the correct location of protected water features.

a.     Within ninety (90) days of receiving information establishing a possible error in the existence or location of a protected water feature, the City shall provide notice to interested parties of a public hearing at which the City will review the information;

b.     The City shall issue a Letter of Map Amendment if the information demonstrates:

i.      That a protected water feature no longer exists because the area has been legally filled, culverted or developed prior to the adoption of this chapter, or

ii.     The boundaries of the NROZ have changed since adoption of the City of Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map.

C.  Habitat Conservation Areas (HCAs)—Basic Map Verification. The basic verification approaches described below are available for applicants who believe either: (1) that the HCA map is accurate, (2) that there is a simple incongruity between the HCA map and the boundary lot lines of a property, or (3) that the property was developed prior to January 5, 2009.

1.   Applicant Believes HCA Map is Accurate. An applicant who believes that the HCA map is accurate may comply with Section 16.34.060(C)(1). The applicant shall submit the following information regarding the real property lot or parcel:

a.     A detailed property description;

b.     A copy of the applicable HCA map;

c.     A summer 2005 aerial photograph of the property, with lot lines shown, at a scale of at least one map inch equal to fifty (50) feet for lots of twenty thousand (20,000) or fewer square feet, and a scale of one map inch equal to one hundred (100) feet for larger lots. Said information is available from the Metro Data Resource Center;

d.     The information required to be submitted under Section 16.34.070 or 16.34.075 if the applicant proposes development within any HCA under those provisions; and

e.     Any other factual information that the applicant wishes to provide to support map verification.

2.   Obvious Misalignment Between Mapped Habitat and Property Lot Lines. In some cases, the mapped vegetative cover data might not align precisely with the tax lot layer that shows property lines, resulting in a HCA map that is also misaligned with tax lot lines. An applicant who believes that the HCA map is inaccurate based on such an obvious misalignment may comply with Section 16.34.060(C)(2). The applicant shall submit the following information regarding the real property lot or parcel:

a.     The information described in Sections 16.34.060(C)(1)(a) through (e); and,

b.     A documented demonstration of the misalignment between the HCA map and the property’s tax lot boundary lines. For example, an applicant could compare the boundary lot lines shown for roads within five hundred (500) feet of a property with the location of such roads as viewed on the aerial photograph of the area surrounding a property to provide evidence of the scale and amount of incongruity between the HCA maps and the property lot lines, and the amount of adjustment that would be appropriate to accurately depict habitat on the property.

3.   Property Developed Between Summer 2002 and September 29, 2005. Where a property was developed between the summer of 2002 (when the aerial photo used to determine the regional habitat inventory was taken) and September 29, 2005, the applicant shall submit the following information regarding the real property lot or parcel:

a.     The information described in Section 16.34.060(C)(1)(a) through (e);

b.     A summer 2002 aerial photograph of the property, with lot lines shown, at a scale of at least one map inch equal to fifty (50) feet for lots of twenty thousand (20,000) or fewer square feet, and a scale of one map inch equal to one hundred (100) feet for larger lots, said information is available from the Metro Data Resource Center;

c.     Any approved building permits or other development plans and drawings related to the development of the property that took place between summer 2002 and September 29, 2005; and

d.     A clear explanation and documentation, such as supporting maps or drawings or a more recent aerial photograph, indicating the new development that has occurred and where previously identified habitat no longer exists because it is now part of a developed area.

D.  Habitat Conservation Areas (HCAs)—Detailed Verification Approach. All applicants who believe that the HCA map is inaccurate for a reason other than as described in Section 16.34.060(C) may file a verification request consistent with Section 16.34.060(D).

1.   Application Requirements. The applicant shall submit a report prepared and signed by either (1) a knowledgeable and qualified natural resource professional, such as a wildlife biologist, botanist, or hydrologist, or (2) a civil or environmental engineer registered in Oregon to design public sanitary or storm systems, stormwater facilities, or other similar facilities. Such report shall include:

a.     A description of the qualifications and experience of all persons that contributed to the report, and, for each person that contributed, a description of the elements of the analysis to which the person contributed;

b.     The information described in Sections 16.34.060(C)(1)(a) through (e);

c.     The information described in Sections 16.34.060(C)(2)(b) and 16.34.060(C)(3)(b) through (d), if the applicant believes such information is relevant to the verification of habitat location on the subject lot or parcel;

d.     Additional aerial photographs if the applicant believes they provide better information regarding the property, including documentation of the date and process used to take the photos and an expert’s interpretation of the additional information they provide;

e.     A map showing the topography of the property shown by two-foot vertical contours in areas of slopes less than fifteen (15) percent, and at five-foot vertical contours of slopes fifteen (15) percent or greater; and

f.      Any additional information necessary to address each of the verification criteria in Section 16.34.060(D)(2), a description of where any HCAs are located on the property based on the application of the verification criteria in Section 16.34.060(D)(2), and factual documentation to support the analysis.

2.   Verification Criteria. The verification of the location of HCAs shall be according to the three-step process described below. A verification application shall not be considered complete and shall not be granted unless all the information required to be submitted with the verification application has been received.

a.     Step 1—Verifying Boundaries of Inventoried Riparian Habitat. Locating habitat and determining its riparian habitat class is a four-step process:

i.      Locate the water feature that is the basis for identifying riparian habitat.

(A)   Locate the top of bank of all streams, rivers, and open water within two hundred (200) feet of the property.

(B)   Locate all flood areas within one hundred (100) feet of the property.

(C)   Locate all wetlands within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property based on the City’s Local Wetland Inventory. Identified wetlands shall be further delineated consistent with methods currently accepted by the Oregon Department of State Lands (ODSL) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps);

ii.     Identify the vegetative cover status of all areas on the property that are within two hundred (200) feet of the top of bank of streams, rivers, and open water, are wetlands or are within one hundred fifty (150) feet of wetlands, and are flood areas and within one hundred (100) feet of flood areas.

(A)   Vegetative cover status shall be as identified on the Metro Vegetative Cover Map, available from the Metro Data Resource Center.

(B)   The vegetative cover status of a property may be adjusted only if: (1) the property was developed prior to the time the regional program was approved (see Section 16.34.060(C)(3) above), or (2) an error was made at the time the vegetative cover status was determined. To assert the latter type of error, applicants shall submit an analysis of the vegetative cover on their property using summer 2002 aerial photographs and the definitions of the different vegetative cover types provided in Chapter 16.12 (Definitions);

iii.    Determine whether the degree that the land slopes upward from all streams, rivers, and open water within two hundred (200) feet of the property is greater than or less than twenty-five (25) percent using the methodology as described in Chapter 16.34.060(B); and

iv.    Identify the riparian habitat classes applicable to all areas on the property using Table 16.34.060-2 and the data identified in Section 16.34.060(D)(2)(a)(i) through (a)(iii).

 

Table 16.34.060-2 Method for Locating Boundaries of Class I and II Riparian Areas

 

 

Distance from Water Feature

Development/Vegetation Status1

Developed areas not providing vegetative cover

Low structure vegetation or open soils

Woody Vegetation (shrub and scattered forest canopy)

Forest Canopy (closed to open forest canopy)

Surface Streams

0—50′

Class II

Class I2

Class I

Class I

50′—100′

 

Class II3

Class I

Class I

100′—150′

 

Class II3 if slope>25%

Class II3 if slope>25%

Class II3

150′—200′

 

Class II3 if slope>25%

Class II3 if slope>25%

Class II3 if slope>25%

Wetlands (Wetland Feature Itself is a Class I Riparian Area)

0—100′

 

Class II3

Class I

Class I

100′—150′

 

 

 

Class II2

Flood Areas

Within 300′ of river or surface stream

 

Class I

Class I

Class I

More than 300′ from river or surface stream

4

Class II3

Class II3

Class I

0—100′ from edge of flood area

 

 

Class II3, 5

Class II3

1 The vegetative cover type assigned to any particular area was based on two factors: the type of vegetation observed in aerial photographs and the size of the overall contiguous area of vegetative cover to which a particular piece of vegetation belonged. As an example of how the categories were assigned, in order to qualify as “forest canopy,” the forested area had to be part of a larger patch of forest of at least one acre in size.

2 Except that areas within fifty (50) feet of surface streams shall be Class II riparian areas if their vegetation status is “Low structure vegetation or open soils,” and if they are high gradient streams. High gradient streams are identified on the Metro Vegetative Cover Map. If a property owner believes the gradient of a stream was incorrectly identified, then the property owner may demonstrate the correct classification by identifying the channel type using the methodology described in the Oregon Watershed Assessment Manual, published by the Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board, and appended to the Metro’s Riparian Corridor and Wildlife Habitat Inventories Report, Attachment 1 to Exhibit F to Metro Ordinance No. 05-1077C.

3 Areas that have been identified as habitats of concern, as designated on the Metro Habitats of Concern Map (on file in the Metro Council office), shall be treated as Class I riparian habitat areas in all cases, subject to the provision of additional information that establishes that they do not meet the criteria used to identify habitats of concern as described in Metro’s Technical Report for Fish and Wildlife. Examples of habitats of concern include: Oregon white oak woodlands, bottomland hardwood forests, wetlands, native grasslands, riverine islands or deltas, and important wildlife migration corridors.

4 If development prior to the effective date of Metro Ordinance No. 05-1077C within a contiguous, undeveloped flood area (to include contiguous flood areas on adjacent properties) that was not mapped as having any vegetative cover has reduced the size of that contiguous flood area to less than one half of an acre in size, then the remaining flood area shall also be considered a developed flood area and shall not be identified as habitat.

5 Only if within three hundred (300) feet of a river or surface stream.

 

b.     Step 2—Urban Development Value of the Property. The urban development value of property designated as regionally significant habitat is depicted on the Metro Habitat Urban Development Value Map (available from the Metro Data Resource Center).

i.      A property’s urban development value designation shall be adjusted upward if the Metro 2040 Design Type designation for the property lot or parcel has changed from a category designated as a lower urban development value category to one designated as a higher urban development value category. 2040 Design Type designations are identified on the Metro 2040 Applied Concept Map (available from the Metro Data Resource Center).

ii.     Properties in areas designated on the 2040 Applied Concept Map as the Central City, Regional Centers, Town Centers, and Regionally Significant Industrial Areas are considered to be of high urban development value; properties in areas designated as Main Streets, Station Communities, Other Industrial Areas, and Employment Centers are of medium urban development value; and properties in areas designated as Inner and Outer Neighborhoods and Corridors are of low urban development value.

iii.    As designated in Title 13 of Metro’s Urban Growth Management Functional Plan, properties owned by a regionally significant educational or medical facility are designated as high urban development value.

c.     Step 3—Cross-Reference Habitat Class With Urban Development Value. City and County verification of the locations of High, Moderate, and Low Habitat Conservation Areas shall be consistent with Table 16.34.060-3.

 

Table 16.34.060-3 Method for Identifying Habitat Conservation Areas (HCA)

 

Fish and Wildlife Habitat Classification

High Urban Development Value1

Medium Urban development Value2

Low Urban development Value3

Other Areas: Parks and Open Spaces, No Design Types Outside UGB

Class I riparian

Moderate HCA

High HCA

High HCA

High HCA /

High HCA+4

Class II riparian

Low HCA

Low HCA

Moderate HCA

Moderate HCA /

High HCA+4

Class A upland wildlife

No HCA

No HCA

No HCA

No HCA /

High HCA5 /

High HCA+4

Class B upland wildlife

No HCA

No HCA

No HCA

No HCA /

High HCA5/

High HCA+4

NOTE: The default urban development value of property is as depicted on the Metro Habitat Urban Development Value Map. The Metro 2040 Design Type designations provided in the following footnotes are only for use when a City or County is determining whether to make an HCA adjustment.

 

1 Primary 2040 design type: regional centers, central City, town centers, and regionally significant industrial areas

2 Secondary 2040 design type: main streets, station communities, other industrial areas, and employment centers

3 Tertiary 2040 design type: Inner and outer neighborhoods, corridors

4 Cities and counties shall give Class I and II riparian habitat and Class A and B upland wildlife habitat in parks designated as natural areas even greater protection than that afforded to High Habitat Conservation Areas.

5 All Class A and B upland wildlife habitat in publicly-owned parks and open spaces, except for parks and open spaces where the acquiring agency clearly identified that it was acquiring the property to develop it for active recreational uses, shall be considered High HCAs.

 

 

16.34.070 Development standards.
For nonexempt uses and activities proposed within verified natural resources, there are three types of development standards outlined in this chapter: nondiscretionary, special use, and discretionary. As summarized below, the special use standards outlined in Section 16.34.070(D) apply to specific types of recreational, public facility and utility facilities. Individuals proposing other nonexempt uses and activities within HCAs (that are not also Water Quality Resource Areas) may use either the nondiscretionary development standards in Section 16.34.070(C) or the discretionary standards in 16.34.075. Except for the Special Uses identified in Section 16.34.070(D), individuals proposing development within a Water Quality Resource must use the discretionary review standards in Section 16.34.075.

 

 

Development Standards

Water Quality Resources

HCAs

Nondiscretionary (16.34.070(C))

No

Yes

Special use (16.34.070(D))

Yes

Yes

Discretionary (16.34.075)

Yes

Yes/No

 

A.  Permit Requirements. Individuals proposing nonexempt development within Natural Resources (Water Quality Resources or HCAs) must provide a development plan and accompanying narrative explanation that includes the following information. All of the application requirements must be met prior to permit approval.

1.   Applicants must verify the boundaries of any Water Quality Resource or HCA on their property as described in Section16.34.060.

2.   For the entire subject property (including non-resource areas), applicants must submit a scale map of the property that includes:

a.     Location of any wetlands or water bodies on the property, including a delineation of the Water Quality Resource Area;

b.     Location of all high, moderate, and low HCAs on the property;

c.     Outline of any existing disturbance area, including the location of existing adjacent streets and paved areas, utilities, culverts, stormwater management facilities, or bridges;

d.     Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway boundary as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the area of the 1996 flood inundation; and

e.     Topography shown by two-foot vertical contours in areas of slopes less than fifteen (15) percent, and at five-foot vertical contours of slopes fifteen (15) percent or greater. On properties that are two acres or larger, such a contour map is required only for the portion of the property to be developed.

3.   Detailed site plan of proposed development outlining total disturbance area, including proposed building footprints, site property improvements, utilities and landscaping. The types, sizes and intensities of lights must be placed so that they do not shine directly into the NROZ.

4.   The following additional information shall be provided about the HCA:

a.     For properties containing less than one acre of HCA, the location of all trees within the HCA that are greater than six inches diameter at breast height (DBH), shall be identified by size and species. For properties containing one acre or more of HCA, the applicant may approximate the number of trees and the diameter range, and provide a listing of the dominant species;

b.     For proposed disturbance areas containing less than one acre of HCA, all trees with a diameter of six inches or greater that will be removed shall be specifically identified as to diameter at breast height (DBH) and species. For proposed disturbance areas containing one acre or more of HCA an approximate of the number of trees, their diameters and the dominant species.

5.   If grading will occur within a Water Quality Resource or HCA, a grading plan showing the proposed alteration of the ground at two-foot vertical contours in areas of slopes less than fifteen (15) percent, and at five-foot vertical contours of slopes fifteen (15) percent or greater.

6.   When a property containing any Water Quality Resource is subdivided, this Code requires that new subdivision plats delineate and show the Water Quality Resource as a separate unbuildable tract. The division of properties containing HCAs are subject to Section 16.34.070(C)(5).

B.  Construction Management Plans.

1.   In order to ensure that trees and vegetation within the NROZ are not damaged during construction, all applicants shall provide a construction management plan that includes the following information:

a.     Location of site access and egress that construction equipment will use;

b.     Equipment and material staging and stockpile areas;

c.     Erosion and sediment control measures; and

d.     Measures to protect trees and other vegetation located within Water Quality Resources and HCAs, but outside of the disturbance area approved under the provisions of Section 16.34.070 or 16.34.075.

2.   Applicants who are partitioning or subdividing, but are not simultaneously developing their property, do not need to provide a Construction Management Plan.

C.  Nondiscretionary Development Standards within HCAs. The following development standards apply to all nonexempt development that occurs within the HCA except for development that occurs pursuant to the standards established by the discretionary development standards in Section 16.34.075 or the special use standards in Section 16.34.070(D).

1.   Disturbance Area Limitations to Minimize Impact to HCA.

a.     Detached Single-Family Residential Uses. The maximum disturbance area (MDA) allowed within HCAs is determined by subtracting the area of the lot or parcel outside of the HCAs from the total disturbance area (TDA) calculated as described in Table 16.34.070-1 below. (TDA—Area outside the HCA = MDA)

i.      Moderate and Low HCAs are subject to the same disturbance area limitations.

ii.     Calculation of Maximum Disturbance Area. If a lot or parcel includes both High and Moderate/Low HCAs then:

(A)   If there is more High HCA than Moderate/Low HCA on the lot or parcel, then the MDA shall be calculated as if all of the Moderate/Low and High HCA were High, pursuant to Table 16.34.070-1 below; or

(B)   If there is more Moderate/Low HCA than High HCA on the lot or parcel, then the MDA shall be calculated as if all of the Moderate/Low and High HCA were Moderate/Low, pursuant to Table 16.34.070-1 below.

iii.    Location of MDA. If a lot or parcel includes different types of HCAs, then:

(A)   The amount of development that may occur within the High HCA is equal to the total disturbance area minus the area of the lot or parcel outside of the High HCA (TDA – non-High HCA = MDA). If the area of the lot or parcel outside the High HCA is greater than the total disturbance area, then development shall not occur within the High HCA (Area outside High HCA > TDA = no development in High HCA);

(B)   The amount of development that may occur within the Moderate HCA is equal to the total disturbance area minus the area of the lot or parcel outside of the High and Moderate HCA (TDA – (Low HCA + non-HCA) = MDA). If the area of the lot or parcel outside the Moderate HCA is greater than the total disturbance area, then development shall not occur within the Moderate HCA (Area outside Moderate HCA > TDA = no development in Moderate HCA); and

(C)   The amount of development that may occur within the Low HCA is equal to the total disturbance area minus the area of the lot or parcel outside of the High, Moderate and Low HCA (TDA – non-HCA = MDA). If the area of the lot or parcel outside the Low HCA is greater than the total disturbance area, then development shall not occur within the Low HCA (Area outside Low HCA > TDA = no development in Low HCA).

b.     All Other Uses. The maximum disturbance area (MDA) allowed by right within Low, Moderate and High HCAs in these zones is found in Table 16.34.070-2 below; this MDA is subject to the mitigation requirements described in Section 16.34.070(B)(4).

 

Table 16.34.070-1 HCA Total Disturbance Area Limitations for Detached SFR Uses

 

 

HCA Type

Total Disturbance Area

High

50 percent of the lot area, up to maximum of 5,000 sq. ft.

Moderate/Low

65 percent of the lot area, up to maximum of 6,000 sq. ft.

 

Table 16.34.070-2 HCA Disturbance Area Limitations for all Uses other than Detached SFR

 

 

HCA Type

Maximum Disturbance Area

High

10 percent of HCA on site

Moderate

15 percent of HCA on site

Low

50 percent of HCA on site

 

c.     Development within an HCA in accordance with these provisions shall not result in a change of the HCA status of such developed areas on a property. In the case of a later development request seeking to develop within previously undisturbed HCAs on a property where a prior development request was subject to these provisions, the calculation of the MDA allowed on the property shall be based on the location of the HCA, notwithstanding the location of any authorized development within the HCA.

2.   Protection of habitat during site development. During development of any site containing a HCA, the following standards apply:

a.     Work areas shall be marked to reduce potential damage to the HCA;

b.     Trees in HCAs shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing construction equipment;

c.     Native soils disturbed during development shall be conserved on the property;

d.     An erosion and sediment control plan is required and shall be prepared in compliance with requirements set forth in the City’s Engineering Design Standards Manual;

e.     Prior to construction, the HCA that is to remain undeveloped shall be flagged, fenced, or otherwise marked and shall remain undisturbed;

f.      All work on the property shall conform to the Construction Management Plan described in Section 16.34.070(B).

3.   Utility Facility Standards. The following disturbance area limitations apply to new utilities, private connections to existing or new utility lines, and upgrades to existing utilities.

a.     The disturbance area for utility facility connections to utility facilities is no greater than ten (10) feet wide.

b.     The disturbance area for the upgrade of existing utility facilities is no greater than fifteen (15) feet wide.

c.     No fill or excavation is allowed within the ordinary high water mark of a stream, unless a permit is obtained from the US Army Corps of Engineers through the Standard Local Operating Procedures for Endangered Species (SLOPES) process.

d.     Mitigation is required as described in Section 16.34.070(B)(4), below.

4.   Mitigation requirements for disturbance in HCAs. In order to achieve the goal of reestablishing forested canopy that meets the ecological values and functions described in Section 16.34.010, tree replacement and vegetation planting are required when development intrudes into a HCA according to the following standards, except for wetlands mitigation requirements imposed by State and Federal law.

a.     Required Plants and Plant Densities. All trees, shrubs and groundcover must be native plants selected from the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A). An applicant must meet Mitigation Option 1 or 2, whichever results in more tree plantings; except that where the disturbance area is one acre or more, the applicant shall comply with Mitigation Option 2.

i.      Mitigation Option 1. This mitigation requirement is calculated based on the number and size of trees that are removed from the site. Trees that are removed from the site shall be replaced as shown in Table 16.34.070-3. Conifers shall be replaced with conifers. Bare ground shall be planted or seeded with native grasses or herbs. Non-native sterile wheat grass may also be planted or seeded, in equal or lesser proportion to the native grasses or herbs.

Table 16.34.070-3 Tree Replacement

 

 

Size of Tree to be Removed (Inches in Diameter)

Number of Trees and Shrubs to be Planted

6 to 12

2 trees and 3 shrubs

13 to 18

3 trees and 6 shrubs

19 to 24

5 trees and 12 shrubs

25 to 30

7 trees and 18 shrubs

over 30

10 trees and 30 shrubs

 

ii.     Mitigation Option 2. This mitigation requirement is calculated based on the size of the disturbance area within a HCA. Native trees and shrubs are required to be planted at a rate of five trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs per every five hundred (500) square feet of disturbance area (calculated by dividing the number of square feet of disturbance area by five hundred (500), and then multiplying that result times five trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs, and rounding all fractions to the nearest whole number of trees and shrubs; for example, if there will be 330 square feet of disturbance area, then three hundred thirty (330) divided by five hundred (500) equals .66, and .66 times five equals 3.3, so three trees must be planted, and .66 times twenty-five (25) equals 16.5, so seventeen (17) shrubs must be planted). Bare ground shall be planted or seeded with native grasses or herbs. Non-native sterile wheat grass may also be planted or seeded, in equal or lesser proportion to the native grasses or herbs.

b.     Plant Size. Replacement trees must be at least one-half inch in caliper, measured at six inches above the ground level for field grown trees or above the soil line for container grown trees (the one-half inch minimum size may be an average caliper measure, recognizing that trees are not uniformly round), unless they are oak or madrone which may be one gallon size. Shrubs must be in at least a one-gallon container or the equivalent in ball and burlap and must be at least twelve (12) inches in height.

c.     Plant Spacing. Trees shall be planted between eight and twelve (12) feet on-center and shrubs shall be planted between four and five feet on center, or clustered in single species groups of no more than four plants, with each cluster planted between eight and ten (10) feet on center. When planting near existing trees, the dripline of the existing tree shall be the starting point for plant spacing measurements.

d.     Plant Diversity. Shrubs must consist of at least two different species. If ten (10) trees or more are planted, then no more than fifty (50) percent of the trees may be of the same genus.

e.     Location of Mitigation Area. All vegetation must be planted on the applicant’s site within the HCA or in an area contiguous to the HCA; provided, however, that if the vegetation is planted outside of the HCA then the applicant shall preserve the contiguous area by executing a deed restriction, such as a restrictive covenant. In addition, an off-site mitigation option is provided in a streamlined discretionary review process, but in all cases, mitigation shall be provided within the City of Happy Valley City limits.

f.      Invasive Vegetation. Invasive non-native or noxious vegetation must be removed within the mitigation area prior to planting.

g.     Tree and Shrub Survival. A minimum of eighty (80) percent of the trees and shrubs planted shall remain alive on the fifth anniversary of the date that the mitigation planting is completed.

h.     Monitoring and Reporting. Monitoring of the mitigation site is the ongoing responsibility of the property owner. Plants that die must be replaced in kind. The developer shall submit a two-year maintenance bond covering the continued health and survival of all plantings.

i.      To enhance survival of the mitigation plantings, the following practices are required:

i.      Mulching. Mulch new plantings a minimum of three inches in depth and eighteen (18) inches in diameter to retain moisture and discourage weed growth.

ii.     Irrigation. Water new plantings one inch per week between June 15th to October 15th, for the three years following planting.

iii.    Weed Control. Remove, or control, non-native or noxious vegetation throughout maintenance period.

j.      To enhance survival of tree replacement and vegetation plantings, the following practices are recommended:

i.      Planting Season. Plant bare root trees between December 1st and February 28th, and potted plants between October 15th and April 30th.

ii.     Wildlife Protection. Use plant sleeves or fencing to protect trees and shrubs against wildlife browsing and resulting damage to plants.

5.   Standards for Partitions, Subdivisions and PUDs. The purpose of this section is to allow for partitions in a manner that limits the total amount of allowable development within HCAs on the partitioned parcels; and to require that new subdivision/PUD plats delineate and show the Moderate and High HCAs as a separate unbuildable tract. These standards apply in addition to the other land division requirements of the Happy Valley Land Development Code.

a.     Standards for Partitions Containing HCAs.

i.      When partitioning a property into parcels, an applicant shall verify the boundaries of the HCA on the property according to Section 16.34.060.

ii.     When partitioning a property into parcels there shall be no more than a thirty (30) percentage point difference in the percentage of HCA on the parcels; for example, a partition that produces two parcels, one that is fifty-five (55) percent HCA and the other that is thirty-five (35) percent HCA is permissible; whereas a partition that produces two parcels, one that is seventy-five (75) percent HCA and the other that is thirty (30) percent HCA is not permissible. However, an applicant may partition a property such that at least ninety (90) percent of the original property’s High HCA and eighty (80) percent of its Moderate HCA is on a separate unbuildable parcel, protected by a conservation easement.

iii.    Subsequent development on any parcels containing HCAs shall comply with the development standards of either Section 16.34.070 or Section 16.34.075.

b.     Standards for Subdivisions/PUDs Containing HCAs.

i.      Applicants who are subdividing, but not constructing, structures must verify the location of the HCA boundary according to Section 16.34.060 and comply with this subsection. Applicants who are subdividing, but not constructing, structures may:

(A)   Complete the mitigation requirements of Section 16.34.070(C)(4) (and, if appropriate, Sections 16.34.075(B) and 16.34.075(C)) and thereby exempt all subsequent development on lots containing HCA from further review; or

(B)   Not complete the mitigation requirements of Sections 16.34.070(C)(4); 16.34.075(B); or 16.34.075(C) thus requiring that any subsequent development within an HCA be subject to this chapter.

ii.     Applicants who are subdividing and developing properties must comply with Sections 16.34.060 and 16.34.070 or 16.34.075.

iii.    When a property containing any HCA is subdivided, this Code requires that new subdivision/PUD plats delineate and show the Moderate and High HCA as a separate unbuildable tract according to the following process:

(A)   The applicant must place at least ninety (90) percent of the High HCA and eighty (80) percent of the Moderate HCA in a separate tract.

(1)    If over fifty (50) percent of the HCA on a property is of a High designation, the entire calculation is for High (i.e., ninety (90) percent of the HCA must be placed within a separate tract).

(2)    If over fifty (50) percent of the HCA on a property is of a Moderate designation, the entire calculation is for Moderate (i.e., eighty (80) percent of the HCA must be placed within a separate tract).

(B)   If the tract is adjacent to the backyard for residences, the minimum backyard requirement is reduced to ten (10) feet.

(C)   Prior to preliminary plat approval, the Moderate and/or High HCA shall be shown as a separate tract, which shall not be a part of any lot used for construction of a dwelling unit.

(D)   Prior to final plat approval, ownership of the HCA tract shall be identified to distinguish it from lots intended for sale. The tract may be identified as any one of the following:

(1)    Private natural area held by the owner or homeowners association by a restrictive covenant and/or conservation easement; or

(2)    For residential subdivisions/PUDs, private natural area subject to an easement conveying storm and surface water management rights to the City of Happy Valley and/or Clackamas County Service District No. 1, preventing the owner of the tract from activities and uses inconsistent with the purpose of this chapter; or

(3)    Public natural area where the tract has been dedicated to the City of Happy Valley or a private nonprofit with the mission of land conservation.

D.  Special Use Standards. Applications for the uses listed in subsections 5 through 7 of this section shall satisfy the following standards:

1.   Water Quality Resources and HCAs shall be restored and maintained in accordance with an approved mitigation plan.

2.   To the extent practicable, existing vegetation shall be protected and left in place. Work areas shall be carefully located and marked to reduce potential damage to Water Quality Resources and HCAs. Trees in the Water Quality Resources or HCAs shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing construction equipment.

3.   Where existing vegetation has been removed, or the original land contours disturbed, the site shall be revegetated, and the vegetation shall be established as soon as practicable. Nuisance plants, as identified in the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A), may be removed at any time. Interim erosion control measures such as mulching shall be used to avoid erosion on bare areas. Nuisance plants shall be replaced with non-nuisance plants by the next growing season.

4.   Prior to construction, the water quality resource area shall be flagged, fenced or otherwise marked and shall remain undisturbed except as allowed in subsections 5 through 7 of this section. Such markings shall be maintained until construction is complete.

5.   Walkways and Bike Paths.

a.     Wherever practicable, a gravel walkway or bike path may not be constructed closer than ten (10) feet from the boundary of the protected water feature. Walkways and bike paths shall be constructed so as to minimize disturbance to existing vegetation. Where practicable, a maximum of ten (10) percent of the trail may be within thirty (30) feet of the protected water feature;

b.     Wherever practicable, a paved walkway or bike path shall not be constructed closer than ten (10) feet from the boundary of the protected water feature. For any paved walkway or bike path, the width of Water Quality Resources or HCAs must be increased by a distance equal to the width of the path. Walkways and bike paths shall be constructed so as to minimize disturbance to existing vegetation. Where practicable, a maximum of ten (10) percent of the trail may be within thirty (30) feet of the protected water feature; and

c.     A walkway or bike path shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width.

6.   Municipal Water Utility Facilities Standards. Except as provided within this subsection, in addition to all other requirements of Section 16.34.075(D)(2), municipal potable water, stormwater (drainage) and wastewater utility facilities may be built, expanded, repaired, maintained, reconfigured, rehabilitated, replaced or upsized if not exempted in Section 16.34.030. These facilities may include but are not limited to water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, raw water intakes, pump stations, transmission mains, conduits or service lines, terminal storage reservoirs, and outfall devices provided that:

a.     Such projects shall not have to comply with the requirements of Section 16.34.075(D)(2)(b); provided that, where practicable, the project does not encroach closer to a water feature than existing operations and development, or for new projects where there are no existing operations or development, that the project does not encroach closer to a water feature than practicable;

b.     Best management practices will be employed that accomplish the following:

i.      Account for watershed assessment information in project design;

ii.     Minimize the trench area and tree removal within Water Quality Resources and HCAs;

iii.    Utilize and maintain erosion controls until other site stabilization measures are established, post-construction;

iv.    Replant immediately after backfilling or as soon as effective;

v.     Preserve wetland soils and retain soil profiles;

vi.    Minimize compactions and the duration of the work within the Water Quality Resources and HCAs;

vii.   Complete in-water construction during appropriate seasons or as approved within requisite Federal or State permits;

viii.  Monitor water quality during the construction phases, if applicable; and

ix.    Implement a full inspection and monitoring program during and after project completion, if applicable.

(Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.34.075 Discretionary development standards.
There are four discretionary review processes provided in this section: subsection A of this section provides discretionary review for an applicant seeking only to partition a property; subsection B of this section provides discretionary review for an applicant who will comply with the development standards in Section 16.34.070, except that the applicant seeks to meet the mitigation requirements of that section on a different property from the property on which a HCA will be disturbed; subsection C of this section provides discretionary review for an applicant who will comply with the development standards in Section 16.34.070, except that the applicant seeks to meet the mitigation requirements of that section by proportionally varying the number and size of plants required to be planted; and subsection D of this section (Natural Resource Review) provides general discretionary review standards applicable to an applicant seeking some other type of discretionary approval of development that will disturb a Water Quality Resource or HCA.

Within HCAs that are not otherwise Water Quality Resources, applicants may choose to use the alternative discretionary development standards provided in this section rather than the development standards provided in Section 16.34.070. However, a Natural Resource Review is required for development within Water Quality Resources. All four types of discretionary reviews will be processed in accordance with the Type II procedures in Section 16.61.030.

 

A.  Discretionary Review for Partitions. An applicant seeking to partition land in ways that do not accord with the standards established in Section 16.34.070(C)(5) may seek review under this subsection.

1.   The applicant shall verify the boundaries of the HCAs on the property according to Section 16.34.060.

2.   The applicant shall submit the following application materials:

a.     A scale map of the entire property that includes:

i.      Location of all high, moderate, and low HCA on the property;

ii.     Location of any wetlands or water bodies on, or within two hundred (200) feet of the property, including a delineation of the Water Quality Resource Area;

iii.    Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway boundary as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the area of the 1996 flood inundation; and

iv.    A delineation of the proposed partition.

b.     A written and documented explanation of how and why the proposed partition satisfies the approval criteria in subsection (A)(3). Such written documentation shall include an alternatives analysis of different possible partition plans, based on the characteristics and zoning of the property.

3.   Approval Criteria. A partition shall be approved under this subsection provided that the applicant demonstrates that it is not practicable to comply with the partition standards in Section 16.34.070(C)(5), and that the applicant’s partition plan will result in the smallest practicable percentage point difference in the percentage of HCA on the parcels created by the partition (this will minimize the amount of allowable disturbance areas within HCAs on the parcels, assuming that the development standards in Section 16.34.070 were applied to future development on such parcels).

4.   Subsequent development on any parcels created by the partition and containing HCAs shall comply with all provisions of this Code, except that the map verification completed and approved as part of the partition may be used to satisfy the requirements of Section 16.34.060(C) for any such development.

B.  Discretionary Review to Approve Off-Site Mitigation. An applicant seeking discretionary approval only for off-site mitigation within the same subwatershed (6th Field Hydrologic Unit Code), but who will comply with all other provisions of Section 16.34.070, may seek review under this subsection. An applicant who seeks to conduct the mitigation in a different subwatershed may apply for such approval under subsection D.

1.   The applicant shall submit:

a.     A calculation of the number of trees and shrubs the applicant is required to plant under Section 16.34.070(C)(4); and

b.     A map and accompanying narrative that details the following:

i.      The number of trees and shrubs that can be planted on-site,

ii.     The on-site location where those trees and shrubs can be planted,

iii.    An explanation of why it is not practicable for the remainder of the mitigation to occur on-site, and

iv.    The proposed location for off-site mitigation and documentation that the applicant can carry out and ensure the success of the mitigation, including documentation that the applicant possesses legal authority to conduct and maintain the mitigation, such as having a sufficient ownership interest in the mitigation site, and, if the mitigation is not within a HCA, documentation that the mitigation site will be protected after the monitoring period expires, such as through the use of a restrictive covenant.

2.   Approval Criteria. Off-site mitigation shall be approved under this subsection provided that the applicant has demonstrated that it is not practicable to complete the mitigation on-site and that the applicant has documented that it can carry out and ensure the success of the off-site mitigation on a property within the same subwatershed (6th Field Hydrologic Unit Code) as the related disturbed HCA, and provided that, in all cases, mitigation provided is within the City of Happy Valley City limits.

3.   Mitigation approved under this subsection shall be subject to all of the requirements of Section 16.34.070(C)(4), except for the requirements of Section 16.34.070(C)(4)(e).

C.  Discretionary Review to Approve Mitigation that Varies the Number and Size of Trees and Shrubs. An applicant seeking discretionary approval only to proportionally vary the number and size of trees and shrubs required to be planted under Section 16.34.070(C)(4)—for example, to plant fewer larger trees and shrubs or to plant more smaller trees and shrubs—but who will comply with all other provisions of Section 16.34.070, may seek review under this subsection.

1.   The applicant shall submit:

a.     A calculation of the number of trees and shrubs the applicant would be required to plant under Section 16.34.070(C)(4);

b.     The numbers and sizes of trees and shrubs that the applicant proposes to plant;

c.     An explanation of why the numbers and sizes of trees and shrubs that the applicant proposes to plant will achieve, at the end of the fifth year after initial planting, comparable or better mitigation results than the results that would be achieved if the applicant complied with all of the requirements of Section 16.34.070(C)(4). Such explanation shall be prepared and signed by a knowledgeable and qualified natural resources professional or a certified landscape architect and shall include discussion of site preparation, including soil additives and removal of invasive and noxious vegetation, plant diversity, plant spacing, planting season, and immediate post-planting care, including mulching, irrigation, wildlife protection, and weed control; and

d.     The applicant’s mitigation site monitoring and reporting plan.

2.   Approval Criteria. A request to vary the numbers and sizes of trees and shrubs to be planted shall be approved if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed planting will achieve, at the end of the fifth year after initial planting, comparable or better mitigation results than the results that would be achieved if the applicant complied with all of the requirements of Section 16.34.070(C)(4). Such determination shall take into consideration all of the information required to be submitted under subsection (C)(1).

3.   Mitigation approved under this subsection shall be subject to the requirements of Sections 16.34.070(C)(4)(d) through (4)(i), and it is recommended that such mitigation also follow the practices recommended in Section 16.34.070(C)(4)(j).

D.  Natural Resource Review (NRR). An applicant seeking discretionary approval to undertake any development activity within a Water Quality Resource or HCA that does not comply with Section 16.34.070 and is not described in subsections A, B or C shall apply for a Natural Resource Review pursuant to subsection D. Natural Resource Review (NRR) is the discretionary process by which the City analyzes the impacts of development on natural resources, as well as measures to prevent negative impacts, and also provides mitigation and enhancement requirements. The Planning Official may consult with a professional with appropriate expertise to evaluate an applicant’s NRR application prepared under this section or may rely on appropriate staff expertise, in order to properly evaluate the report’s conclusions.

1.   Agency Coordination. Other state and regional agencies regulate some of the natural resources that are protected by the standards of this chapter. In order to avoid unnecessary duplication, an applicant may substitute application materials prepared by another regulating agency, for the materials required by this section where these materials will provide sufficient information for the City to address the approval criteria in subsection (D)(3).

2.   Application Requirements. The applicant shall provide all items described in Section 16.34.070(A), except that, for utility projects undertaken by public utilities across property that is not owned by the utility, the utility shall not be required to map or provide any information about the property except for the area within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the proposed disturbance area of the utility’s project, and the applicant shall also provide all of the following:

a.     A topographic map of the site with two-foot vertical contours in areas of slopes less than fifteen (15) percent, and at five-foot vertical contours of slopes fifteen (15) percent or greater showing a delineation of the Water Quality Resource, which includes areas shown on the Happy Valley Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay Zone Map, and that meets the definition of water quality resource areas in Table 16.34.030-1;

b.     Location of Title 3 Wetlands. Where Title 3 wetlands are identified, the applicant shall follow the Division of State Lands recommended wetlands delineation process. The delineation shall be prepared by a professional wetlands specialist;

c.     An inventory, location and plan for removal of any existing debris and noxious materials;

d.     An assessment of the existing condition of any Water Quality Resources, including an inventory and map of the existing plant communities including the number and area covered by each plant community present. A plant community is defined as a grouping of plants that often occur together growing in a uniform habitat. For each sample point, document the area covered by all species providing greater than five percent cover within the plot boundary. A ten (10) foot radius plot for herbs (non-woody vegetation) and a thirty (30) foot radius plot for woody vegetation are required; however, plot boundaries may be adjusted to ensure that only one plant community is represented in a plot. The inventory and map shall specify cover by native species, invasive species, and noxious species.

e.     Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis. An impact evaluation and alternatives analysis is required to determine compliance with the approval criteria and to evaluate development alternatives for a particular property. The alternatives must be evaluated on the basis of their impact on Water Quality Resources and HCAs, the ecological functions provided by the resource on the property, and off-site impacts within the subwatershed (6th Field Hydrologic Unit Code) where the property is located. The impact evaluation shall include the following:

i.      Identification of the ecological functions of riparian habitat found on the property as described in Table 16.34.075-1.

ii.     An assessment of the water quality impacts related to the development, including: sediments, temperature and nutrients, sediment control, temperature control or addressing any other condition with the potential to cause the Protected Water Feature to be listed on DEQ’s 303(d) list.

iii.    Evaluation of alternative locations, design modifications, or alternative methods of development to determine which options reduce the significant detrimental impacts on the HCAs and the ecological functions provided on the property. At a minimum, the following approaches must be considered:

(A)   The techniques described in Section 16.34.050;

(B)   Multi-story construction;

(C)   Minimizing building and development footprint;

(D)   Maximizing the use of native landscaping materials; and

(E)   Minimal excavation foundation systems (e.g., pier, post or piling foundation).

iv.    Determination of the alternative that best meets the applicable approval criteria and identification of significant detrimental impacts that are unavoidable. Where Water Quality Resources are proposed to be impacted, the applicant shall also demonstrate that no practicable alternatives to the requested development exist that will not disturb the Water Quality Resource; that development in the Water Quality Resource has been limited to the area necessary to allow for the proposed use; and that the Water Quality Resource can be restored to an equal or better condition.

 

Table 16.34.075-1 Ecological Functional Values of Riparian Corridors

 

 

Ecological Function

Landscape Features Providing Functional Values

Microclimate and shade

Forest canopy or woody vegetation within 100 feet of a stream; a wetland1; or a flood area2.

Streamflow moderation and water storage

A wetland or other water body3 with a hydrologic connection to a stream; or a flood area2.

Bank stabilization, sediment and pollution control

All sites within 50 feet of a surface stream;

Forest canopy, woody vegetation, or low structure vegetation/open soils within 100 feet of a stream or a wetland; or forest canopy, woody vegetation, or low structure vegetation/open soils within a flood area; and

Forest canopy, woody vegetation, or low structure vegetation/open soils within 100—200 feet of a stream if the slope is greater than 25 percent.

Large wood and channel dynamics

Forest canopy within 150 feet of a stream or wetland; or within a flood area; and

The channel migration zone is defined by the floodplain, but where there is no mapped floodplain a default of 50 feet is established to allow for the channel migration zone.

Organic material sources

Forest canopy or woody vegetation within 100 feet of a stream or wetland; or within a flood area.

NOTES:

1 Refers to “hydrologically-connected wetlands,” which are located partially or wholly within one-quarter mile of a surface stream or flood area.

2 Developed floodplains are not identified as HCAs because they do not provide primary ecological functional value.

3 “Other water body” could include lakes, ponds, reservoirs, or manmade water feature that is not a water quality facility or farm pond.

 

f.      Mitigation Plan. The purpose of a mitigation plan is to compensate for unavoidable significant detrimental impacts to ecological functions that result from the chosen development alternative as identified in the impact evaluation.

i.      An applicant may choose to develop a mitigation plan consistent with the requirements of Section 16.34.070(C)(4). If an applicant so chooses, then the applicant shall submit a mitigation plan demonstrating such compliance.

ii.     If an applicant chooses to develop an alternative mitigation plan that would not comply with the requirements of Section 16.34.070(C)(4), including, for example, a proposal to create an alternative plant community type such as an oak savannah or a low-structure plant community, then the applicant shall submit a mitigation plan that includes all of the following:

(A)   An explanation of how the proposed mitigation will adequately compensate for the impacts to ecological functions described in the impact evaluation required by subsection (D)(2)(e). The applicant shall use the mitigation that would be required under Section 16.34.070(C)(4) as the baseline mitigation required to compensate for disturbance to a HCA that provides an average level of ecological functions. Such explanation shall include:

(1)    If the applicant uses the mitigation that would be required under Section 16.34.070(C)(4) as the baseline mitigation required to compensate for disturbance to a HCA, then the applicant shall submit a calculation of the number of trees and shrubs the applicant would be required to plant under Section 16.34.070(C)(4);

(2)    A site plan showing where the specific mitigation activities will occur and the numbers and sizes of trees and shrubs that the applicant proposes to plant; and

(3)    A discussion of site preparation including soil additives and removal of invasive and noxious vegetation, plant diversity, plant spacing, planting season, and immediate post-planting care including mulching, irrigation, wildlife protection, and weed control.

(B)   Documentation of coordination with appropriate local, regional, special district, state, and federal regulatory agencies.

(C)   A list of all parties responsible for implementing and monitoring the mitigation plan and, if mitigation will occur off-site, the names of the owners of property where mitigation plantings will occur.

(D)   The applicant’s mitigation site monitoring and reporting plan. Applicant must provide a minimum of three years of monitoring and maintenance (with removal of invasive species). All such maintenance must be documented and reported annually.

(E)   If the proposed mitigation will not be conducted on-site, the applicant shall submit a map and accompanying narrative that details the following:

(1)    The number of trees and shrubs that can be planted on-site;

(2)    The on-site location where those trees and shrubs can be planted;

(3)    An explanation of why it is not practicable for the remainder of the mitigation to occur on-site; and

(4)    The proposed location for off-site mitigation and documentation that the applicant can carry out and ensure the success of the mitigation, including documentation that the applicant possesses legal authority to conduct and maintain the mitigation, such as having a sufficient ownership interest in the mitigation site, and, if the mitigation is not within a HCA, documentation that the mitigation site will be protected after the monitoring period expires, such as through the use of a restrictive covenant. In all cases, mitigation must be provided within the City of Happy Valley City limits.

(F)    If the mitigation area is off-site and not within the same subwatershed (6th Field Hydrologic Unit Code) as the related disturbed HCA, the applicant shall submit an explanation of why it is not practicable to conduct the mitigation within the same subwatershed and of why and how, considering the purpose of the mitigation, the mitigation will provide more ecological functional value if implemented outside of the subwatershed.

(G)   An implementation schedule, including timeline for construction, mitigation, mitigation maintenance, monitoring, reporting and a contingency plan. If the applicant is proposing any in-stream work in fish-bearing streams as part of the mitigation project, then the applicant shall submit documentation that such work will be done in accordance with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife in-stream work timing schedule.

 

iii.    In addition, where a Water Quality Resource is proposed to be impacted, the mitigation plan shall contain the following additional information:

(A)   A description of adverse water quality impacts that will be caused as a result of development;

(B)   An explanation of how development in the Water Quality Resource has been limited to the area necessary to allow for the proposed use and how the Water Quality Resource area will be restored to an equal or better condition; and

(C)   A map showing where the specific mitigation activities will occur.

c.     The Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis required by subsection (D)(1)(e) and the Mitigation Plan required by subsection (D)(1)(f) shall be prepared and signed by either (i) a knowledgeable and qualified natural resource professional, such as a wildlife biologist, botanist, or hydrologist, or (ii) a civil or environmental engineer registered in Oregon to design public sanitary or storm systems, stormwater facilities, or other similar facilities. The application shall include a description of the qualifications and experience of all persons that contributed to the Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis and to the Mitigation Plan, and for each person that contributed, a description of the elements of such reports to which the person contributed.

3.   Approval Criteria.

a.     All application requirements in subsection (D)(1) shall be met.

b.     Avoid. An applicant shall first avoid the intrusion of development into Water Quality Resources and HCAs to the extent practicable. The development that is proposed must have less detrimental impact to Water Quality Resources and HCAs than other practicable alternatives, including significantly different practicable alternatives that propose less development within Water Quality Resources and HCAs. If there are both Water Quality Resource Areas and HCAs on a property and/or there is more than one type of HCA on a property, then the applicant shall first avoid the intrusion of development into the Water Quality Resource, then into the higher-valued HCA, to the extent practicable, and the development that is proposed must have less detrimental impact to the Water Quality Resource and higher-valued HCAs than other practicable alternatives. To avoid development in Water Quality Resources and HCAs, and to the extent practicable, applicants shall use the approaches described in subsection (D)(1)(e)(iii).

c.     Minimize. If the applicant demonstrates that there is no practicable alternative that will not avoid disturbance of Water Quality Resources and HCAs, then the development proposed by the applicant within the Water Quality Resources and HCAs shall minimize detrimental impacts to the extent practicable. If there are both Water Quality Resource Areas and HCAs on a property and/or there is more than one type of HCAs on a property, then the development within Water Quality Resources and higher-valued HCAs shall be considered more detrimental than development within lower-valued HCAs.

i.      Development must minimize detrimental impacts to ecological functions and loss of habitat consistent with uses allowed by right under the base zone, to the extent practicable.

ii.     To the extent practicable within Water Quality Resources and HCAs, the proposed development shall be designed, located, and constructed to:

(A)   Minimize grading, removal of native vegetation, and disturbance and removal of native soils by using the approaches described in Section 16.34.070(C)(2), reducing building footprints, and using minimal excavation foundation systems (e.g., pier, post or piling foundation);

(B)   Minimize adverse hydrological impacts on water resources such as by using the techniques described in Part (a) of Table 16.34.075-2, unless their use is prohibited by an applicable and required State or Federal permit issued to a unit of local government having jurisdiction in the area, such as a permit required under the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 et seq., or the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. Sections 300f et seq., and including conditions or plans required by such permit;

(C)   Minimize impacts on wildlife corridors and fish passage such as by using the techniques described in Part (b) of Table 16.34.075-2; and

(D)   Consider using the techniques described in Part (c) of Table 16.34.075-2 to further minimize the impacts of development in the Water Quality Resources and HCAs.

 

Table 16.34.075-2 Habitat-Friendly Development Practices*

 

 

Part (a): Design and Construction Practices to Minimize Hydrologic Impacts

1.   Amend disturbed soils to original or higher level of porosity to regain infiltration and stormwater storage capacity.

2.   Use pervious paving materials for residential driveways, parking lots, walkways, and within centers of cul-de-sacs.

3.   Incorporate stormwater management in road rights-of-way.

4.   Landscape with rain gardens to provide on-lot detention, filtering of rainwater, and groundwater recharge.

5.   Use green roofs for runoff reduction, energy savings, improved air quality, and enhanced aesthetics.

6.   Disconnect downspouts from roofs and direct the flow to vegetated infiltration/filtration areas such as rain gardens.

7.   Retain rooftop runoff in a rain barrel for later on-lot use in lawn and garden watering.

8.   Use multifunctional open drainage systems in lieu of more conventional curb-and-gutter systems.

9.   Use bioretention cells as rain gardens in landscaped parking lot islands to reduce runoff volume and filter pollutants.

10. Apply a treatment train approach to provide multiple opportunities for stormwater treatment and reduce the possibility of system failure.

11. Reduce sidewalk width and grade them such that they drain to the front yard of a residential lot or retention area.

12. Reduce impervious impacts of residential driveways by narrowing widths and moving access to the rear of the site.

13. Use shared driveways.

14. Reduce width of residential streets, depending on traffic and parking needs.

15. Reduce street length, primarily in residential areas, by encouraging clustering and using curvilinear designs.

16. Reduce cul-de-sac radii and use pervious vegetated islands in center to minimize impervious effects, and allow them to be utilized for truck maneuvering/loading to reduce need for wide loading areas on site.

17. Eliminate redundant non-ADA sidewalks within a site (i.e., sidewalk to all entryways and/or to truck loading areas may be unnecessary for industrial developments).

18. Minimize car spaces and stall dimensions, reduce parking ratios, and use shared parking facilities and structured parking.

19. Minimize the number of stream crossings and place crossing perpendicular to stream channel if possible.

20. Allow narrow street rights-of-way through stream corridors whenever possible to reduce adverse impacts of transportation corridors.

Part (b): Design and Construction Practices to Minimize Impacts on Wildlife Corridors and Fish Passage

1.   Carefully integrate fencing into the landscape to guide animals toward animal crossings under, over, or around transportation corridors.

2.   Use bridge crossings rather than culverts wherever possible.

3.   If culverts are utilized, install slab, arch or box type culverts, preferably using bottomless designs that more closely mimic stream bottom habitat.

4.   Design stream crossings for fish passage with shelves and other design features to facilitate terrestrial wildlife passage.

5.   Extend vegetative cover through the wildlife crossing in the migratory route, along with sheltering areas.

Part (c): Miscellaneous Other Habitat-Friendly Design and Construction Practices

1.   Use native plants throughout the development (not just in HCA).

2.   Locate landscaping (required by other sections of the code) adjacent to HCA.

3.   Reduce light spill-off into HCAs from development.

4.   Preserve and maintain existing trees and tree canopy coverage, and plant trees, where appropriate, to maximize future tree canopy coverage.

 

*       These development practices represent the state of scientific knowledge at the time of this Code’s enactment; if more effective habitat-friendly practices become available, they should be used.

 

d.     Mitigate. If the applicant demonstrates that there is no practicable alternative that will not avoid disturbance of a Water Quality Resource or HCA, then development must mitigate for adverse impacts to the Water Quality Resource and HCA. All proposed mitigation plans must meet the following standards.

i.      The mitigation plan shall demonstrate that it compensates for detrimental impacts to ecological functions provided by HCAs, after taking into consideration the applicant’s efforts to minimize such detrimental impacts through the use of the techniques described in Table 16.34.075-2 and through any additional or innovative techniques. A mitigation plan that requires the amount of planting that would be required under Section 16.34.070(C)(4) based on the amount of proposed disturbance area within the HCA, and that otherwise complies with all of the mitigation requirements in Section 16.34.070(C)(4), shall be considered to have satisfied the requirements of subsection (D)(2)(d).

ii.     Mitigation shall occur on the site of the disturbance, to the extent practicable. Off-site mitigation shall be approved if the applicant has demonstrated that it is not practicable to complete the mitigation on-site and that the applicant has documented that it can carry out and ensure the success of the off-site mitigation, as described in subsection (B)(1)(b)(iv). In addition, if the off-site mitigation area is not within the same subwatershed (6th Field Hydrologic Unit Code) as the related disturbed HCA, the applicant shall demonstrate that it is not practicable to complete the mitigation within the same subwatershed and that, considering the purpose of the mitigation, the mitigation will provide more ecological functional value if implemented outside of the subwatershed. Mitigation shall not be allowed outside of the Metro jurisdictional boundary.

iii.    All re-vegetation plantings shall be with native plants listed on the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A).

iv.    All in-stream work in fish-bearing streams shall be done in accordance with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife in-stream work-timing schedule.

v.     A mitigation maintenance plan shall be included and shall be sufficient to ensure the success of the planting, and compliance with the plan shall be a condition of development approval.

e.     Natural resource boundaries shall be located and staked by a qualified professional prior to any construction, demolition, grading or site clearing. Construction barrier fencing should be erected around the vegetated corridor prior to construction.

f.      Protective measures and erosion control measures shall comply with the City’s Erosion Control Ordinance No. 141. These measures shall remain in place throughout the development of the site.

g.     No stockpiling of fill materials, parking, or storage of construction equipment shall be allowed within a significant natural resource or its buffer.

h.     The types, sizes and intensities of lights must be placed so that they do not shine directly into the significant natural resource or its buffer.

i.      The removal of native vegetation shall not be permitted from a resource area unless:

i.      A permit has been issued by the City in accordance with the land development code; or

ii.     Species to be removed are on the Happy Valley Plant List’s Nuisance Plant List or Prohibited Plant List (Appendix A).

j.      Plantings within the natural resource shall only be with species on the Happy Valley Plant List’s native groundcovers, shrub or tree lists (Appendix A).

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.34.080 Compensatory mitigation ratios.
A.  The following standards apply to required mitigation:

1.   Mitigation shall occur at a two-to-one ratio of mitigation area to proposed Natural Resource Overlay Zone (NROZ) disturbance area. Mitigation of the removal or encroachment of a wetland or stream shall not be part of this chapter and will be reviewed by the Division of State Lands or the Army Corp of Engineers during a separate review process;

2.   Mitigation shall occur on the site where the disturbance occurs, except as follows:

a.     The mitigation is required for disturbance associated with a right-of-way or utility in the right-of-way,

b.     The mitigation shall occur first on the same stream tributary, secondly in the Mt. Scott Creek, Sieben Creek, Rock Creek, Richardson Creek or a tributary thereof, or thirdly as close to the impact area as possible within the NROZ, and

c.     An easement that allows access to the mitigation site for monitoring and maintenance shall be provided as part of the mitigation plan;

3.   Mitigation shall occur within the NROZ area of a site unless it is demonstrated that this is not feasible because of a lack of available and appropriate area. In such cases, the proposed mitigation area shall be contiguous to the existing NROZ area so the NROZ boundary can be easily extended in the future to include the new resource site;

4.   Invasive and nuisance vegetation shall be removed within the mitigation area;

5.   Required Mitigation Planting. An applicant shall meet Mitigation Planting Option 1 or 2 below, whichever option results in more tree plantings, except that where the disturbance area is one acre or more, Mitigation Option 2 shall be required. All trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be selected from the Happy Valley Native Plant List;

6.   Applications on sites where no trees are present or which are predominantly covered with invasive species shall be required to mitigate the site, remove the invasive species and plant trees and native plants pursuant to Option 2.

B.  Mitigation Planting Option 1.

1.   Planting Quantity. This option requires mitigation planting based on the number and size of trees that are removed from the site pursuant to Table 16.34.080-1. Conifers shall be replaced with conifers. Bare ground shall be planted or seeded with native grasses and ground cover species.

 

Table 16.34.080-1 (Required Planting Option 1)

 

Size of Tree to be Removed (DBH)

Number of Trees and Shrubs to be Replanted

6 to 12″

2 trees and 3 shrubs

13 to 18″

3 trees and 6 shrubs

19 to 24″

5 trees and 12 shrubs

25 to 30″

7 trees and 18 shrubs

Over 30″

10 trees and 30 shrubs

 

2.   Plant Size. Replacement trees shall be at least one-half inch in caliper on average, measured at six inches above the ground level for field grown trees or above the soil line for container grown trees. Oak, madrone, ash or alder may be one-gallon size. Conifers shall be a minimum of six feet in height. Shrubs must be in at least one-gallon container size or the equivalent in ball and burlap and shall be at least twelve (12) inches in height at the time of planting. All other species shall be a minimum of four-inch pots.

3.   Plant Spacing. Except for the outer edges of mitigation areas, trees and shrubs shall be planted in a non-linear fashion. Plant spacing for new species shall be measured from the driplines of existing trees when present. Trees shall be planted on average between eight and twelve (12) feet on center, and shrubs shall be planted on average between four and five feet on center, or clustered in single species groups of no more than four plants, with each cluster planted on average between eight and ten (10) feet on center.

4.   Mulching and Irrigation. Mulch new plantings a minimum of three inches in depth and eighteen (18) inches in diameters. Water new plantings one inch per week from June 30th to September 15th, for the three years following planting.

5.   Plant Diversity. Shrubs shall consist of at least two different species. If ten trees or more are planted, no more than one-half of the trees may be of the same genus.

C.  Mitigation Planting Option 2.

1.   Planting Quantity. In this option, the mitigation requirement is calculated based on the size of the disturbance area within the NROZ. Native trees and shrubs are required to be planted at a rate of five trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs per every five hundred (500) square feet of disturbance area (calculated by dividing the number of square feet of disturbance area by five hundred (500), and then multiplying that result times five trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs, and rounding all fractions to the nearest whole number of trees and shrubs; for example, if there will be three hundred thirty (330) square feet of disturbance area, then three hundred thirty (330) divided by five hundred (500) equals 0.66, and 0.66 times five equals 3.3, so three trees must be planted, and 0.66 times twenty-five (25) equals 16.5, so seventeen (17) shrubs must be planted). Bare ground must be planted or seeded with native grasses or herbs. Non-native sterile wheat grass may also be planted or seeded, in equal or lesser proportion to the native grasses or herbs.

2.   Plant Size. Plantings may vary in size dependent on whether they are live cuttings, bare root stock or container stock, however, no initial plantings may be shorter than twelve (12) inches in height.

3.   Plant Spacing. Trees shall be planted at average intervals of seven feet on center. Shrubs may be planted in single-species groups of no more than four plants, with clusters planted on average between eight and ten (10) feet on center.

4.   Mulching and Irrigation shall be applied in the amounts necessary to ensure eighty (80) percent survival at the end of the required five-year monitoring period.

5.   Plant Diversity. Shrubs shall consist of at least three different species. If twenty (20) trees or more are planted, no more than one-third of the trees may be of the same genus.

D.  Alternative Planting Plan. An alternative planting plan using native plants may be approved in order to create a new wetland area, if it is part of a wetlands mitigation plan that has been approved by the DSL or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) in conjunction with a wetland joint removal/fill permit application.

 

E.  Monitoring and Maintenance. The mitigation plan shall provide for a five-year monitoring and maintenance plan with annual reports in a form approved by the director of community development. Monitoring of the mitigation site is the on-going responsibility of the property owner, assign, or designee, who shall submit said annual report to the city’s planning division, documenting plant survival rates of shrubs and trees on the mitigation site. Photographs shall accompany the report that indicate the progress of the mitigation. A minimum of eighty (80) percent survival of trees and shrubs of those species planted is required at the end of the five-year maintenance and monitoring period. Any invasive species shall be removed and plants that die shall be replaced in kind. Bare spots and areas of invasive vegetation larger than ten (10) square feet that remain at the end the five-year monitoring period shall be replanted or reseeded with native grasses and ground cover species.

F.  Covenant or Conservation Easement. Applicant shall record a restrictive covenant or conservation easement, in a form provided by the city, requiring the owners and assigns of properties subject to this section to comply with the applicable mitigation requirements of this section. Said covenant shall run with the land and permit the city to complete mitigation work in the event of default by the responsible party. Costs borne by the city for such mitigation shall be borne by the owner.

G.  Financial Guarantee. A financial guarantee for establishment of the mitigation area, in a form approved by the city, shall be submitted before development within the NROD disturbance area commences. The city will release the guarantee at the end of the five-year monitoring period, or before, upon its determination that the mitigation plan has been satisfactorily implemented pursuant to this section. (Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.34.090 Environmental review permit.
Development proposals that are subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.34 will require an environmental review permit application. Environmental review permits will be reviewed through a Type II procedure, pursuant to Section 16.61.030. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.35 FLOOD MANAGEMENT OVERLAY ZONE
16.35.010 Purpose.
A.  The purpose of these standards is to reduce the risk of flooding, prevent or reduce risk to human life and property, and maintain the functions and values of floodplains, such as allowing for the storage and conveyance of stream flows through existing and natural flood conveyance systems.

B.  This section establishes a flood management area overlay zone, which is delineated on the flood management area map incorporated by reference as a part of this chapter. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.35.020 Applicability.
A.  The flood management areas mapped include land contained within the one hundred (100) year floodplain, flood area and floodway as shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency flood insurance maps.

B.  The standards that apply to the flood management areas apply in addition to local, state or Federal restrictions governing floodplains or flood hazard areas, including the standards in Chapter 15.24, Flood Damage Prevention. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.35.030 Permitted uses.
A.  Uses Permitted Outright.

1.   Excavation and fill required to plant any new trees or vegetation;

2.   Restoration or enhancement of floodplains, riparian areas, wetland, upland and streams that meet Federal and State standards.

B.  Conditional Uses. All uses allowed in the base zone or existing flood hazard overlay zone are allowed in the flood management overlay zone subject to compliance with the development standards of this section.

C.  Prohibited Uses.

1.   Any use prohibited in the base zone or existing flood hazard overlay zone (Chapter 15.24, Flood Damage Prevention);

 

2.   Uncontained areas of hazardous materials as defined by the department of environmental quality.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.35.040 Development standards.
A.  All development, excavation and fill in the floodplain shall conform to the following balanced cut and fill standards.

1.   No net fill in any floodplain is allowed. All fill placed in a floodplain shall be balanced with at least an equal amount of soil material removal.

2.   Excavation areas shall not exceed fill areas by more than fifty (50) percent of the square footage.

3.   Any excavation below bankful stage shall not count toward compensating for fill.

4.   Excavation to balance a fill shall be located on the same parcel as the fill unless it is not reasonable or practicable to do so. In such cases, the excavation shall be located in the same drainage basin and as close as possible to the fill site, so long as the proposed excavation and fill will not increase flood impacts for surrounding properties as determined through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis.

5.   For excavated areas identified by the City to remain dry in the summer, such as parks or mowed areas, the lowest elevation of the excavated area shall be at least six inches above the winter “low water” elevation, and sloped at a minimum of two percent towards the protected water feature. One percent slopes will be allowed in smaller areas.

6.   For excavated areas identified by the City to remain wet in the summer, such as a constructed wetland, the grade shall be designed not to drain into the protected water feature.

7.   Minimum finished floor elevations and the bottom floor of septic tanks must be at least one foot above the design flood height or highest flood of record, whichever is higher, for new habitable structures in the flood area.

8.   Short-term parking in the floodplain may be located at an elevation of no more than one foot below the ten (10) year floodplain so long as the parking facilities do not occur in a water quality resource area. Long-term parking in the floodplain may be located at an elevation of no more than one foot below the one hundred (100) year floodplain so long as the parking facilities do not occur in a water quality resource area.

9.   Temporary fills permitted during construction shall be removed.

10. New culverts, stream crossings and transportation projects shall be designed as balanced cut and fill projects or designed not to significantly raise the design flood elevation. Such projects shall be designed to minimize the area of fill in flood management areas and to minimize erosive velocities. Stream crossings shall be as close to perpendicular to the stream as practicable. Bridges shall be used instead of culverts wherever practicable.

11. Excavation and fill required for the construction of detention facilities or structures, and other facilities, such as levees, specifically shall be designed to reduce or mitigate flood impacts and improve water quality. Levees shall not be used to create vacant buildable lands.

B.  Land divisions and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a land division or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that all proposals shall:

1.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

2.   Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; and

3.   Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.

C.  Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five acres (whichever is less). (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.35.050 Variances.
A.  The purpose of this section is to ensure that compliance with Chapter 16.35 does not cause unreasonable hardship. To avoid such instances, the requirements of Chapter 16.35 may be varied. Variances are also allowed when strict application of Chapter 16.35 would deprive an owner of all economically viable use of land, pursuant to Section 16.71.040, Class B variance.

B.  This section applies in addition to the standards governing proposals to vary the requirements of the base zone.

C.  The Community Development Director shall provide the following notice of variance applications:

1.   Upon receiving an application to vary the requirements of Chapter 16.35, the Planning Official shall provide notice of the request to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet; to Metro; to any affected neighborhood or community planning organization recognized by the City and whose boundaries include the property; and to any watershed council recognized by the Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board and whose boundaries include the property.

2.   Within seven days of a decision on the variance, the Planning Official shall provide notice of the decision to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet; to Metro; to any affected neighborhood or community planning organization recognized by the City and whose boundaries include the property; to any watershed council recognized by the Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board and whose boundaries include the property; and to any other person required to receive notice of such a decision under State law.

D.  Hardship Variance. Variances to avoid unreasonable hardship caused by the strict application of Chapter 16.35 are permitted subject to the criteria set forth in this section. To vary from the requirements of Chapter 16.35, the applicant must demonstrate the following:

1.   The variance is the minimum necessary to allow the proposed use or activity;

2.   The variance does not increase danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion;

3.   The impact of the increase in flood hazard, which will result from the variance, will not prevent the City from meeting the requirements of Chapter 16.35. In support of this criteria the applicant shall have a qualified professional engineer document the expected height, velocity and duration of floodwaters, and estimate the rate of increase in sediment transport of the floodwaters expected both downstream and upstream as a result of the variance;

 

4.   The variance will not increase the cost of providing and maintaining public services during and after flood conditions so as to unduly burden public agencies and taxpayers;

5.   Unless the proposed variance is from mitigation under Section 16.34.075(D)(1) (mitigation plan), the proposed use will comply with those standards, as applicable; and

6.   The proposed use complies with the standards of the base zone.

E.  Variance Conditions. The Planning Official may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to limit any adverse impacts that may result from granting relief. (Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.35.060 Map administration.
A.  The purpose of this section is to provide a process for amending the flood management areas map to correct the location flood management area overlay zones.

B.  Map Corrections.

1.   Within ninety (90) days of receiving information establishing a possible error in the existence or location of a protected flood management area overlay zone, the City shall provide notice to interested parties of a public hearing at which the City will review the information;

2.   The City shall amend the flood management areas map if the information demonstrates:

a.     That the water feature no longer exists because the area has been legally filled, culverted or developed prior to the adoption of this chapter, or

b.     The boundaries of the flood management area overlay zone have changed since adoption of the flood management areas map.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.35.070 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by Chapter 16.35 is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. Chapter 16.35 does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. Chapter 16.35 shall not create liability on the part of the City or County, any officer or employee of the City or County, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any damages that result from reliance on flood management sections of this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.35.080 Environmental review permit.
Development proposals that are subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.35 will require an environmental review permit application. Environmental Review Permits will be reviewed through a Type II procedure, pursuant to Section 16.61.030. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

ARTICLE 16.4 COMMUNITY DESIGN STANDARDS
Chapter 16.40 DESIGN STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION
16.40.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general site development standards in regard to landscaping, off-street parking and loading, pedestrian access and circulation, and grading requirements. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.40.020 Applicability.
Each chapter within the Community Design Standards contains an applicability statement for those specific standards. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.41 ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
16.41.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to ensure that developments provide safe and efficient access and circulation for pedestrians and vehicles. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.41.020 Applicability.
This section applies to all streets within the City and to all properties that abut these streets. The standards apply when lots are created, consolidated, or modified through a land division, lot line adjustment, lot consolidation, or street vacation; and when properties are subject to site design review. (Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.41.030 Vehicular access and circulation.
A.  Access to Arterial and Collector Streets.

1.   Location and design of all accesses to and/or from arterials and collectors (as designated in the transportation system plan) are subject to review and approval by the City Engineer. Where practical, access from a lower functional order street shall be required.

2.   Accesses to arterials or collectors shall be in accordance with the City’s Transportation System Plan. Exceptions may be granted by the City Engineer. Evaluations of exceptions shall consider posted speed of the street on which access is proposed, constraints due to lot patterns, and effects on safety and capacity of the adjacent public street, bicycle and pedestrian facilities.

3.   No development site that abuts an arterial or collector street shall be allowed more than one access point to that street (as designated in the transportation system plan) except as approved by the City Engineer. Evaluations of exceptions shall consider posted speed of street on which access is proposed, constraints due to lot patterns, and effects on safety and capacity of the adjacent public street, bicycle and pedestrian facilities.

4.   When developed property is to be expanded or altered in a manner that significantly affects on-site parking or circulation, both existing and proposed accesses shall be reviewed under the standards in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section. As a part of an expansion or alteration approval, the City may require relocation and/or reconstruction of existing accesses not meeting those standards.

5.   When a partition, subdivision or a planned unit development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street as defined within the Comprehensive Plan, the review body shall require reverse frontage lots, thereby precluding access to the parkway streets.

B.  Driveways.

1.   A driveway to an off-street parking area shall be improved from the public roadway to the parking area a minimum width of twenty (20) feet for a two-way drive or twelve (12) feet for a one-way drive but in either case not less than the full width of the standard approach for the first twenty (20) feet of the driveway.

2.   Access to and from off-street parking areas shall not permit backing onto a public street, except for single-family dwellings.

3.   A driveway for a single-family dwelling or an accessory structure serving as a garage or home occupation shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet. Driveway approaches and vehicular maneuvering areas must be constructed in accordance with applicable City standards and the entire drive must be paved with asphalt or concrete or an approved permeable or semi-permeable surface.

4.   A driveway for a two-family dwelling shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. A driveway approach must be constructed in accordance with applicable City standards and the entire driveway must be paved with asphalt or concrete or an approved permeable or semi-permeable surface.

5.   Driveways, aisles, turnaround areas and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of twelve (12) feet for their entire length and width but such clearance may be reduced in parking structures.

6.   No driveway shall traverse a slope fifteen (15) percent or greater at any point along the driveway length.

7.   The location and design of the driveway within the lot frontage shall provide for unobstructed sight pursuant to the vision clearance requirements. Requests for exceptions to these requirements will be evaluated by the public works director considering the physical limitations of the lot and safety impacts to vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic.

8.   The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets should be minimized by the use of shared driveways for adjoining lots where feasible. When necessary for traffic safety and access management purposes, or to access flag lots, the City Engineer may require joint access and/or shared driveways.

9.   A driveway must line up with surrounding streets and meet the connectivity standards for full street connections in Section 16.50.030(B)(9)(a) if it meets one or more of the following:

a.     Intersects with a public street that is controlled, or is to be controlled in the planning period, by a traffic signal;

b.     Intersects with an existing or planned arterial or collector street; or

c.     Would be an extension of an existing or planned local street, or of another major driveway.

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.41.040 Pedestrian access and circulation.
To ensure safe, direct and convenient pedestrian circulation, all developments, shall provide a continuous pedestrian and/or multi-use pathway system consistent with the City’s TSP and Happy Valley Parks Master Plan. (Pathways only provide for pedestrian circulation; multi-use pathways accommodate pedestrians and bicycles.) The system of pathways shall be designed based on the standards in subsections A through E of this section.

A.  Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the development site, and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent trails, public parks and open space areas whenever possible. The developer may also be required to connect or stub pathways(s) to adjacent streets and private property.

B.  Safe, Direct and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within all developments, except single-family detached housing (i.e., on individual lots), shall provide safe, reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all adjacent streets. For purposes of this Code section, the “primary entrance” of commercial, industrial, mixed use, public and institutional buildings is the main public entrance to the building. In the case where no public entrance exists, street connections shall be provided to the main employee entrance. For residential buildings, the “primary entrance” is the front door (i.e., facing the street). For multifamily buildings in which each unit does not have its own exterior entrance, the “primary entrance” may be a lobby, courtyard or breezeway that serves as a common entrance for more than one dwelling. A determination of whether or not a bicycle or pedestrian route is safe, direct, and convenient will be based on the following criteria:

1.   Planned bicycle and pedestrian routes do not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line and will not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for likely users.

2.   Bicycle and pedestrian routes are reasonably free from hazards and provide safe access to destinations.

C.  Connection within Development. For all developments subject to site design review, pathways shall connect to all building entrances to one another. In addition, pathways shall connect all parking areas, storage areas, recreational facilities and common areas (as applicable), and adjacent developments to the site, as applicable.

D.  Connections to Transit.

1.   New multi-family, retail, office and institutional buildings at or near major transit stops shall provide for convenient pedestrian access to transit through the use of the continuous pathway system outlined in subsections A and B above. “At a major transit stop” means a parcel or ownership that is adjacent to or includes a major transit stop, generally including portions of such parcels or ownerships that are within two hundred (200) feet of a major transit stop. “Near a major transit stop” means a parcel or ownership that is within three hundred (300) feet of a major transit stop.

2.   In addition to other requirements in this section, sites that are located at a major transit stop shall provide the following:

a.     Either locate buildings within twenty (20) feet of the transit stop, a transit street or an intersection street, or provide a pedestrian plaza at the transit stop or a street intersection;

b.     A reasonably direct pedestrian connection between the transit stop and building entrances on the site;

 

c.     A transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons;

d.     Lighting at the transit stop;

e.     An easement or dedication for a passenger shelter and an underground utility connection to a major transit stop if requested by the public transit provider; and

f.      Intersection and mid-block traffic management improvements as needed and practicable to enable marked crossings at major transit stops.

E.  Design and Construction. Pathways shall be designed and built in accordance with City public works standards. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2017; Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.42 LANDSCAPING, STREET TREES, FENCES AND WALLS, RECREATION AREAS
16.42.010 Purpose.
The City of Happy Valley recognizes the aesthetic and economic value of landscaping and recreation areas and encourages its use to establish a pleasant community character, unify developments, buffer or screen unsightly features, soften and buffer large scale structures and parking lots; and to aid in energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter from the wind. The community desires and intends all properties to be landscaped and maintained.

This chapter prescribes standards for landscaping, street trees, buffering and screening and shared outdoor recreation areas. While this chapter provides standards for frequently encountered development situations, detailed planting plans and irrigation system designs, when required, shall be reviewed by the City consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.42.020 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all land divisions and developments subject to site design review. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.42.030 Landscaping standards.
A.  General Requirements for Landscaping.

1.   Where landscaping is required by this code, a detailed landscape design plan in accordance with Section 16.42.030(C) shall be submitted for review with development applications. No development may commence until the Planning Official or designee has determined the plans comply with the specific standards of this section. All required landscaping and related improvements shall be completed or financially guaranteed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

2.   Appropriate care and maintenance of landscaping on-site and landscaping in the adjacent public right-of-way is the joint and several right and responsibility of the property owner, tenant, and their agent, if any, unless otherwise provided by the lease agreement, or City ordinances specify otherwise for general public and safety reasons. If street trees or other plant materials do not survive or are removed, materials shall be replaced in kind within four months. Landscaping shall be maintained in a condition which presents a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free of refuse and debris.

3.   Significant plant and tree specimens should be preserved to the greatest extent practicable and integrated into the design of a development. Trees that are six inches or greater in diameter measured at a height of four and one-half feet above grade are considered significant pursuant to Section 16.42.050. Plants to be saved and methods of protection shall be indicated on the detailed landscape plan submitted for approval. Existing trees may be considered preserved if no cutting, filling, or compaction of the soil takes place between the trunk of the tree and the area five feet outside the tree’s drip line. Trees to be retained shall be protected from damage during construction by a construction fence located five feet outside the drip line.

4.   In no case shall shrubs, conifer trees, or other screening be permitted within vision clearance areas of street, alley, or driveway intersections, or where the City Engineer otherwise deems such plantings would endanger pedestrians and vehicles. All plant growth in landscaped areas shall be controlled by pruning, trimming, or otherwise so that it will not interfere with the maintenance or repair of any public utility.

5.   Landscaped areas may include stormwater detention facilities, architectural features or artificial groundcovers such as sculptures, benches, masonry or stone walls, fences, rock groupings, bark dust, decorative hard paving and gravel areas interspersed with planted areas, and on-site natural features which are retained and improved. The exposed area developed with such features shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the required landscaped area. This area may be developed into pedestrian amenities, including, but not limited to, sidewalk cafés, seating, water features and plazas, as approved by the Planning Official or designee or the Design Review Board. Artificial plants are prohibited in any required landscaped area.

6.   Balconies required for entrances and exits should not be considered as landscaped areas except where such exits and entrances are for the sole use of the unit.

7.   Roofed structures shall not be included as open space except for open unenclosed public patios, balconies, gazebos, or other similar structures or spaces.

8.   Driveways and parking areas shall not be included as landscaped area.

9.   All areas not occupied by paved roadways, parking areas, loading areas, driveways, walkways, patios, or buildings shall be landscaped.

10. Topsoil and Cover Planting.

a.     During construction, sufficient topsoil and overburden shall be stored on the property in a stabilized condition at an isolated location to restore graded or backfilled areas. Such areas shall be covered with not less than eight inches of topsoil of at least equal quality to that removed, provided that if the average depth of the topsoil prior to excavation was less than eight inches, then the depth required need not exceed such lesser average.

b.     Upon replacement of topsoil, the developer shall provide groundcover selected by the developer adequate to control erosion, prevent undue runoff and restore the surface in a manner suitable for its future development. Such groundcover will be identified by the developer on the site plan at the time of site plan review or preliminary approval of a partition, subdivision, PUD, or nonresidential development.

11. Final public infrastructure inspection and authorization to submit building permits may occur prior to the landscaping requirements having been met, provided that the City has received bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required public improvements, in accordance with Section 16.50.080.

B.  Area Required. The following minimum gross developable lot area of the greater proposed development shall be landscaped for the following uses:

1.   Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes: twenty (20) percent;

2.   Multifamily dwellings containing five or more units: twenty (20) percent;

3.   Nonresidential uses, e.g., commercial, industrial, institutional, or civic: fifteen (15) percent.

C.  Landscaping Plan Requirements.

1.   The applicant shall submit a preliminary landscape design plan which includes:

a.     Location of underground irrigation system sprinkler heads where required by the City;

b.     Location and height of fences, buffers and screening;

c.     Location of terraces, decks, shelters, play areas, accessory structures and facilities, and common open areas;

d.     Location, type, size and species of existing and proposed plant materials; and

e.     A narrative which addresses soil conditions and erosion control measures that will be used;

f.      Proposed location(s) and design of trash receptacles, clustered mailboxes per the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act and implementing federal regulations as well as the accessibility provisions of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, newspaper boxes, and entry features or signs;

g.     Any trees over six inches in diameter at four feet in height proposed to be removed;

h.     The approval standards shall be the applicable standards contained in this section.

D.  Parking Lot Landscaping.

1.   Except for a residential development that has landscaped yards, parking facilities shall include landscaping to cover not less than fifteen (15) percent of the area devoted to parking facilities. The landscaping shall be uniformly distributed throughout the parking area and may consist of trees, shrubs, and groundcovers.

2.   Screening of all parking areas containing four or more spaces and all parking areas in conjunction with an off-street loading facility shall be required. Where not otherwise specified by district requirement, screening along a public right-of-way and the parking area perimeter shall include a minimum ten (10) feet depth of buffer plantings adjacent to the right-of-way and along the perimeter of the parking area except when the perimeter of the parking area is within a commercial center or part of shared parking area, where a buffer is not required.

3.   When parking in a commercial or industrial district adjoins a residential zoning district or use that is not comprised of a landscaped open space tract owned and maintained by the public or a Homeowner’s Association providing for sight obscuring screening along the length of the subject site, a sight-obscuring screen that is at least eighty (80) percent opaque when viewed horizontally from between two and eight feet above the average ground level shall be required. The screening shall be composed of materials that are an adequate size so as to achieve the required degree of screening. Screening options may include landscaped earthen berms, solid wood fences or masonry walls with landscaping, or a combination of landscaping and construction materials that provide sight and sound abatement at the time of building occupancy.

4.   Parking areas shall be divided into bays of not more than eight spaces in parking areas with twenty (20) or more spaces. Between, and at the end of each parking bay, there shall be planters that have a minimum width of five feet and a minimum length of seventeen (17) feet for a single depth bay and thirty-four (34) feet for a double bay. Each planter shall contain one major structural tree and groundcover. Truck parking and loading areas are exempt from this requirement.

5.   In parking lots three acres and larger intended for use by the general public, the walkway shall be raised or separated from parking, parking aisles and travel lanes by a raised curb, concrete bumpers, bollards, landscaping or other physical barrier. If a raised walkway is used, curb ramps shall be provided in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines.

E.  Required Tree Plantings.

1.   Planting of street trees is required for all public street frontages. Planting of street trees along private roadways is at the discretion of the developer, builder or property owner. Private street trees shall be located within a private street easement or combined private street tree/public utility easement. Trees shall be planted outside the right-of-way except where there is a designated planting strip or City-adopted street tree plan. (See Section 16.42.040(B) for standards.)

2.   The City maintains a list of appropriate trees for street tree and parking lot planting situations in Table 16.42.040-1. Selection of species should be made from the City-approved list. Alternate selections may be approved by the Planning Official or designee following written request. The type of tree used shall determine frequency of trees in planting areas. Trees in parking areas shall be dispersed throughout the lot to provide a canopy for shade and visual relief. Street trees shall be planted at thirty (30) feet on center except where planting a tree would conflict with existing trees, retaining walls, utilities and similar barriers.

3.   Trees may not be planted:

a.     Within five feet of a permanent hard surface paving or walkways, unless specific species, special planting techniques and specifications approved by the Planning Official or designee are used;

b.     Within ten (10) feet of fire hydrants and utility poles;

c.     Within five feet from a curb face when not in a planter strip or island;

d.     Where the Planning Official or designee determines the trees may be a hazard to the public interest or general welfare.

4.   Trees shall be pruned to provide a minimum clearance of eight feet above sidewalks and twelve (12) feet above street and roadway surfaces.

F.  Irrigation. Landscaping shall be irrigated, either with a manual or automatic system, to sustain viable plant life, or shall submit a xeriscaping landscape plan based on drought tolerant plantings for review and approval of the Planning Official and/or Design Review Board. Any development, redevelopment, or street improvement or installation project that results in the requirement of more than one standard residential meter (⅝ x ¾, rated at twenty (20) gallons per minute) to be dedicated to the irrigation of publicly accessible green space and/or planter strips shall be required to install irrigation systems that utilize evapotranspiration (ET) based controllers if the green spaces are to be irrigated at any time during peak demand season. Subdivisions, planned unit developments (PUDs) and road projects requiring more than two standard residential meters (⅝ x ¾, rated at twenty (20) gpm) to be dedicated to the irrigation of publicly accessible green space and/or planter strips shall utilize central control systems with active connection to weather stations and flow monitoring sensors. The developer or project owner will be required to pay the cost for initial set-up and programming with the contractor selected by Sunrise Water Authority to manage the irrigation control system. Sunrise Water Authority will retain responsibility for engaging the contractor to operate any and all irrigation management systems installed under this program. Annual operational costs for the management of the system shall be collected from the homeowners within the subdivision or planned unit development as a surcharge on their water bill. Industry standard charges for operation and management of ET based irrigation control systems are based upon the number of valves in the irrigation system. This charge shall be equitably distributed amongst all home sites within the subdivision or PUD or, in the case of road projects, borne by the project owner, such as the County, City or State.

G.  Types and Size of Plant Material.

1.   At least seventy-five (75) percent of the required landscaping area (at maturity) shall be planted with a suitable combination of trees, shrubs, or evergreen groundcover.

2.   Plant Materials. Use of native plant materials or plants acclimatized to the Pacific Northwest is encouraged where possible.

3.   Deciduous trees shall be species having an average mature spread of crown greater than fifteen (15) feet and having trunks, which can be maintained in a clear condition with over five feet of clear wood (without branches). Trees having a mature spread of crown less than fifteen (15) feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of a fifteen (15) foot crown spread.

4.   Deciduous trees shall be balled and burlapped, and a minimum of seven feet in overall height or one and one-half inches in caliper measured six inches above the ground, immediately after planting. Bare root trees will be acceptable to plant during their dormant season.

5.   Coniferous trees shall be a minimum five feet in height above ground at time of planting.

6.   Shrubs shall be a minimum of one gallon in size or two feet in height when measured immediately after planting.

7.   Hedges, where required to screen and buffer off-street parking from adjoining properties shall be planted with an evergreen species maintained so as to form a continuous, solid visual screen within two years after planting.

8.   Vines for screening purposes shall be a minimum of one gallon in size or thirty (30) inches in height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as specified. English Ivy is not permitted.

9.   Vegetated groundcovers shall be fully rooted and shall be well branched or leafed. If used in lieu of turf in whole or in part, groundcovers shall be planted in such a manner as to provide complete coverage in two years.

10. Turf areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in western Oregon. Either sod or seed are acceptable. Acceptable varieties include improved perennial ryes and fescues used within the local landscape industry. Artificial turf/lawn/grass may substitute for vegetative turf/lawn/grass as part of an approved landscape plan illustrating high-quality product that is generally natural in appearance as approved by the Planning Official or designee.

H.  Revegetation in Unlandscaped or Natural Landscaped Areas.

1.   Areas where natural vegetation has been removed or damaged through grading or construction activity in areas not affected by the landscaping requirements and that are not to be occupied by structures or other improvements shall be replanted as required by the City or by applicable conditions of approval.

2.   Plant material shall be watered at intervals sufficient to assure survival and growth.

3.   The use of native plant materials or plants acclimatized to the Pacific Northwest is encouraged to reduce irrigation and maintenance demands.

I.   Landscaping Between Public Right-of-Way and Property Lines. Except for portions allowed for parking, loading, or traffic maneuvering, a required setback area abutting a public street and open area between the property line and the roadway in the public street shall be landscaped. That portion of the landscaping within the street right-of-way shall not count as part of the lot area percentage to be landscaped.

J.   Buffer Planting—Parking, Loading and Maneuvering Areas.

1.   Buffer plantings are used to reduce building scale, provide transition between contrasting architectural styles, and generally mitigate incompatible or undesirable views. They are used to soften rather than to block viewing. Where required, a mix of plant materials shall be used to achieve the desired buffering effect.

2.   Any use which is required to provide off-street parking for five or more vehicles shall provide buffering of the parking areas on all sides which face directly upon and are within one hundred (100) feet of any property line of the subject site. Buffering shall include, in addition to required street trees for the project as a whole, fencing, sound walls (if deemed necessary by the review authority) or plantings at the immediate perimeter of the parking area which shall be of sufficient height and density, year around, to obscure sight lines to the parked vehicles and negate the impacts of headlights.

3.   Boundary plantings shall be used to buffer these uses from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. On-site plantings shall be used between parking bays, as well as between parking bays and vehicle maneuvering areas. A balance of low-lying groundcover and shrubs, and vertical shrubs and trees shall be used to buffer the view of these facilities.

4.   Decorative walls and fences may be used in conjunction with plantings, but may not be used by themselves to comply with buffering requirements.

K.  Assurance Required. Landscaped areas shall provide assurance to the City for one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated cost of the project through a bond, escrow account or certified letter of credit. Landscaped areas shall be completed as shown in the approved plans and inspected and approved by the City prior to final approval (“walk-through”), or shall be provided for by financial guarantee. The City will require a maintenance bond or other financial guarantee for the landscaped areas which will be held for two years after improvements are made to ensure plant survival. Plants that do not survive shall be replaced by the applicant during the first two years after the landscaped area is improved. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the construction cost of the landscaped areas as approved by the Planning Official or designee. The City may, at its option, require the maintenance bond to be extended should the need arise to finalize inspections or determine plant health. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.42.040 Street trees and planter strips.
A.  Applicability. All partitions, subdivisions, planned unit developments (PUDs), and any individual uses within any district, whether permitted by right or conditional approval, shall be required to provide street trees and, where applicable, planter strips on all public roadways within the project area, in accordance with the standards in subsection B below. Planting of street trees along private roadways is at the discretion of the developer, builder or property owner. Private street trees shall be located within a private street easement or combined private street tree/public utility easement.

B.  Standards.

1.   All street trees and planter strips shall be installed or financially secured by the developer pursuant to the definition of a “planter strip” found within Section 16.12.030 (Definitions). Private streets or development areas that do not utilize curbside planter strips shall install street trees beyond the public sidewalk, within a public utility and street tree easement.

2.   Street Tree Installation Methodology. The developer and/or builder shall submit a planter strip and street tree plan as part of the construction plan set, detailing to the greatest extent practicable the placement of street trees in conformance with all spacing requirements in regard to street intersections, street lights, driveways, fire hydrants, etc. Based on this street tree plan, the developer shall submit a street tree installation fee or liquid financial guarantee based on the methodology set forth in Section 16.50.080.

3.   Planting/Removal. Any person desiring for any purpose to plant, remove, destroy, top or treat any tree in or upon any street right-of-way, shall first submit a tree cutting/planting application to the City describing the purpose and scope of work. All work done under such permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. The Public Works Director shall base approval of such permit on the health, safety and welfare of both the affected tree(s) and community residents. If any permit required by this section is denied, the applicant may appeal in writing to the City Council within ten (10) days of denial. The council shall proceed and determine the appeal, calling upon the Public Works Director to defend his or her decision.

4.   Modified Existing Streets. All proposed changes to existing public street right-of-way widths or any proposed existing street improvement shall, where feasible, include allowances for parking and median strips in accordance with the City’s public facilities plan and its new street system final development standards.

5.   Clearance Design.

a.     Curb and Sidewalk. Parking strip street trees shall be planted midway between curb and sidewalk in parking strips.

b.     Center Medians. Center median street trees shall be laterally centered in the medians and an offset placement pattern relative to parking strip street trees is required.

c.     Utilities. All digging, including tree planting, must be preceded by underground location of utilities, water lines, sewer lines and transmission lines conducted by the planter.

d.     Corners, Driveways, Fire Hydrants and Street Lights. No street trees shall be planted closer than thirty-five (35) feet from any street corner, measured back from the point of intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than five feet to any drive-way, ten (10) feet to any fire hydrant or utility pole. Vision clearance shall be provided pursuant to standards in Section 16.50.030(B) and consistent with Figure 16.42.040-1.

e.     Street Tree Spacing. Street trees in parking strips shall be placed at a maximum of thirty (30) feet on-center and located in accordance with the requirements contained in this chapter. Street trees in center medians shall be placed at a maximum of fifteen (15) feet on center. Trees planted in the center medians shall be staggered with the trees planted in the parking strips. Special plantings shall be allowed with prior approval by the City Manager.

f.      Visual Clearance. In order to keep visual zones clear and to protect traffic, pedestrians and bicyclists from running into low limbs, trees within or overhanging the public right-of-way and/or visual clearance zone must be trimmed to at least seven feet above the sidewalk area, eleven (11) feet above streets or alleys, and fourteen (14) feet above neighborhood collector level two and higher level roads (see Figure 16.42.040-1).

g.     Median Trees. Center median street trees shall be planted and maintained in a manner that eliminates conflict between vehicle traffic and trees. Pruning of median street trees shall reflect a limb standard sufficient to ensure a fourteen (14) foot clearance above streets.

Figure 16.42.040-1 Visual Clear Zones at Intersections



 

6.   Consistency. In order to foster distinct and harmonious neighborhoods and encourage smooth transition between different sections of the City, consistency in street tree species shall be encouraged. However, this does not equate to the implementation of a street tree plan that is homogenous in species type for local residential streets. Staff shall review and approve street tree choice based on, but not limited to, the following criteria:

a.     Type and spacing of street trees in adjacent developments/neighborhoods;

b.     Maintenance of the same species type for the entire length of all collector level streets, including center median groundcover and trees. All new street trees placed on collector level streets must be the identical specie of those street trees already existing on that same street;

c.     Assist in the establishment of distinct neighborhoods with the use of street tree type.

7.   Installation Standards.

a.     Street Tree List. The species of street trees to be planted shall be chosen from the approved list of street trees in Table 16.42.040-1, or an acceptable alternative as determined by the Planning Official or designee. Planter strip groundcover shall be chosen from the approved list of groundcover in the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A). Copies of the Happy Valley Plant List can be obtained from the City. The street tree list is Table 16.42.040-1 in this section.

b.     Method of Planting. Planting methods for all public trees shall adhere to the National Arborist Association Revised Standards (NAA) latest edition unless determined otherwise by the City.

c.     Installation Standards.

i.      Planter Strip Street Trees. Minimum: one and three-quarters to two inches in diameter at a point four feet above existing grade at time of planting;

ii.     Center Median Street Trees. Minimum: two to two and one-half inches in diameter at a point four feet above existing grade at time of planting.

d.     Center Median Strips. Center median strips shall be landscaped with vegetative groundcover and/or covered with nonvegetative materials (i.e., interlocking paving stones). Automatic irrigation systems for all center median strips with street trees and/or vegetative groundcover shall be installed by the developer at the time the medians are constructed. Water lines shall be stubbed to center medians prior to the installation of the first street lift. Where possible, the water lines to the center medians shall be laid in series, continuing under the street where median breaks occur. Center median landscape and irrigation plans must be prepared by a landscape architect registered in the State of Oregon and shall be incorporated into the final landscape plan submitted to the City for approval.

e.     Method of Support. Street trees shall be guyed or supported in an upright position according to accepted arboricultural standards (NAA) and fastened in a manner such that injury to the tree is avoided and public safety is ensured.

f.      Permission to Plant. No person shall plant or set out any tree in a public place without first obtaining written permission from the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall consider the following criteria in determining whether permission should be granted: number of trees to be planted or set out; location, grade, and variety of each tree; method of planting; and any additional information the Public Works Director may reasonably need to make a fair judgment as to permission to plant.

g.     Replacement. The City may require the replacement of a new tree by the abutting land owner, at the land owner’s expense, after permission has been granted to remove an existing street tree.

h.     Protection. No person may attach any ropes, wires, chains, or other devices to any street tree, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such trees, other than a device that will support and/or protect such trees. During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any structure all street trees shall be adequately guarded and protected to prevent injury to such trees.

8.   Removal. No person shall remove trees from public places without first obtaining written permission from the Public Works Director. Refer to the City’s tree cutting removal regulations in regard to the removal of trees from private property.

9.   Maintenance Standards.

a.     All street trees within planting strips and medians must be pruned and maintained to National Arborist Association (NAA) standards for shade trees. A copy of the NAA standards is available at the City offices.

b.     Care and maintenance of street trees is the continuing duty and routine obligation of the property owner(s) abutting dedicated rights-of-way and utility easements that contain street trees. It is the duty of the owner(s) to keep the sidewalks which abut their property clean from branches, leaves, flowers, fruit or other organic material fallen on such sidewalks.

c.     No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the City or any agent acting on the City’s behalf, while such agents are engaged in the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees or private trees as authorized by this chapter.

d.     Trees on private grounds having limbs projecting into the street right-of-way shall be pruned by the owners of the property to satisfy the clearance requirements set forth in this chapter. Whenever the owner(s) of private grounds neglect to adequately prune such trees, they may be declared a nuisance. Upon declaring a tree a public nuisance, the Public Works Director may order the pruning and/or treatment of such tree(s). All costs associated with the maintenance of nuisance trees as established in this chapter shall be borne by the owner of that property upon which such trees are located.

e.     Whenever the owner(s) of private grounds neglect any street tree in the public right-of-way that fronts their property as provided in this chapter, such tree(s) may be declared a nuisance. Upon declaring a street tree a public nuisance, the Public Works Director may order the treatment of such tree(s). All costs associated with the maintenance of nuisance street trees shall be borne by the owner of that property which such trees front.

f.      A private utility maintaining its utility system may prune to NAA standards any tree located in the public right-of-way which interferes with any street light, pole, wire, cable, appliance or apparatus used in connection with, or as a part of, the utility system.

g.     Topping of street trees and park trees is prohibited unless so ordered by the Public Works Director. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs larger than three inches in diameter to stubs within the tree’s crown to such a degree that the normal canopy is removed and the tree is disfigured. Trees severely damaged by storms or where permanent obstructions make standard pruning practices impractical, may be exempted from this section at the discretion of the Public Works Director. The person(s) responsible for violations of this provision shall be subject to fines and penalties as established in Section 16.42.050(H) of this title.

h.     In new partitions, subdivisions and planned unit developments, and any individual uses within any district, the developer shall be responsible for the care, maintenance and irrigation costs of all trees and landscaping within the public right-of-ways for a two-year period after the installation and acceptance of the street trees. A final inspection to determine street tree health and long term survivability shall be conducted at the end of the two-year maintenance period. The final street tree inspection shall be conducted by an arborist registered in the State of Oregon with all associated costs borne by the developer. The arborist’s report shall be submitted to the City for approval, and subsequent replanting of any noted landscape materials shall occur, prior to the City’s final acceptance of public improvements or release of the pertinent maintenance bond.

 

Table 16.42.040-1 Happy Valley Approved Street Tree List

 

Botanical Name

Common Name

Parking Strip Minimum Width (ft.)

Powerline Compatible

Mature Height (ft.)

Mature Spread (ft.)

Mature Shape

Poor Drainage Tolerant

Drought Tolerant

PNW Native

Maintenance Needs

Prohibited as a Street Tree?

Conspicuous Flowers

Conspicuous Fall Color

Comments

Acer buergeranum

Trident Maple

4

Y

25

25

R

Y

Y

N

M

N

N

Y

Attractive small tree. Bronze new leaves, turn dark green, then yellow, orange, and red in fall. 1″ samara. Wood can be brittle in snow and ice. Low branching may require pruning to train trees for several years after transplanting. Usually multi-trunked but can be found as single trunk.

Acer campestre

Hedge Maple

4

M

35

35

R

N

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Very tough, tolerant tree, but does not offer much in terms of flower or fall color.

Acer ginnala

Amur Maple

4

Y

20

20

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

Y

Y

Shrubby, but has lovely glossy leaves and bright scarlet fall color.

Acer griseum

Paperbark Maple

4

M

30

15

O

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

Striking bark, leaves are incised, so they look pinnate. Glossy. Bright red fall color. Slow grower. Few samaras.

Acer rubrum

Red Maple

6

N

70

65

O

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

Red maples are prone to tight branch angles and can be hard on infrastructure due to surface rooting tendency. PLEASE do not plant under power lines. Lovely crimson red fall color, red flowers in spring, Susceptible to Verticillium; sunscald can be a problem. Vigorous where room allows.

Acer rubrum ‘var’

‘October Glory’ Red Maple

6

N

55

45

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

Species info applies. This cultivar holds its leaves longer than others. Color may turn brown suddenly after frost. Less cold hardy than other cultivars, better adapted to warmer zones. Wood tends to be brittle in snow/ice. May have delayed graft incompatibility.

Acer saccharum ‘var’

‘Green Mountain’ Sugar Maple

6

N

70

55

O

N

N

N

L

N

N

Y

Uniform and more vigorous growth than species with upright habit. Good summer -fall foliage color, resists leaf scorch. Sensitive to salt, compaction, heat, drought and susceptible to Verticillium.

Acer truncatum x ‘var.’

‘Pacific Sunset’ Maple

6

M

30

25

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

Aka ‘Warrenred’; rounded upright spreading, very glossy green foliage, finer branched, brighter yellow-orange to red fall color, turns color earlier than ‘Norwegian Sunset.’ (This tree is a cross of A. truncatum x A. platanoides ‘Warrensred’)

Acer truncatum x ‘var.’

‘Norwegian Sunset’ Maple

5

M

35

25

O

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

Good uniform branching structure, with glossy dark green foliage, yellow-orange to red fall color, more heat and drought tolerant than Norways, and even Pacific Sunset. Also called Keithsform.

Aesculus x carnea ‘var.’

‘Briotti’ Red Horsechestnut

6

N

50

45

O

N

Y

N

L

N

Y

N

Nearly fruitless.

Carpinus betulus

European Hornbeam

6

N

60

40

O

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Great, tolerant, tough urban tree. Not much fall color or spring flowers

Carpinus betulus ‘var.’

‘Fastigiate’ European Hornbeam

6

N

40

30

P

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

N

More narrow version of the European Hornbeam; tough, reliable, but not showy

Carpinus carolinia

American Hornbeam

6

M

35

35

O

Y

N

N

L

N

N

N

Native to the East Coast, but still a strong hardy tree with more open branching than the European form.

Celtis occidentalis ‘var.’

‘Chicagoland’ Hackberry

6

N

50

50

P

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Exceptionally tough; easy on infrastructure; may have trouble with psillids; late to leaf out; recovers slowly from transplant.

Celtis occidentalis ‘var.’

‘Prairie Pride’ Hackberry

6

N

50

50

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Exceptionally tough; easy on infrastructure; may have trouble with psillids; late to leaf out; recovers slowly from transplant.

Cercidiphyllum japonica

Katsuratree

6

N

45

60

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

Heart shaped, frilly leaves. Needs good watering for establishment or will dry up quickly.

Cercis canadensis

Eastern Redbud

4

M

30

35

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

Y

N

Magenta flowers before leaves in April/May. Hear-shaped leaves, red when emerging turning to green; yellow in fall. Susceptible to Verticillium.

Cercis canadensis ‘var’

‘Forest Pansy’ redbud

4

Y

25

25

R

N

N

N

M

N

Y

N

Purple leaves, gorgeous magenta flowers before leaves in spring.

Crecis reniformis ‘var’

Texas Redbud ‘Oklahoma’

4

Y

18

20

R

Y

Y

N

M

N

Y

N

Far better foliage and excellent substitute for Eastern Redbud; white flowers; tolerates drought better than species.

Chionanthus virginicus

Fringe Tree

4

M

20

15

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

Y

N

Slow growing, bright white fragrant flowers in Spring. Moderate drought tolerance.  Purple fruit attracts birds; not a significant litter problem; persistent. Stress may catalyze problems with scale, mites, leaf spots, powdery mildew, stem cankers. Best growth is with afternoon sun.

Cladrastis lutea

Yellowwood

4

N

50

55

R

N

Y

N

M

N

Y

N

Can be a vigorous grower. Drooping pannicles of white flowers in spring.

Clerodendrum trichotomum

Glorybower Tree

4

Y

20

20

R

N

N

N

M

N

Y

N

Lovely, tough, small tree with white flowers in LATE summer, followed by interesting purple fruit with magenta sepals. Late to leaf out. Heart shaped leaves that smell like peanut butter when rubbed. Can sucker, but is quite disease resistant.

Cornus kousa

Korean Dogwood

4

M

30

30

R

N

N

N

M

N

Y

Y

Great pagoda-like form; resists anthracnose; blooms later than C. florida; bracts are pointy and look like stars.

Crataegus laevigata ‘var.’

‘Crimson Cloud’ Hawthorne

4

Y

20

18

O

Y

Y

N

H

Y

Y

N

Grows well in city conditions, almost thornless. Resists leaf blight. Susceptible to aphids, lacebug, fireblight and rust. Growth is vigorous and upright. Staking may be need when trees are small and in exposed locations.

Crataegus phaenopyrum

Washington Hawthorn

4

M

30

25

O

Y

Y

N

H

Y

Y

Y

Tolerates severe urban stresses, but it does have slender 1"-3" thorns, on dense horizontal branches. Heavy snow may cause breaking of branches. Pruning this tree can be a challenge. ‘Princeton Sentry’ cultivar is almost thornless, upright branching, and pest free. ‘Manbeck Select’ has improved tree form.

Fraxinus americana ‘var.’

‘Autumn Applause’ White Ash

7

N

60

50

O

Y

N

N

L

N

N

Y

Improved growth habit, fall color, seedlessness. Deep red fall color.

Fraxinus americana ‘var.’

‘Champaign County’ White Ash

7

N

60

50

O

Y

N

N

L

N

N

Y

Improved in vigor, branching habit, foliage, fall color and seedlessness. Later fall color than other white ash; has shiny dark leaves, yellow-purple in fall.

Fraxinus americana ‘var.’

‘Autumn Purple’ White Ash

7

N

60

55

O

Y

N

N

L

N

N

Y

Improved vigor, form, and fall color - orange-maroon to dark burgundy in fall.

Fraxinus americana ‘var.’

‘Rosehill’ White Ash

7

N

65

45

P

Y

N

N

L

N

N

Y

Uniform branch attachment, narrow form with open crown, good fall color, seedlessness. Bronze-red fall color.

Fraxinus oxycarpa ‘var.’

‘Raywood’ Ash

7

N

50

50

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

Pinnately compound leaf with thin leaflets; some structural problems; brittle wood can break in storms, brilliant burgundy fall color, can heave sidewalks if not given enough space.

Fraxinus oxycarpa ‘var.’

‘Golden Desert’ Ash

4

Y

20

20

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

Closely related to ‘angustifolia’ ashes - narrow, pinnately compound leaves, and may be listed differently in the trade. Deciduous tree, 30 ft (9 m) tall and somewhat less of a spread, compact, rounded head. Foliage is reportedly yellowish in spring, green-yellow in summer, and yellow-gold in fall.

Fraxinus pennsylvanica ‘var.’

‘Urbanite’ Green Ash

7

N

60

45

P

Y

Y

N

M

N

N

Y

Full crowned tree with pleasing growth habit; parent tree has remained vigorous under city conditions and limited root space. Prune carefully to remove weak branch angles. Deep bronze-red in fall.

Fraxinus pennsylvanica ‘var.’

‘Summit’ Green Ash

7

N

60

55

R

Y

Y

N

M

N

N

N

Improved trunk, branching, and vigor. Thicker bark makes it resistant to mechanical injury. Abundant seeds. Golden yellow early fall color.

Fraxinus pennsylvanica ‘var.’

‘Marshall Seedless’ Green Ash

7

N

55

45

O

Y

Y

N

M

N

N

N

Partially seedless; improved form, leaves, vigor. Glossy dark green leaves, yellow fall color.

Ginkgo biloba ‘var.’

‘Princeton Sentry’ Ginkgo

7

N

65

30

P

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Male clone; narrowly conical. Transplants readily. Early pruning improves branching.

Ginkgo biloba ‘var.’

‘Autumn Gold’ Ginkgo

7

N

50

30

P

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Male clone; symmetrical conical form when young becoming broadly spreading with age.

Ginkgo biloba ‘var.’

‘Lakeview’ Ginkgo

7

N

55

35

P

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Male clone; this tree was developed for smaller sites (though it still gets pretty large)

Halesia carolina

Carolina Silverbell

6

N

60

35

O

Y

N

N

L

N

Y

N

Lovely bell shaped flowers in spring, followed by interesting 4-pointed fruit.

Maackia amurensis

Amur Maackia

5

M

35

30

V

N

Y

N

M

N

Y

N

Lovely tree that could be planted more often. Tends to spread widely and lower branches will droop into street or walkway unless pruned for structure early on. Usually found in multi-stem forms. Intolerant of saturated soils. Nitrogen-fixing legume. White flowers borne upright on stalks, in summer; pinnately compound leaf. Slow growth rate. Disease and pest free.

Magnolia stellata

Star Magnolia

4

Y

15

20

O

N

N

N

M

N

Y

N

Best as accent plant, not street tree. Gets Verticillium, buds can be damaged by frost. Transplant B&B; best in sheltered locales.

Nyssa sylvatica

Blackgum

6

N

70

45

O

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

Y

aka Black Tupelo; reputation for being difficult to establish - transplant B&B in spring; gorgeous fall color, glossy leaves; female trees may eventually produce small dark berries.

Ostrya virginiana

American Hop Hornbeam

6

N

40

25

P

N

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Hornbeam has a lovely yellow fall color, and the small nutlets, which ripen in summer and fall, are used by birds and mammals during the winter. Bark is an attractive orange or grayish brown peeling off in longitudinal strips. A rugged tree; tolerant of urban conditions and relatively care-free.

Parrotia persica

Persian Parrotia

4

N

40

30

R

N

Y

N

L

N

Y

Y

Flaky, mature bark is interesting.  This tree is related to witchazel and the leaves look similar.  This hardy tree turns red, orange, yellow and purple all on the same tree in the fall.

Prunus cerasifera ‘var.’

‘Newport’ Flowering Plum

4

Y

20

20

R

Y

Y

N

H

Y

Y

N

Probably the hardiest of purple-leaved plums. New growth is light-bronze; pale pink flowers early spring, 1" diameter fruits. Usual Prunus pest and disease problems; tends to have useful life in cities of about 20 years.

Prunus sargentii

Sargent Cherry

4

M

30

30

R

Y

Y

N

L

N

Y

Y

Deep rose-colored blooms in early; bark is polished mahogany. Hardiest of Japanese cherries. Tends to be short lived (only 20 years!). ‘Columnaris’ cultivar is recommended for narrow spaces. Typical cherry disease issues.

Prunus serrulata ‘var.’

‘Kwanzan’ Flowering Cherry

6

M

35

25

R

Y

Y

N

M

N

Y

Y

aka ‘Sekiyama’; branches upright into vase-shape; large double rosy pink pendulous midseason blossoms. See species info. CAUTION: Overplanted.

Prunus x yedoensis

Yoshino Flowering Cherry

6

N

50

50

R

Y

Y

N

M

N

Y

N

Horizontal open branches; Early single light pink to nearly white. This kind planted in Wash, DC tidal basin. Needs good drainage, consistent water.

Pyrus calleryana ‘var.’

‘Aristocrat’ Callery Pear

5

N

45

40

P

Y

Y

N

M

N

Y

Y

Early, single white flowers with glossy green leaves. Yellow-red fall color. VERY susceptible to fireblight.

Pyrus calleryana ‘var.’

‘Chanticleer’ Callery Pear

5

N

40

20

P

Y

Y

N

L

N

Y

Y

aka ‘Cleveland Select’;  Narrow tree; early, single white flowers with glossy green leaves. Orange-reddish purple fall color. Fireblight resistant.

Quercus robur ‘var.’

‘Skymaster’ English Oak

6

N

50

25

P

N

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Uniform shape and strong upright branching makes it look better than the species.

Styrax japonicus

Japanese Snowbell

4

M

30

30

R

Y

N

N

M

N

Y

N

Bell-shaped white flowers in May; delicate appearance.

Syringa reticulata

Japanese Tree Lilac

4

M

30

25

R

N

Y

N

L

N

Y

N

Blooms on new growth late in the lilac season. Smooth glossy red-brown bark.

Syringa reticulata ‘var’

Ivory Silk’ Japanese Tree Lilac

4

M

30

20

O

N

Y

N

L

N

Y

N

Large clusters of creamy while lilac flowers in summer. Can be multi-stemmed or single stemmed. Persistent fruits, but not much of litter problem. Borers can cause wilting problems with drought-stressed trees.  Plant in full sun to avoid powdery mildew.

Tilla cordata ‘var.’

‘Glenleven’ Littleleaf Linden

6

N

70

50

P

Y

M

N

M

N

Y

N

May be a cross with T. americana; improved form and branching, straight trunk, larger leaves than species trees, flowers attract bees.

Tilla cordata ‘var.’

‘Greenspire’ Littleleaf Linden

6

N

70

50

P

Y

M

N

M

N

Y

N

Rapid growth, improved form, smaller leaves, greater tolerance of urban conditions.

Ulmus ‘Pioneer’

Pioneer Elm

7

N

50

50

O

Y

Y

N

L

N

N

N

Resists DED and elm yellows. Susceptible to elm leaf beetle. Vigorous and highly tolerant of urban conditions.

Zelkova serrata ‘var.’

‘Halka’ Japanese Zelkova

6

N

50

30

O

Y

Y

N

M

N

N

Y

Good tolerance to urban and seacoast conditions, grows rapidly, resembles American elm more than other cultivars.

Zelkova serrata ‘var.’

‘Green Vase’ Japanese Zelkova

6

N

70

55

O

Y

Y

N

M

N

N

Y

Leaves turn bronze-red in fall. Very hardy tree. Branches-out higher than ‘Village Green’ for easy clearance.

Zelkova serrata ‘var.’

‘Village Green’ Japanese Zelkova

6

N

60

60

R

Y

Y

N

M

N

N

Y

The crown form is broader than ‘Green Vase’. Otherwise, similar to other zelkova cultivars.

 

Legend

H – High, L – Low, M – Medium,

N – No, Y – Yes

O – Oval, P – Pyramidal, R – Round

 

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.42.050 Tree cutting and preservation.
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the removal and preservation of trees and to protect trees as a natural resource of the City. It is the intent of this section to allow the prudent management of trees by individual property owners and developers where such management is in keeping with the purposes of this section.

B.  Tree Removal Permits Applicability.

1.   No person shall remove a tree that is six inches or more in diameter at four and one-half feet above ground level, without first obtaining a tree removal permit from the City. Permits shall be either a Type A permit or a Type B permit.

2.   All tree removal permit fees shall be determined by resolution of the City Council.

3.   The City may impose additional conditions in writing upon approval of a Type A or B tree removal application such as the time and nature of the removal, mitigation measures, erosion control or other reasonable conditions.

4.   Tree removal fees (per tree) for trees determined to be located within the development envelope and associated tree impact zone around development not associated with subdivision construction, planned unit development (PUD) construction, land partition construction or nonresidential construction, and for hazard trees (dangerous, diseased or dying) shall be waived. This waiver shall not include the filing fee.

5.   Trees that exist within an existing lot of record, parcel or lot that are not part of preliminary subdivision or PUD may be removed for the creation or preservation of view corridors in the City. Applications to remove trees for the creation or preservation of view corridors shall be made upon forms prescribed by the City. Application type shall be dependent upon whether the applicant meets Type A or Type B permit criteria.

6.   Tree removal from forested lands outside of commercially viable tree farms pursuant to the definition of “tree farm” preceding building construction or land development activities is prohibited. Tree farms and fruit or nut orchards that can demonstrate current commercial growing and harvesting operations shall be excluded from the provisions of this title, except where the removal of trees would create a significant increase in erosion as determined by the City Engineer, in which case a Type A or Type B permit shall be required.

C.  Type A Permits.

1.   Type A permits are required if all of the following criteria are met:

a.     The applicant proposes to remove a maximum of three trees;

b.     The property does not contain areas subject to Chapter 16.32 or Chapter 16.34 of the LDC; and

c.     The property does not contain trees protected as a condition of approval of development pursuant to the LDC.

2.   An application for a Type A tree removal permit shall be made upon forms prescribed by the City. Upon submittal of the required application a representative of the City may make a site visit prior to issuance of the permit to verify the information contained in the application. The application for a permit shall contain at a minimum:

a.     The number, size, species and location of trees to be cut;

b.     The time and method of cutting or removal;

c.     A site plan or sketch depicting where each individual tree sought to be removed and each replacement tree, if any, is located;

d.     A statement of the reason for cutting or removal;

e.     Information concerning any proposed mitigation or landscaping measures to be taken to replace the tree(s) that is (are) to be removed;

f.      Any erosion control measures that are to be implemented;

g.     Any other relevant information that may be required by the City.

3.   The following procedure shall be followed for Type A permits:

a.     By submission of an application, the applicant shall be deemed to have authorized City representatives access to the property as may be needed to verify the information provided, to observe site conditions, and if a permit is granted, to verify that terms and conditions of the permit have been followed;

b.     Upon application for a tree removal permit, the applicant shall clearly mark all trees requested for removal. Trees may be marked by colored tape, paper or any other clearly identifiable marking. A representative of the City may then make a site visit to examine the trees requested for removal;

c.     Within seven working days, the City shall notify an applicant if the application is deemed complete or not complete. Within ten (10) working days of the submission of a complete or completed Type A application, the City shall grant or deny the application.

4.   Type A permits shall be evaluated based upon the following criteria:

a.     It is the intent of this section to allow the prudent management of trees where such management is in keeping with the purposes of this section. Type A permits shall be granted upon a showing that tree removal is consistent with prudent management of trees, does not constitute a hazard to property or other necessary uses and does not negatively affect scenic, ecological, wildlife or similar values.

5.   No property for which a Type A permit has been granted may be the subject of an application for a subsequent Type A permit for a period of twelve (12) months; provided, however, that this limitation may be waived by the City upon a showing of extreme hardship or exigent circumstances. All removal work commenced after the issuance of a tree removal permit, including, but not limited to, the removal and disposal of trees and debris permitted to be removed, shall be completed within ninety (90) days after the issuance of a tree removal permit. If tree removal work has not been completed within ninety (90) days, a new permit must be applied for.

6.   An applicant for a Type A permit is responsible for obtaining all necessary State and Federal permits that may, in addition to City approvals. be required for a tree removal proposal. This includes abiding by State and Federal wildlife protection laws.

D.  Type B Permits.

1.   Type B permits are required for all circumstances where the criteria for a Type A permit are not met.

2.   Type B permit applications shall contain all information required for a Type A application as provided in subsection C above. In addition, a Type B application shall include:

a.     A tree survey prepared by a certified arborist, or other qualified landscape specialist as approved by the City, which describes size, species, health and condition of trees, and a map at a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, that locates trees on the property. An arborist-prepared survey is not required for trees determined to be located within the development envelope and associated tree impact zone around the development area not associated with subdivision construction, planned unit development (PUD) construction, land partition construction or nonresidential construction, or if the Planning Official or designee can easily determine that the tree(s) in question are dead or dying. Drainageways, wetlands and surface water features shall also be identified on the map, unless waived by the Planning Official or designee;

b.     A Tree Removal Plan. The plan shall identify each tree to be removed, describe protective fencing or markings around other trees or spaces to protect surrounding vegetation, and shall map proposed mitigation and erosion control measures. In addition, the plan shall designate grade changes, if any, proposed for the property. Individual trees that are to be removed during construction of a development shall be clearly identified on the tree removal plan, and must receive approval from the City. The plan shall illustrate typical building envelopes as allowed by the required yard setbacks of the underlying development district or actual building envelopes at the discretion of the Planning Official or designee, particularly for multifamily, institutional, commercial or industrial developments; easements; or any other structural development constraints, and shall be based on the final grading plan. All trees proposed for removal must exist within grading areas for public rights-of-way and public infrastructure and utility areas, pursuant to Section 15.12.050 of the Happy Valley Municipal Code, including stormwater detention facilities pursuant to Section 16.50.060 of this Code; and, within the potential or actual building envelope. At the discretion of the Planning Official, tree removal from individual lots may also be proposed for removal or may be subject to a separate Type A or Type B permit as described in subsection B. Removal of trees outside of the areas approved as part of the original subdivision, PUD, partition or nonresidential tree removal plan shall be permitted only upon demonstration by a certified arborist that retention of trees within these areas represents a significant hazard to public health, safety and welfare (including potential damage to structures), or maintains a “view corridor.” Review and approval of said arborist report shall be the responsibility of the Planning Official and City Engineer (or designees). The Planning Official or designee shall determine the tree mitigation ratio for all tree removal as detailed within subsection D of this section, with a maximum ratio of three trees to one removed.

i.      Optimal Tree Protection Zone. The minimum distance from the center of a tree to the disturbance line shall be one foot of radius per inch of diameter at breast height (dbh), as measured four and one-half feet above the uphill side of the tree. Within these parameters, no more than thirty-three (33) percent of the area may be disturbed, though with healthy vigorous trees, up to fifty (50) percent of the area may be disturbed if supported by a certified arborist.

ii.     A tree that is adjacent to a public right-of-way, public infrastructure and utility area, or potential or actual building footprint shall be retained only if protected within the optimal tree protection zone as defined above. Within the portion of the optimal tree protection zone that is being protected, a substantial fence or barrier shall exist. Within the fenced area, no soil disturbance, including stripping, is permitted. The natural grade is to be maintained, and no storage or dumping of materials, parking, etc. will be allowed within this protection area. The protection area fence or barrier shall remain in place through the construction of the structure. If excavation is proposed within the optimal tree protection zone (outside of the fenced off protection area), tree roots shall be pruned along excavation lines in the following manner:

(A)   Excavation in the top twenty-four (24) inches of the soil in the critical root zone area should begin at the excavation line that is closest to the tree;

(B)   Excavation is to occur with a hand shovel or a backhoe accompanied by a person with a shovel, pruning shears and a pruning saw;

(C)   When shoveling, all roots one inch diameter or larger shall be pruned at the excavation line. When a backhoe is utilized, the operator starts the cut at the excavation line and if encountering roots or resistance, has the person with the shovel/shears/saw prune any roots that are larger than one inch diameter;

(D)   Backhoes are to remain off the roots that are to be saved at all times; and

(E)   All excavation work within the optimal tree protection zone (outside of the fenced protection area) shall be accomplished under the supervision of a certified arborist.

c.     The review body shall determine the tree mitigation ratio for all tree removal as detailed within subsection D (except for partitions), with a maximum ratio of three trees to one removed. The Planning Official or designee shall determine the tree mitigation ratio for all tree removal in conjunction with a partition application, as detailed within subsection D, with a maximum ratio of three trees to one removed. Mitigation requirements shall not apply to trees removed that are identified by a certified arborist as dead or dying. An arborist report is not required if the Planning Official or designee can easily determine that the tree(s) in question are dead or dying. For Type B permits, the City may require that replacement trees have shade or erosion control potential or other characteristics comparable to or greater than the removed trees. Replacement trees shall be appropriately chosen for the site from an approved tree species list supplied by the City (see Appendix A), or as approved by a representative of the City, and shall be nursery Grade No. 1 or better. All replacement trees shall be at least one and one-quarter to one and one-half inches (bag and burlap) in diameter at breast height (dbh), as measured by caliper method for non-wetland, non-riparian corridor mitigation area, or non-slope re-vegetation sites. Within wetland, or riparian corridor mitigation sites, trees may be bare-root or greater. The preparation of lands for tree planting (e.g., removal and control of non-native species via a submitted management plan) may count for up to two-thirds of the required mitigation ratio. Within slope re-vegetation areas identified in a Native Vegetation Report prepared pursuant to Section 16.32.070(B)(2)(c), native trees and/or shrubs proposed consistent with the recommendations contained in said report may satisfy the required mitigation ratio. The City may review and modify tree replacement plans in order to provide optimum enhancement, preservation and protection of wooded areas. Where it is not feasible or desirable to relocate or replace trees on site, relocation or replacement may be made at an approved alternate public or private property in the City, or the property owner, builder or developer may make financial contribution to the City’s “Tree Bank” equal to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per tree, for the actual number of trees removed. If weather/irrigation conditions do not support planting of the mitigation trees, the builder or developer may secure the mitigated number of trees with a City-approved financial security (bonds, irrevocable letters of credit, bank set-asides, cash, etc.).

3.   The following procedure shall be followed for Type B permits:

a.     By submission of an application, the applicant shall be deemed to have authorized City representatives access to the property as may be needed to verify the information provided, to observe site conditions, and if a permit is granted, to verify that terms and conditions of the permit have been followed. All trees are to be clearly marked by the applicant for inspection by a City representative, prior to removal;

b.     No property for which a Type B permit has been granted may be the subject of an application for a subsequent Type B permit for a period of twelve (12) months; provided, however, that this limitation may be waived by the City upon a showing of extreme hardship or exigent circumstances. If tree removal work has not been completed within ninety (90) days, a new permit must be applied for. By submittal of a written request, the Planning Official may extend this period up to two additional ninety (90) day periods.

4.   Type B permits shall be evaluated based upon the following criteria:

a.     It is the intent of this section to allow the prudent management of trees where such management is in keeping with the purposes of this section. Type B permits shall be granted upon a showing that tree removal is either:

i.      Necessary for the construction of a building, addition, structure or other approved site improvement, and there is no feasible or reasonable alternative option for such improvement which would not require removal of trees; or

ii.     Necessary to remove a tree or trees that is/are diseased, damaged or in danger of falling, or which present(s) a hazard to people or adjacent property; or

iii.    Necessary to provide safe and adequate access to utility service, utility drainage or right-of-way.

5.   An applicant for a Type B permit is responsible for obtaining all necessary State and Federal permits that may, in addition to City approvals, be required for a tree removal proposal. This includes abiding by State and Federal wildlife protection laws.

E.  Tree Removal from Open Spaces and Areas Adjacent to Drainageways.

1.   At no time shall trees be removed from open spaces in a development, except under circumstances of danger, or threat to life and property as determined by a representative of the City.

2.   Removal of trees will not be allowed within thirty (30) feet of the high water mark on either side of an identified drainageway. An identified drainageway shall be one that is identified on a United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey 7.5 Minute Quadrangle Map (“U.S. Geological Survey Map”). No tree may be removed from an identified drainageway unless such tree is determined by a City representative to be a dangerous tree. For any drainageway that is not identified upon the United States Geological Survey Map, the permittee shall have the burden of demonstrating that the tree removal sought will not cause or contribute to erosion. The City may require that added erosion control measures be implemented to prevent erosion. The City may require additional documentation substantiating a claim of dangerous circumstances alleged to necessitate the removal of trees from within an identified drainageway. This request for information may include, but is not limited to, a certified arborist report confirming the danger posed by the tree(s) in question.

F.  Emergency Permits. If any tree presents an immediate danger of collapse, posing a clear and present hazard to persons and/or property, such tree may be removed without formal application for a Type A or B permit and the payment of a tree removal permit fee may be waived by the Planning Official or designee. For the purposes of this section, “immediate danger of collapse” means that the tree is already leaning, with the surrounding soil heaving, and there is a significant likelihood that the tree will topple or otherwise fall and cause damage before a tree removal permit can be obtained through the nonemergency process. The tree owner should photograph the tree showing emergency conditions and then may proceed with the removal of the tree to the extent necessary to avoid the immediate hazard. Within seven days after such removal, the tree owner shall apply for a retroactive emergency tree removal permit. If the evidence and information presented by the tree owner do not meet the criteria for an emergency tree removal permit set forth in this section, the owner shall be subject to penalties as set forth in subsection H of this section. Tree removal permit application fees may also be waived by a representative of the City after the emergency condition has been adequately verified.

G.  Mitigation of Tree Removal within Annexation Areas. Previously unincorporated areas within Clackamas County that have annexed within the City of Happy Valley and have caused significant removal (greater than fifty (50) percent) of the “forest canopy” that are not part of a “tree farm” pursuant to City definitions, shall be evaluated at the time of land division or site design review application for past tree removal. For discernible mass tree removal by remaining stumps, logging permit records, survey data or any other means authorized by the Planning Official that has occurred within a previous five-year period from submittal of a complete land use application, tree mitigation at a ratio of 2:1 shall be required. If on or off-site tree mitigation efforts are not accomplished pursuant to the auspices of this chapter, the applicant may make payment to the City’s Tree Bank in lieu of tree planting mitigation.

H.  Topping, Thinning and Pruning of Trees.

1.   Trees severely damaged by storms or other uncontrollable natural causes, trees under utility wires or other obstructions making normal pruning practices impractical, trees that are being made into “habitat trees” that are outside of a fall area that could damage persons or property and trees that have been continually topped and trimmed over time to be maintained as a visual screen or to perform a similar function may be topped without a tree removal permit. All other tree topping is prohibited.

2.   Trees shall not be limbed in any manner that removes more than thirty (30) percent of the existing limbs. This requirement is intended to allow for normal tree pruning, but eliminate the consecutive limbing of trees from top to bottom.

I.   Violation and Penalties.

1.   If a tree is removed without a tree removal permit, a violation may be determined by measuring the stump. A stump that is six inches or more in diameter at four and one-half feet above ground level, or as close to four and one-half feet above ground level as can be determined from remaining evidence, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.

2.   Failure to follow any requirements or conditions of an approved tree cutting permit shall constitute a violation of this section.

3.   Removal of the stump of a tree cut without a tree removal permit prior to the determination provided for in subsection (H)(1) of this section is a separate, additional violation of this section.

4.   Each day’s violation of any provision of this section constitutes a separate offense. Each individual tree removed in violation of the requirements of this section shall be a separate offense hereunder. Failure to comply with a condition of approval shall be a separate infraction each day the failure to comply continues. Each offense or infraction is subject to a civil penalty as prescribed in Section 16.13.020 of this title.

5.   A person who removes a tree subject to this section without first obtaining a valid tree removal permit may obtain a retroactive permit by demonstrating that the removal complied with the applicable criteria for obtaining a tree removal permit. No person may obtain more than one retroactive permit. In addition, the applicant may be subject to additional mitigation requirements as determined by the City.

6.   Upon request of the City Manager or at the direction of the City Council, the City Attorney may institute appropriate legal action to enjoin the removal of trees in violation of this section, or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this section.

7.   The City shall have authority to issue a stop-work order, withhold approval of a final plat and/or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permit or inspection until the provisions of this section have been fully complied with.

8.   A builder, developer or tree service holding a City business license who is convicted of violating any provision of this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license, at the discretion of the City Council.

9.   Any arborist, landscaper, contractor or tree service that has performed any tree removal in violation of this section or submitted a falsified report in connection with any tree removal or application for any tree removal covered by this section, shall not be considered a responsible bidder for any City contracts for a period of five years from the date of violation and/or penalty, whichever is later. The City Council may, at its discretion, waive this provision upon a showing of good cause.

10. Removal of a tree in violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by appropriate proceedings pursuant to City Charter Section 21.

11. The owner of the property upon which tree removal takes place is subject to enforcement and penalties pursuant to this section regardless of whether such owner personally conducts activities in violation of this section.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.42.060 Fencing, walls and screening.
A.  While fencing, walls or screening is not uniformly mandatory for all residential development, perimeter street fences, walls and earthen berms along arterial or collector streets in residential districts have significant visual impacts, particularly with respect to traffic safety, site visibility and design aesthetics affecting major transportation corridors. Therefore, perimeter street fences, walls, berms and required landscaping (between a new fence required by Table 16.42.060-1 and the public right-of-way) shall be installed by the developer prior to the issuance of structural building permits according to the standards listed in Table 16.42.060-1 and be required by the development’s Codes, Covenants and Restrictions (CC&Rs) to be maintained over time:

 

Table 16.42.060-1 Arterial and Collector Street Frontage Screening

 

Project Character

Development Standard

Arterial or collector frontage—double front loaded (garage and front door facing interior street)

Option 1: Masonry or brick walls treated with anti-graffiti sealant.

Option 2: Solid wood uniformly stained (any variety of the color brown) fence with masonry or brick columns (maximum spacing of 24 feet between columns) with cap board and treated with anti-graffiti sealant.

Option 3: Solid earthen berms no greater than 25 percent in slope, with stabilizing landscaping on all areas of the slopes, and subject to the landscape plan design and construction standards of this title.

All fences, walls or berms shall be six feet high, however, fences taller than two and one-half feet shall not be allowed in clear vision areas. If a fence or wall is located in a utility easement, a minimum five-foot wide landscape strip shall exist (as measured back toward the structure from the property line adjacent to the street), subject to the landscape plan design and construction standards of this title. Landscaping within these areas shall be installed prior to the issuance of structural building permits.

Arterial or collector frontage—rear loaded (front door facing arterial or collector, garage facing interior street)

Option 1: Masonry or brick walls treated with anti-graffiti sealant.

Option 2: Decorative metal fence with masonry or brick columns.

Option 3: Solid wood uniformly stained (any variety of the color brown) fence with masonry or brick columns (maximum spacing of 24 feet between columns) with cap board and treated with anti-graffiti sealant.

All fences shall be at least four feet high, however, fences taller than two and one-half feet shall not be allowed in clear vision areas. If the fence or wall is located in a utility easement, a minimum five-foot wide landscape strip shall exist (as measured back toward the structure from the property line adjacent to the street), subject to the landscape plan design and construction standards of this title. Landscaping within these areas shall be installed prior to the issuance of structural building permits.

 

 

B.  Criteria. When reviewing all proposals for partitions, subdivision of land or planned unit development, or multifamily projects, the approval authority shall determine the need and desirability of fencing or screening within the development site area. The review body, may at its discretion, condition the fencing/screening along collector or arterial street frontage per one of the three design options listed in Table 16.42.060-1, including location within any public utility easement (PUE). In its consideration, the approval authority shall use the following criteria:

1.   The intended use for the area;

2.   Surrounding uses and existing fence, wall or berm sections, their design, materials and appearance;

3.   The impact of the intended use upon surrounding uses and vice versa;

4.   The need for fencing or screening to reduce the amount of use conflicts, noise, wind, dust, vision and other forms of pollution and conflicts;

5.   The need and desirability for the replacement of trees removed from the site as a result of the proposed development;

6.   The relationship and appearance between alley-loaded or rear facing lots on an arterial or collector facility in conjunction with primary and accessory structure rear yard setbacks; and

7.   The placement of utility vaults, transformers and similar facilities shall be accommodated by the fence/columns by providing adequate clear space and access to the facility per the specifications of the utility company. As necessary, the fence/columns will provide retaining walls, variation of the fence/column location into the PUD, gates and signage and all other accommodations necessary to achieve the aesthetic objectives of the continuous fence/columns, while providing for all utility facilities, and access thereof, necessary to serve any given project or development.

C.  All fencing, walls or screening shall be subject to the following standards and requirements:

1.   Side and Rear Setback Areas. In any residential district, a “stand-alone” fence or decorative wall not to exceed six feet in height may be located or maintained within the required interior side or rear yards. For exterior side yards within corner lots, a maximum six-foot tall fence or decorative wall may exist within the exterior side yard to the point of the front building line, or the presence of any sight visibility area and/or easement, whichever occurs first. However, a fence which is structurally engineered by determination of the Building Official and receives a building permit may be constructed to a maximum height of eight feet. Grading and design requirements for fencing, walls or screening are subject to applicable provisions of Section 16.50.100 of this title.

2.   Front Property Setback Areas. Within any required front yard, a maximum four-foot tall fence or decorative wall may exist within the front yard, unless located within a sight visibility area and/or easement, in which case said fence or decorative wall shall not exceed two and one-half feet in height.

3.   In any district, trees, shrubbery, berms, arbors, trellises and similar landscape features are permitted in all required yards provided that on corner lots no object or planting shall obscure vision between the vertical heights of two and one-half feet and eight feet, as measured from the adjoining curb elevation, for the triangular area which has sides extending from the corner of the property in either direction, the same distance as the front yard setback requirement for that district.

4.   Height and Opacity. Where landscaping is used for required screening, it shall be at least six feet in height and at least eighty (80) percent opaque, as seen from a perpendicular line of sight, within two years following establishment of the primary use of the site. Landscaping that provides a buffer between a commercial or industrial structure that is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of a residential zone or use shall provide solid sight and sound elements such as earthen berms, solid wood fences, or masonry walls. Chain-link fencing with slats shall not qualify as a solid sight and sound element.

5.   Chain Link Fencing. A chain link fence with slats shall qualify for screening only if a landscape buffer is also provided in compliance with this section.

6.   The height of hedges, fences, walls, and berms shall be measured from the lowest adjoining finished grade, except where used to comply with screening requirements for parking, loading, storage, and similar areas. In these cases, height shall be measured from the finished grade of such improvements. Screening is not permitted within vision clearance areas.

7.   Earthen berms up to six feet in height may be used to comply with screening requirements. Slope of berms may not exceed 2:1 and both faces of the slope shall be planted with groundcover, shrubs, and trees.

8.   Long expanses of fences and walls shall be designed to prevent visual monotony through use of offsets, changes of materials and textures, or landscaping.

9.   Fence height restrictions do not apply to public utility fences, “deer fences” or similar fences constructed of “wire mesh” type products, baseball backstops, or chain link fences enclosing schools and playgrounds.

10. Fencing along open space tracts and conservation easements shall comprise of either split rail vinyl or stained cedar. Fencing along stormwater detention facilities shall be six-foot tall, black, vinyl-coated chain link or the most current requirement of Clackamas County Service District No. 1.

D.  For any development of a structure, yard or any facility requiring the utilization of retaining walls, retaining walls over four feet in height require the approval of an engineering permit, including provisions for stormwater management. Within any zoning district, on property immediately abutting existing residences or residential districts, the maximum single-face retaining wall height within an individual existing lot of record, parcel or lot (as created after any retaining walls necessary for public or private infrastructure such as streets, drive-aisles, parking lots, stormwater detention facilities, etc.) shall have a maximum height of eight feet, as measured from the downslope face of the retaining wall. Retaining walls may be terraced up the slopes of existing lots of record, parcels or lots, but shall have a minimum distance between walls of the height of the downslope retaining wall, as measured from the upslope side of the lower retaining wall to the downslope side of the upper retaining wall. All retaining walls abutting other single-family residences or zoning districts shall provide solid vegetative screening along the entire linear face of the lowest retaining wall. Fences or decorative walls may exist atop retaining walls, and are measured in height independent of the retaining wall. Said facilities may exist to the maximum height allowed in the front, interior side, exterior side (corner lot) or rear setback area.

E.  Pools. For the purpose of safety, any property which contains any size in-ground swimming pool or an above-ground swimming pool any part of which is less than forty-eight (48) inches in height above grade shall be fenced with an artificial fence of continuous construction of not less than four feet in height. Additionally, the gate entrances to the pool area should be lockable.

F.  Screening of Service Facilities. Site-obscuring shrubbery or a berm, wall or fence shall be placed along a property line between residential and commercial and industrial zones and around unsightly areas such as trash and recycling areas, gas meters, ground level air-conditioning units, disc antennas exceeding thirty-six (36) inches in diameter and equipment storage or an industrial or commercial use with outside storage of equipment or materials.

G.  Outdoor Storage. All outdoor storage areas for commercial, industrial, public and semi-public uses are to be entirely screened by a sight obscuring fence, vegetative materials, or other alternative deemed appropriate by the Planning Official or designee. Exceptions to the preceding requirements include: new or used cars, cycles and trucks sales (but not including car parts or damaged vehicles); new or used boat sales; recreational vehicle sales; new or used large equipment sales or rentals; manufactured home sales, florists and plants nurseries. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 443 § 1, 2013; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.42.070 Lighting.
A.  Purpose.

1.   This section has been formulated to allow for the provision of street lighting for reasons of safety, health, peace and general welfare of all users and the citizens of and visitors to Happy Valley. It is the intent of this section that such lighting shall be provided by and through annexation of the City to Clackamas County Service District No. 5 or its successor.

2.   The rules and regulations set forth in this section are jointly established by the City, Clackamas County Service District No. 5, or its successor, and Portland General Electric Co. (PGE) for all street lighting installation and service within the City.

B.  Street Light Design Requirements.

1.   Street lighting installations to be provided with light from dusk to dawn daily, activated by photo-electrical control.

2.   Whenever any installation of street lighting is made, the City, in cooperation with the District and PGE, or its successor, shall approve the design for such lighting. Street lighting design shall conform to the following requirements:

a.     Street lighting shall be provided only on public rights-of-way;

b.     Illumination levels shall be guided by the recommendations of the most current edition of the “American National Standard—Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting”;

c.     The luminaire spacing may be modified to meet existing conditions such as utility poles, property lines, roadway geometry, trees, signs, buildings or any other obstacle within the right-of-way, at the discretion of the City.

C.  Street Lighting Service.

1.   New Development. For any subdivision of land or planned unit development, the landowner or developer, as a part of the minimum improvement standards, shall install street lighting on all public streets within the development. The recommended standards of this section and PGE shall be used for placement of light standards for uniformity of illumination.

2.   Public Safety. Whenever the City determines that, in the interest of public safety, street lights should be installed anywhere in the City, the City Manager, or Public Works Director, or their designee, shall initiate the processes of both selection and installation of appropriate fixtures.

3.   Installation and Maintenance. PGE shall install and maintain all materials and equipment. This includes lamp replacement on burnouts as soon as reasonably possible after notification.

D.  Special Lighting.

1.   Special lighting different from these standards may be approved by the review body when used for lighting parks, picnic areas, entrance areas of a subdivision and other areas requiring special lighting. Such lighting shall not be a part of the lighting district and shall be separately metered and paid for by the homeowners’ association or those residents benefiting from the special lighting.

2.   Any lighting proposed by a landowner or developer for any open space whether public or private in a subdivision or planned unit development shall be reviewed by the City and either approved or denied as a part of Section 16.63.060. All lighting in open spaces should contribute to the safety, health, peace and general welfare of all users and the citizens of and visitors to Happy Valley.

E.  Standards for Materials and Equipment for Street Lighting.

1.   Local private and public residential and neighborhood streets outside of new subdivisions/PUDs, and excluding properties annexed to the City after August 1, 2003 and properties located in the Rock Creek and East Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan areas:

a.     Poles (new or replacement): Fiberglass poles meeting PGE specifications, thirty (30) foot overall length for twenty-five (25) foot mounting height. Color to be bronze. Special poles may be required for minor arterials at the discretion of the City;

b.     Bracket: An eight-inch arm pursuant to PGE specifications;

c.     Luminaire: Shoebox luminaire having a drop lens or flat lens, as required;

d.     Lamp: High pressure sodium vapor. Wattage of lamps to vary with design requirements, street designation and location;

e.     All other standards for materials and equipment other than those set forth above shall be those established by the District in cooperation with PGE.

2.   Local private and public residential and neighborhood streets including all developments within properties annexed to the City after August 1, 2003 and within the City’s Urban Growth Management Area:

a.     Poles (new): Decorative Westbrook pole, luminaire, lamp and all other standards for materials and equipment as established by Clackamas County Service District No. 5 and Portland General Electric.

3.   Collector Streets, Minor Arterials, and Major Arterials. Lighting fixtures and equipment must be identified on the current Portland General Electric approved fixture list, and must be further approved by the City of Happy Valley  Public Works Director and Clackamas County Service District No. 5.

 

F.  Financing.

1.   Method. The method of financing the installation, operation and maintenance of street lighting service facilities shall be by annual assessment against property benefited by street lighting. Property considered benefited by street lighting service is that property with access to a public right-of-way served with street lighting.

2.   Means. Assessments shall be billed and collected with the property tax statement for Clackamas County and shall be identified on the statement as a special assessment for Clackamas County Service District No. 5.

3.   Rate Schedule. Rate schedules shall be classified according to the primary type of electrical distribution. All areas of similar service shall be placed into one of the rate schedules that follow:

 

a.     Rate Schedule A. Lots which are served by utility owned luminaries mounted on existing electrical distribution poles with overhead service. Some street light only poles may be used.

b.     Rate Schedule B. Lots which are served by utility owned luminaries mounted on underground served street light only poles.

c.     Rate Schedule C. Any other area not conforming to one of the above rate schedules and/or served by optional equipment.

d.     Rate Schedule D. Adjustment of rate schedules for street or other public area lighting or lighting alterations having a citywide benefit.

4.   Rate. Rates for each schedule shall be established on the basis of City and District cost for equipment, maintenance, energy and administration.

5.   Benefit. All lots in each of rate schedules A, B and D are considered to be equally benefited without regard to frontage, lot size or luminaire size, spacing and location. All lots in rate schedule C are considered to be benefited according to the amount of frontage abutting the public right-of-way served by street lighting, without regard to lot size or luminaire size, spacing and location.

6.   Initial Assessments. Assessments for new installations shall begin on July 1st following the installation. The initial assessment rate shall include a prorated amount from any prior fractional year of service plus the current rate established for the tax year beginning July 1st.

7.   Special Conditions. Owners requesting street light installation shall be assessed for costs associated with trenching, conduit, transformers, restoration and any other initial cost of installation not provided for by State Schedule 91 for Portland General Electric Company. Installation costs shall be assessed by the same method as for street light services. Assessments exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be eligible for Bancroft financing in accordance with ORS 451.530 or appropriate state statute.

G.  Removal.

1.   Request. Whenever any interested person requests removal of street lights, the request shall be in petition form and shall contain the signatures of more than fifty (50) percent of the owners of land to be affected by the street light removal. Petitions shall contain a description of the area as well as the reason for requesting such removal.

2.   Removal. The City, before attempting to remove street lighting, shall:

a.     Provide for notice to affected owners of the intention to remove street lighting and to assess affected property for all of the cost;

b.     Provide the affected owners with an estimate of the cost of removal;

c.     Provide for a hearing at which time affected owners may appear to object to the removal of street lighting.

3.   Notice. Notice shall be by first class mail to the name and mailing address of each owner as listed by the tax assessor of Clackamas County.

4.   Cost. If street lighting is removed at the request of the affected owners, a charge shall be made consisting of the installed cost, less accrued depreciation and less salvage value, and plus cost of removal.

 

5.   Payment. Removal costs shall be assessed by the same method as for street light service. Assessments exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be eligible for Bancroft financing in accordance with ORS 451.530 or appropriate state statute.

(Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.42.080 Shared outdoor recreation areas.
A.  Applicability. The standards of this section apply to subdivisions of thirty (30) or more units.

B.  Exemptions. The standards of this section do not apply to PUDs subject to the open space requirements of Section 16.63.130(H)(1) or multifamily housing, single-family attached housing, duplexes and triplexes subject to the outdoor recreation area requirements of Section 16.44.010(C)(10).

C.  Density. The recreation area requirements of this section shall not affect the number of dwelling units allowed by the density calculations in Section 16.63.020. Applicants may include the recreation area tract when applying lot size averaging and the flexible lot size standards in Section 16.63.030(A) in order to achieve the permitted density.

D.  Recreation area tracts required by this section must meet the following standards:

1.   Size. Each tract must be at least one hundred (100) feet wide by one hundred (100) feet deep;

2.   Location. No more than fifty (50) percent of each recreation area tract may be in a Natural Resource Overlay Zone or in a Flood Management Overlay Zone;

3.   Accessibility. Each recreation area tract must have at least thirty (30) feet of street frontage;

4.   Ownership. The tracts must be owned in common by all of the owners of the land division site, owned by a homeowners’ association, or owned by a public agency; and

5.   Improvements. The applicant must submit a surety and construction timing agreement prior to final plat approval. The construction timing agreement will specify the installation schedule of all improvements.

E.  Required Recreation Area Approval Criteria. All of the following approval criteria must be met:

1.   Location. Each recreation area must be located on a part of the site that can be reasonably developed for recreational use;

2.   Accessibility. Each recreation area must be reasonably accessible to all those who will live on the land division site; and

3.   Improvements. Each recreation area must be improved in order to meet the recreational needs of those who will live on the land division site. Provision for both active and passive recreation must be included. Where there is more than one recreation area, not all areas must be improved for both active and passive recreation. Recreation areas shall include improvements such as children’s play equipment, picnic areas, open lawn, benches, paved walkways or trails, gardens, or organized sport fields or courts. Surety may be required which specifies the timing of recreation area improvements. The recreation area improvements should be installed before any of the dwelling units on the site have received final inspection.

(Ord. 468 § 1, 2014)

 

Chapter 16.43 PARKING AND LOADING
16.43.010 Purpose.
The intent of these regulations is to provide adequate capacity and appropriate location and design of on-site parking and loading areas as well as adequate access to such areas. The parking requirements are intended to provide sufficient parking in close proximity for residents, customers, and/or employees of various land uses. These regulations apply to both motorized vehicles (hereinafter referred to as vehicles) and bicycles. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.43.020 Applicability.
All developments involving land division or subject to site design review, including development of parking facilities, shall comply with the standards in this chapter. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.43.030 Automobile parking standards.
A.  General Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading.

1.   Provision and Maintenance. The provision of required off-street parking for motor vehicles and bicycles, and loading facilities for motor vehicles, is a continuing obligation of the property owners. Building permits or other permits will only be issued after review and approval of site plans showing location of permanent access, parking and loading facilities.

2.   An area shall not be considered a parking space unless it can be shown that the area is accessible and usable for that purpose, and has maneuvering area for the vehicles, as determined by the Engineering Manager or designee based on the City’s Engineering and Design Standards Manual. Parking and maneuvering areas, including drive-through aisles, will be reviewed to ensure the design provides for the safe and adequate movement of all vehicles, pedestrians and service providers per the Engineering and Design Standards Manual.

3.   New Structure or Use. When a structure is constructed or a new use of land is commenced, on-site vehicle and bicycle parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with subsection B of this section or as otherwise modified through a planned development or specific area plan.

4.   Alteration of Existing Structures. When an existing structure is altered to the extent that the existing use is intensified, on-site vehicle and bicycle parking shall be provided in the amount required for such intensification.

5.   Increased Intensity. When increased intensity requires no more than two vehicle spaces, no additional parking facilities shall be required. However, the effects of changes, additions, or enlargements shall be cumulative. When the net effect of one or more changes generates a need for more than two spaces, the additional required spaces shall be provided. Additional spaces shall be required for the intensification but not for the original use.

6.   Change in Use. When an existing structure or use of land is changed in use from one use to another use as listed in subsection B of this section, and the vehicle and bicycle parking requirements for each use type are the same, no additional parking shall be required. However, where a change in use results in an intensification of use in terms of number of vehicle and bicycle parking spaces required, additional parking space shall be provided in an amount equal to the difference between the number of spaces required for the existing use and number of spaces required for more intensive use.

7.   Time of Completion. Required parking spaces and loading areas shall be improved and available for use prior to issuance of a temporary occupancy and/or final building inspection.

8.   Inoperative Motor Vehicles. In any residential district, all motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power or lacking legal registration shall be stored in a completely screened space, garage, or carport.

9.   Truck Parking. In residential zoning districts, no overnight parking of commercial vehicles shall be permitted except as allowed through the provisions of a home occupation permit. Vehicles and equipment necessary for farming and truck gardening on the premises where such use is conducted are exempt from the restrictions of this subsection.

10. Availability of Parking Spaces. Required vehicle and bicycle parking spaces shall be unobstructed and available for the parking of vehicles and bicycles of residents, customers, patrons, and employees only. Parking spaces shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or materials or for parking of vehicles and bicycles used in conducting the business or use, and shall not be used for sale, repair, or servicing of any vehicle or bicycle.

11. Shared Bicycle Parking. Multifamily dwelling units with more than ten (10) required bicycle parking spaces may provide shared outdoor bicycle parking. The shared bicycle parking shall consist of at least fifteen (15) percent of the total required parking spaces and be located such that they are available for shared use by all occupants and guests of the development.

12. All dwellings shall have direct, unimpeded access from the required off-street parking spaces to the nearest public street, road or accessway.

B.  Minimum Off-Street Parking Space Requirements and Calculations.

1.   Unspecified Requirements. Vehicle and bicycle parking requirements for uses not specified in this chapter may be determined by the Planning Official based upon the requirements for similar specified uses.

2.   Tandem parking (where two spaces are directly behind one another) may be counted as two parking spaces.

3.   On-street parking within three hundred (300) feet of a use along its property frontage may be counted as part of the minimum spaces required.

4.   Structured parking, fleet parking, spaces that are user paid (at a market rate approved by the City), on-street parking spaces and market rate surface parking lots are exempt from the maximum parking ratios.

5.   If the applicant demonstrates that too many or too few parking spaces are required, applicant may seek a variance from the minimum or maximum by providing evidence that the particular use needs more or less than the amount specified in this Code.

6.   Mixed Uses. In the case of mixed uses, shared parking between uses is encouraged. Where shared parking is not an option, the total required vehicle and bicycle parking shall be the sum of requirements of individual uses computed separately.

7.   Transit. Existing development shall be allowed to redevelop a portion of their existing parking area for transit-oriented uses, including bus stops and pullouts, bus shelters, park and ride stations, and similar facilities, where appropriate. The redevelopment shall not result in greater than ten (10) percent reduction in the number of required on-site vehicle parking spaces.

8.   Where uses are mixed in a single building, parking shall be a blend of the ratio required less ten (10) percent for the minimum number of spaces. The maximum number of spaces shall be ten (10) percent less than the total permitted maximum for each use.

9.   Fractions. When the sum of the required vehicle or bicycle parking spaces is a fraction of a space less than one-half, the fraction shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. When the fraction of the space is greater than one-half, the fraction shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

10. Maximum Parking Allowed. A maximum number of vehicular parking spaces allowed exists if provided for in Table 16.43.030-1.

11. Parking Table. The following parking table shall be interpreted with the following notation: All square footage measurements are gross square feet of total floor area. Eighteen (18) lineal inches of bench shall be considered one seat.

 

Table 16.43.030-1

 

 

Proposed Use

Minimum Parking Spaces

Maximum Parking Spaces (if nothing is noted, there is no maximum)1

Bicycle Spaces

Percentage of Bicycle Spaces to be Covered

Zone A

Zone B

Residential

Single-family detached

2 per dwelling

 

 

None required

N/A

Single-family attached

2 per dwelling3

 

 

None required

N/A

Duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes

2 per dwelling3

 

 

None required

N/A

Manufactured home park

2 per dwelling

 

 

None required

N/A

Multifamily dwellings containing five or more units4

 

 

 

 

75

Studio and one bedroom units

1.25 per dwelling

 

 

1 space per unit

 

Two-bedroom units

1.5 per dwelling

 

 

1 space per unit

 

Three or more bedroom units

1.75 per dwelling

 

 

1 space per unit

 

Visitor parking

0.35 per dwelling unit (if less than 100 total units); 35 spaces or 0.25 per dwelling unit, whichever is greater (if 100 or more total units)

 

 

 

 

Congregate housing, retirement homes, intermediate care facilities

1 per 3 beds plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift

 

 

1 per 5 beds

50

Residential care facilities

1 per 4 beds plus 1 space per employee in the largest work shift

 

 

1 per 5 beds

50

Community Services, Institutional and Semipublic Uses

General office, government office

3 per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area

3.4 per 1,000 sq. ft.

4.1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

2 or 1 per 20 auto spaces whichever is greater

35

Community recreation buildings/covered picnic areas

1 per 250 sq. ft., or 1 space per four patrons to the maximum capacity, plus one space per employee on the largest shift

 

 

0.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

35

Church, chapel, auditorium

0.8 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.6 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.8 per 1,000 sq. ft.

1 space per 40 seats

35

Library or museums

2 per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area

 

 

2 or 1.5 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft., which is greater with 10 percent required to be covered

35

Lodge, fraternal and civic assembly with/or without eating and drinking facilities

1 per 4 fixed seats or 1 for each 50 sq. ft. of public assembly area where there are no fixed seats

 

 

2 or 1 per 20 vehicle spaces

35

Hospitals and medical centers

1 per 500

 

 

0.2 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft.

35

Medical and dental offices and clinics

4 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

4.9 per 1,000 sq. ft.

5.9 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

35

Schools

Day care/small school

1 per employee and 1 per five students

 

 

1.5 spaces per classroom

35

Preschool/kindergarten

2.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area

 

 

1.5 spaces per classroom

35

School—Elementary

2 per classroom, plus recreation facilities, if applicable

 

 

2 spaces per classroom

35

School—Middle school/junior high

2 per classroom, plus recreation facilities, if applicable

 

 

4 spaces per classroom

35

School—Senior high

0.6 per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area, plus recreation facilities, if applicable

0.3 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.6 per 1,000 sq. ft.

4 spaces per classroom

35

School—Vocational or college

3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus recreation facilities, if applicable

0.3 per 1,000 sq. ft.

3 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area (excluding dorms, for which residential facility standards apply)

35

Commercial Uses

Retail sales, general and personal services

4.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

5.1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

6.2 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

50

Shopping centers

4 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

5.1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

6.2 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

50

Retail sales, bulky merchandise (examples: furniture or motor vehicles)

1 per 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

 

0.3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

50

Grocery stores

2.9 per 1000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

5.1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

6.2 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.33 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

50

Convenience market

2.3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

 

2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

50

Restaurant/coffee shop/food-beverage carts (with drive-through)

11.4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

12.4 per 1,000 sq. ft.

14.9 per 1,000 sq. ft.

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

25

Restaurant/coffee shop/food-beverage carts without drive-through

11.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area2

19.1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

23.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

25

Sports club/health spas/ recreation facilities

4.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area or field area (see Section 16.43.030(H))

5.4 per 1,000 sq. ft.

6.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

50

Basketball, tennis and racquetball clubs and courts

2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area; square footage of outdoor courts shall include the area of sport activity only (i.e., not including any sidelines, etc.)

1.3 per 1,000 sq. ft.

2 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

50

Theaters/sports arenas/stadiums

0.3 spaces per seat or 6 linear feet of bench seating

0.4 per seat

0.5 per seat

0.04 spaces per seat or 60 linear feet of bench seating

10

Service station

3 spaces plus 2 spaces per service bay, if any

 

 

2 spaces or 0.2 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area whichever is greater

50

Service station with convenience market with gas pumps

2.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

 

2 spaces or 0.2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater

50

Parks and open spaces

None required, except that parking for sport courts, recreation facilities, community recreation buildings and covered picnic areas shall be computed separately. Parking for these facilities may be shared in accordance with Section 16.43.030(C)

 

 

4 spaces or 1 space per 20 vehicle parking spaces, whichever is greater

50

Bank (with drive-through)

4.3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

5.4 per 1,000 sq. ft.

6.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.5 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

10

Bank without drive-through

5 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

 

0.5 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

10

Industrial Uses

Manufacturing, processing, packing, assembly, and fabrication

1.6 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

 

0.1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

10

Warehousing, freight movement distribution, and storage

0.5 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area (if less than 150,000 sq. ft. of floor area)

 

0.4 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

10

 

0.3 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area (if equal to or greater than 150,000 sq. ft. of floor area)

 

 

Wholesale, retail sales

0.8 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

 

0.1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

30

Industrial, commercial services

0.8 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

 

0.1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

30

Office (relating to industrial uses)

2.7 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

3.4 per 1,000 sq. ft.

4.1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

0.5 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

30

NOTES:

1          Parking maximums are based on A and B Zone designations, pursuant to Metro Regional Transportation Functional Plan Title 2, Regional Parking Management, and as listed in Table 3.08-3 - Regional Parking Ratio Table and illustrated in the Regional Parking Maximum Map. The zones are based on access to transit. Areas with twenty (20) minute peak hour transit service available within a one-quarter mile walking distance for bus transit or one-half mile walking distance for light rail transit shall be within Zone A. Cities and counties should designate Zone A parking ratios in areas with good pedestrian access to commercial or employment areas (within one-third mile walk from adjacent residential areas).

2       Enclosed outdoor seating area shall count as floor area in determining parking requirement for restaurants/coffee shop/food-beverage carts without drive-through.

3       Visitor parking for attached dwellings containing four or more dwelling units is required in addition to the minimum off-street parking required by this subsection.

4       In order to address the conversion of garages from parking to storage, in multifamily developments where parking is provided in individual garages an additional one hundred (100) square foot by ten (10) foot high storage area is required per dwelling unit. Alternatively, the applicant may provide a parking management plan. At a minimum, the parking management plan shall include quarterly inspections and sworn affidavits by the multifamily development owner/management company guaranteeing the utilization of garage parking for automobile parking spaces only. Further, the parking management plan shall demonstrate that the parking pricing policies of the multifamily development will not result in additional on-street parking by tenants.

 

C.  Shared Use of Parking Facilities.

1.   Except for residential uses, required parking facilities may be located on an adjacent parcel of land or separated by a maximum of two hundred (200) feet (measured as a direct pedestrian route).

2.   The right to use the off-site parking must be evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, easement or similar written instrument.

3.   Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facility used jointly, to the extent that it can be shown by the owners or operators that the needs of the facilities do not materially overlap (e.g., uses primarily of day time versus night time uses) or typically provide services to many of the same patrons within the same development, and provided that such right of joint use is evidenced by a deed, lease, contract or similar written instrument establishing such joint use.

4.   Any change in use which would produce a need for additional parking in a shared situation shall require additional review pursuant to Section 16.62.040.

D.  Carpool, Hybrid/Electric Car and Vanpool Parking. New industrial, commercial, and institutional uses with more than twenty (20) employee parking spaces on site shall meet the following minimum requirements for carpool, hybrid/electric car and vanpool parking.

1.   For this section, a hybrid car is defined as an automobile that is powered by two fuel sources (i.e., gas and electricity) and achieves a combined EPA gas mileage of forty-five (45) miles per gallon or more.

2.   Five spaces or five percent of the parking spaces on site, whichever is less, must be reserved for carpool/hybrid/electric car use during normal working hours. More spaces may be reserved, but they are not required.

3.   The spaces will be those closest to the building entrance or elevator, but not closer than the spaces for disabled parking and those signed for exclusive customer use.

4.   Signs must be posted indicating these spaces are reserved for carpool/hybrid/electric car use during normal working hours and those hours must be included on the sign.

E.  Parking Location.

1.   Vehicle parking required for residential uses shall be provided on the development site of the primary structure. Required parking for all other uses shall be provided only on streets, within garages, carports, and other structures, or on driveways or parking lots that have been developed in conformance with this code.

2.   No off-street parking shall be allowed in the landscaped yard areas of any lot.

3.   Bicycle parking required for all uses in all districts shall be provided on the development site in accordance with Table 16.43.030-1 of this section.

4.   Parking areas, which abut a residential zoning district, shall meet the setback of the most restrictive adjoining residential zoning district.

5.   Required parking shall not be located in a required front or side yard setback area abutting a public street except in industrial districts. For single-family and two-family dwellings, required parking may be located in front of a garage.

6.   Parking areas shall be setback from a lot line adjoining a street the same distance as the required building setbacks. Regardless of other provisions, a minimum setback of ten feet shall be provided along the property fronting on a public street. The setback area shall be landscaped as provided in this code.

F.  Parking Area Design, Size, Layout and Access. All off-street parking facilities, vehicular maneuvering areas, driveways, loading facilities, accessways, and private streets shall conform to the standards set forth in this section.

1.   All areas used for parking and maneuvering of cars shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other approved impervious, permeable, or semi-permeable surface, and shall provide for suitable drainage.

 

2.   The following table states the minimums for parking space size:

 

Table 16.43.030-2 Off-Street Parking Matrix

Required Space and Aisle Dimensions in Feet

 

Standard Size Vehicles

Compact Size Vehicle

 

Stall Width

Stall Depth

Aisle Width

Module Width

Bumper Overhang

Stall Width

Stall Depth

Aisle Width

Module Width

Bumper Overhang

Angle

0º (parallel)

8.0

24.0

N/A

N/A

N/A

8.0

20.0

N/A

N/A

N/A

45º

9.0

17.5

12.0

47.0

2.0

8.0

15.5

11.0

42.0

2.0

60º

9.0

19.0

16.0

54.0

2.5

8.0

17.0

14.0

48.0

2.5

75º

9.0

19.5

23.0

62.0

2.5

8.0

17.5

21.0

56.0

2.5

90º

9.0

18.5

24.0

61.0

2.5

8.0

16.0

20.0

52.0

1.5

 

3.   Parking Lot Layout. Parking area setbacks shall be landscaped with major trees, shrubs, and groundcover as specified in Section 16.42. Wheel stops, bumper guards, or other method to protect landscaped areas shall be provided. No vehicle may project over a property line or a public right-of-way. Parking may project over an internal sidewalk, but a minimum clearance of five feet for safe pedestrian circulation is required. Parking areas, driveways, aisles and turnarounds shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or comparable surfacing, constructed to City standards for off-street vehicle areas.

4.   Groups of more than three parking spaces shall be permanently marked.

5.   Backing and Maneuvering. Except for a single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling, groups of more than three parking spaces shall be provided with adequate aisles or turnaround areas so that all vehicles enter the right-of-way (except for alleys) in a forward manner. Parking spaces shall not have backing or maneuvering movements for any of the parking spaces occurring across public sidewalks or within any public street, except as approved by the Public Works Director. Evaluations of requests for exceptions shall consider constraints due to lot patterns and impacts to the safety and capacity of the adjacent public street, bicycle and pedestrian facilities.

6.   Parking Lot Lighting.

a.     Artificial lighting shall be provided in all required off-street parking areas.

b.     The “Lighting Zone” (LZ) shall determine the limitations for lighting. The Lighting Zones shall be specified as follows:

i.      LZ0: No Ambient Lighting. Areas where the natural environment will be seriously and adversely affected by lighting. Impacts include disturbing the biological cycles of flora and fauna and/or detracting from human enjoyment and appreciation of the natural environment. Human activity is subordinate in importance to nature. The vision of human residents and users is adapted to the darkness, and they expect to see little or no lighting. When not needed, lighting should be extinguished.

ii.     LZ1: Low Ambient Lighting. Areas where lighting might adversely affect flora and fauna or disturb the character of the area. The vision of human residents and users is adapted to low light levels. Lighting may be used for safety and convenience but it is not necessarily uniform or continuous. After operating hours, most lighting should be extinguished or reduced as activity levels decline.

iii.    LZ2: Moderate Ambient Lighting. Areas of human activity where the vision of human residents and users is adapted to moderate light levels. Lighting may typically be used for safety and convenience but it is not necessarily uniform or continuous. After curfew, lighting may be extinguished or reduced as activity levels decline.

iv.    LZ3: Moderately High Ambient Lighting. Areas of human activity where the vision of human residents and users is adapted to moderately high light levels. Lighting is generally desired for safety, security and/or convenience and it is often uniform and/or continuous. After curfew, lighting may be extinguished or reduced in most areas as activity levels decline.

v.     LZ4: High Ambient Lighting. Areas of human activity where the vision of human residents and users is adapted to high light levels. Lighting is generally considered necessary for safety, security and/or convenience and it is mostly uniform and/or continuous. After curfew, lighting may be extinguished or reduced in some areas as activity levels decline.

c.     The total installed initial luminaire lumens of all outdoor lighting shall not exceed the total site lumen limit. The total site lumen limit shall be determined using LZ-2 for either the Parking Space Method (Table A) or the Hardscape Area Method (Table B). Only one method shall be used per permit application, and for sites with existing lighting, existing lighting shall be included in the calculation of total installed lumens. The total installed initial luminaire lumens is calculated as the sum of the initial luminaire lumens for all luminaires:







 

d.     Lighting shall be directed into the site and shall be arranged to not produce direct glare on adjacent properties. All luminaires shall be rated and installed according to Table C, lighting zone 2:

 



 



 

e.     Light elements shall be fully shielded and shall have no light emitted above ninety (90) degrees. Examples of acceptable lighting elements, or fixtures, can be found below:



f.      Lighting shall be provided in all bicycle parking areas so that all facilities are thoroughly illuminated and visible from adjacent sidewalks or vehicle parking lots during all hours of use.

7.   Parking stalls for compact vehicles shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the total parking stalls required by Table 16.43.030-1. Stalls in excess of the number required by Table 16.43.030-1 can be compact stalls.

G.  Accessible/Handicapped Parking Facilities. Disabled person accessible parking shall be provided for all uses consistent with the requirements of the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code and/or Federal requirements, whichever is more restrictive.

H.  Recreation facilities are public or private facilities used for active recreation activities. They may be indoor or outdoor and include facilities such as athletic fields, swimming pools, miniature golf, and skateboard parks.

1.   Parking requirements for athletic fields shall be computed based on the square footage of the area of sport activity (i.e., the field of play not including any sidelines, etc.).

2.   In no case shall the number of parking spaces required for an athletic field exceed thirty (30) spaces per field except where the field is part of a stadium or sports arena.

3.   Parking requirements recreation facilities other than athletic fields shall be computed based on gross square footage of the building and/or improved or fenced area.

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 443 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.43.040 Bicycle parking standards.
A.  Required Number and Type.

1.   Bicycle parking requirements are provided in the parking Table 16.43.030-1.

2.   For specific uses listed in Table 16.43.030-1 under the following categories a portion of the required bicycle parking shall be provided as long-term bicycle parking spaces: Multi-family Dwellings; Schools; Community Services, Institutional and Semipublic Uses; Commercial Uses; and Industrial Uses.

a.     Long-term bicycle parking is defined as parking that is secure for longer stays (more than four hours). Long-term bicycle parking may be provided through lockable enclosures, a designated bicycle storage area inside a building on-site, a covered rack, or another form of sheltered parking where the bicycle can be stored.

b.     For major transit stops and park-and-ride lots that are proposed for commuter use only, at least four bicycle parking spaces shall be required; one hundred (100) percent of all required bicycle parking spaces shall be long-term spaces.

B.  Location and Design.

1.   Bicycle parking shall be located on-site, convenient to building entrances, and have direct access to both the public right-of-way and to the main entrance of the principal structure.

2.   Bicycle parking should be no further from the main building entrance than the distance to the closest vehicle space, or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less. Long-term bicycle parking should be incorporated whenever possible into building design. Short-term bicycle parking, when allowed within a public right-of-way, should be coordinated with the design of street furniture, as applicable.

3.   For facilities with multiple buildings or parking lots, bicycle parking shall be located in areas of greatest use and convenience to bicyclists.

4.   Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians. The location of bicycle parking facilities shall not conflict with vision clearance standards.

5.   Bicycle parking may be provided within the public right-of-way in areas without building setbacks, subject to the approval of the appropriate governing official and provided it meets the other bicycle parking requirements.

6.   If the bicycle parking area is located within the vehicle parking area, the bicycle facilities shall be separated from vehicular maneuvering areas by curbing or other barrier to prevent damage to parked bicycles.

7.   Curb cuts shall be installed to provide safe, convenient access to bicycle parking areas.

C.  Bicycle Parking Space Dimensions.

1.   Each required bicycle parking space shall be at least two and one-half feet by six feet. If covered, vertical clearance of seven feet must be provided.

2.   An access aisle of at least five feet wide shall be provided and maintained beside or between each row of bicycle parking. Vertical or upright bicycle storage structures are exempted from the parking space length.

D.  Security.

1.   Bicycle parking facilities shall offer security in the form of either a lockable enclosure in which the bicycle can be stored or a stationary object (i.e., a “rack”) upon which the bicycle can be located.

2.   Racks requiring user-supplied locks shall accommodate both cable and U-shaped locks. Racks shall be designed and installed to permit the frame and both wheels to be secured, with removal of the front wheel, or the frame and one wheel to be secured, if both wheels remain on the bicycle.

3.   Bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to the ground or a structure and shall be designed to hold bicycles securely by means of the bicycle frame.

4.   Required bicycle parking inside a building shall be provided in a well illuminated, secure location within fifty (50) feet of a building entrance.

5.   Outdoor bicycle parking spaces shall be clearly visible from the building entrance or the public right-of-way and shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the public entrance to the building unless clustered pursuant to Section 16.31.030, in which case the parking spaces shall be no more than one hundred (100) feet from a public entrance.

 

6.   If the outdoor vehicle parking area for a use has lighting, then the bicycle parking areas associated with that same use are required to be lit to the same extent.

E.  Signing. Where bicycle facilities are not directly visible and obvious from the public right-of-way, entry or directional signs shall be provided to direct bicyclists from the public right-of-way to the bicycle parking facility.

F.  Exemptions. Temporary street-side sales and temporary uses such as fireworks stands, Christmas tree sales lots, single-family and are exempt from the standards. (Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.43.050 Off-street loading facilities.
A.  The minimum area required for commercial and industrial loading spaces is as follows:

 

Table 16.43.050-1 Commercial and Industrial Loading Space Requirements

 

 

Use

Aggregate Floor Area (sq. ft.)

Berths Required

Type

Freight terminals, industrial plants, manufacturing or wholesale establishments, warehouses

12,000—36,000

1

A

36,001—60,000

2

A

60,001—100,000

3

A

Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof

1 additional

A

Hospitals, convalescent homes and similar institutions

10,000—100,000

1

B

over 100,000

2

B

Department stores, retail establishments, restaurants, grocery stores, and commercial establishments not otherwise mentioned

7,000—24,000

1

B

24,001—50,000

2

B

50,001—100,000

3

B

Over 100,000—each additional 50,000 or major fraction thereof

1 additional

B

Hotels or office buildings

25,000—40,000

1

B

40,001—100,000

2

B

Each additional 10,000 or major fraction thereof

1 additional

B

Schools

Over 10,000

1

B

 

B.  Uses Not Specifically Mentioned. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street loading facilities shall be the same as the above-mentioned use which, as determined by the Planning Official or designee, is most similar to the use not specifically mentioned.

C.  Concurrent Different Uses. When any proposed structure will be used concurrently for different purposes, final determination of loading requirements will be made by the Planning Official or designee but in no event shall the loading requirements be less than the total requirement for each use based upon its aggregate floor area.

D.  Loading berths shall conform to the following minimum size specifications:

1.   Type “A” berths shall be at least sixty (60) feet long by twelve (12) feet wide by fifteen (15) feet high, inside dimensions, with a sixty (60) foot maneuvering apron.

2.   Type “B” berths shall be at least thirty (30) feet long by twelve (12) feet wide by fourteen (14) feet six inches high, inside dimensions, with a thirty (30) foot maneuvering apron.

E.  Loading areas shall be screened from public view from public streets and adjacent properties except in industrial districts and shall require the same screening as parking lots. Screening may be waived in commercial districts if the applicant can demonstrate the type and size of loading vehicles will not detract from the project’s aesthetic appearance and the timing of loading will not conflict with the hours and operation of the surrounding uses.

F.  Sufficient space for turning and maneuvering of vehicles shall be provided on the site in accordance with the standard specifications established by the Public Works Director.

G.  Entrances and exits shall be provided at locations approved in accordance with applicable ordinances and statutes.

H.  No off-street loading facilities shall be required where buildings abut a public alley in such a manner that loading operations can be conducted from said alley in accordance with applicable traffic and parking ordinances.

I.   The off-street loading facilities shall in all cases be on the same lot or parcel as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading spaces be part of the area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements.

J.   School Loading Requirements. A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children shall be located on the site of a school (other than a pre-school) having a capacity greater than twenty-five (25) students.

K.  Exceptions and Adjustments. Loading areas within a street right-of-way in areas zoned mixed-use commercial in the Regional Center or Town Center may be approved when all of the following conditions are met:

1.   Loading areas must be signed to limit the duration of the activity, which may not exceed one hour for each loading operation.

2.   Proposed loading areas must support a use that requires infrequent loading activity. Infrequent loading activity is defined as less than three operations that occur daily between 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., or all operations that occur between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. at a location that is not adjacent to a residential zone.

3.   The proposed loading area:

a.     Does not unreasonably obstruct traffic;

b.     Does not obstruct a primary emergency response route; and

c.     Is acceptable to the applicable roadway authority.

(Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.44 SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN USES
16.44.010 Design standards for multifamily housing, single-family attached housing, duplexes and triplexes and single-family detached structures utilizing alley access.
A.  Single-family attached housing (townhome units on individual lots), duplex and triplex developments shall comply with the standards set forth below. The standards are intended to control development scale; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic, parking, and design compatibility; and ensure management and maintenance of common areas.

1.   Building Mass Supplemental Standard. Within the residential district, the number of consecutively attached townhomes (i.e., with attached walls at property line) shall not exceed eight units.

a.     Exception. In the R-5 District the number of consecutively attached townhomes shall not exceed four units.

b.     Exception. This standard does not apply in the Village Townhouse District (VTH).

2.   Alley Access Developments. Townhome, duplex and triplex subdivisions are required to receive vehicle access only from a rear alley or other grouped accessway approved by the land use review authority (see Figure 16.44.010-1), except as noted below. As used here, grouped access is not intended to result in consolidated access to front-loaded garages that would not otherwise be allowed by this code. Alleys and grouped access shall be created at the time of subdivision approval, in accordance with Chapter 16.63, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments, and any other applicable transportation standards. Alleys and grouped access are not required when existing development patterns, topography, lot depth, or similar physical limitations makes construction of an alley impracticable (See the City’s adopted transportation system plan for alley design standards). As necessary, the City shall require dedication of right-of-way or easements and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building breaks) to implement the access and circulation standards of Chapter 16.41 and the TSP.

3.   Street Access Developments. If an alley or grouped accessway is not required under subsection (A)(2) of this section, and the single-family detached, townhomes, duplexes and triplexes will receive access directly from a public or private street (see Figure 16.44.010-2), the following standards apply in order to minimize interruption of adjacent sidewalks by driveway entrances, slow traffic, improve appearance of the streets, and minimize paved surfaces for better stormwater management.

a.     “Double-frontage” lots with alley access shall have garages/rear elevations of the home facing the alley and front doors/elevations facing the higher classification roadway.

b.     The maximum allowable driveway width facing the street is twelve (12) feet per dwelling unit. The maximum combined garage width per unit is fifty (50) percent of the total building width. For example, a twenty-four (24) foot wide unit may have one twelve (12) foot wide recessed garage facing the street.

Exception. An eighteen (18) foot drive is allowed for a two-car garage, provided that one on-street parking space is provided for every two lots.

c.     Two adjacent garages shall share one driveway when individual driveways would otherwise be separated by less than twenty (20) feet (i.e., the width of one on-street parking space). When a driveway serves more than one lot, the developer shall record an access and maintenance easement/agreement to benefit each lot, prior to building permit issuance.

d.     Maximum Shared Driveway Width. Twenty-four (24) feet.

4.   Common Areas. “Common areas” (e.g., landscaping in private tracts, shared driveways, private alleys, and similar uses) shall be maintained by a homeowners association or other legal entity. A homeowners association may also be responsible for exterior building maintenance. A copy of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the City prior to building permit approval.

 

Figure 16.44.010-1 Townhomes with Alley Access



 

Figure 16.44.010-2 Townhomes with Street Access



 

B.  The purpose of this section is to provide for additional review to encourage the development of multifamily and single-family attached residential buildings that are visually engaging and compatible with one another and with the surrounding district.

C.  Multifamily and single-family attached residential developments shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and the following additional requirements. For single-family attached development, these standards apply in addition to the standards in Section 16.44.010(A) above.

1.   Roofs. Roofs shall meet the following additional requirements:

a.     Roofs shall be gabled or hip type roofs (minimum pitch 3:12) with an overhang that is commensurate with the pitch of the roof and using shingles or similar roofing materials. Alternatives may be approved where the developer can demonstrate that abutting structures or the majority of structures within three hundred (300) feet have roofs similar to what is proposed.

b.     Modulation of the building mass shall distinguish individual units and break down the scale of the building through one or more of the following between units:

i.      Vertical offsets that provide breaks in the roof line;

ii.     Horizontal offsets that provide variation in the façade plane; and/or

iii.    Variations of the roof form, such as dormers or street facing gable ends that provide breaks of the roof line.

2.   Entries.

a.     Entries shall be sheltered with an overhang, portico or recessed entry or otherwise articulated with an architecturally detailed entry.

 

b.     Primary dwelling entries shall face a public street or designated pedestrian way and be visible from the street whenever feasible.

c.     Multiple Units. Ground floor units shall face a public street or designated pedestrian way and be visible from the street whenever feasible and shall avoid out-of-direction travel. Upper story units may share entries.

d.     Secondary entries may face parking lots or loading areas.

3.   Building Façades Design.

a.     Detailed Design. Detailed design shall be provided by using at least eight of the following fourteen (14) architectural features on all elevations as appropriate for the proposed building type and style (see Figures 16.44.010-4 and 16.44.010-5; may vary features on rear/side/front elevations):

i.      Dormers;

ii.     Gables;

iii.    Recessed entries;

iv.    Covered porch entries;

v.     Cupolas or towers;

vi.    Pillars or posts;

vii.   Eaves (minimum of six-inch projection);

viii.  Offsets in building face or roof (minimum of sixteen (16) inches);

ix.    Window trim (minimum four inches wide);

x.     Bay windows;

xi.    Balconies;

xii.   Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles, wainscoting, ornamentation or similar features);

xiii. Decorative cornices and roof lines (e.g., for flat roofs);

xiv. An alternative feature providing for visual relief, similar to options i through xiv.

b.     Residential Mixed Use Structures. The residential portion of a mixed use structure shall be differentiated through the use of design elements such as decks, balconies, landscaping, chimneys, dormers, gable or hipped roofs or step backs above the second story to provide upper story deck areas. Masonry should be used for chimney construction.

 

Figure 16.44.010-4 Example of Architectural Details—Multifamily



 

Figure 16.44.010-5 Example of Architectural Details—Townhomes



 

c.     Landscape/Hardscape Design. The following standards apply in addition to the landscaping standards in Chapter 16.42.

i.      Where new or substantially remodeled buildings are set back from property lines and sidewalks, intervening landscaping shall be designed to invite the public in, not to provide separation.

ii.     Where non-pedestrian space is placed between a building and a sidewalk, benches, low sitting walls or other street furniture shall be placed in order to enliven the sidewalk.

iii.    Small areas of landscaping and paving in courtyards, entryways, building nooks and other areas shall use materials and designs similar to adjacent public spaces where such use will make the area appear larger or more inviting. This requirement is intended to minimize the transition from public to private space, but is not intended to restrict changes in material where it is functionally necessary or where it will avoid visual monotony.

iv.    Hardscaping or landscaping shall be located in stopping areas created outside of pedestrian circulation areas. Stopping areas may be created by an enclosure, a change in grade or a change in paving materials.

v.     Decorative iron gates and hangers for signs, flags and hanging baskets may be required as part of the landscape plan.

vi.    Miscellaneous solid wood materials such as fences, decks, balconies, pergolas, etc. that are not painted in conjunction with the greater development color palette shall be uniformly stained any variety of the color brown and be required by the development’s Codes, Covenants and Restrictions (CC&Rs) to be maintained over time.

4.   Offsets. Along the vertical face of a structure, when facing a public street, pedestrian way or an abutting residential use, offsets shall occur at a minimum of every twenty-four (24) feet by providing any two of the following (see Figure 16.44.010-6):

a.     Recesses (decks, patios, entrances, floor area, etc.) of a minimum depth of four feet;

b.     Extensions (decks, patios, entrances, floor area, etc.) at a minimum depth of four feet, with a maximum length of an overhang not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet;

c.     If a partially enclosed covered porch is proposed, this can meet one of the offset requirements provided the porch is four feet deep and at least one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet in area.

 

Figure 16.44.010-6 Example of Extensions and Recesses



 

5.   Private Outdoor Areas.

a.     A separate outdoor area of not less than forty-eight (48) square feet shall be attached to each ground level dwelling unit. These areas shall be separated from common outdoor areas in a manner, which enables the resident to control access from separate to common areas with elements such as walls, fences, or shrubs.

b.     A separate outdoor area of not less than forty-eight (48) square feet in the form of balconies, terraces, or porches shall be provided for each dwelling unit located above the ground level.

6.   Parking Lots. Parking lots in multifamily developments shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the frontage of any public street abutting the lot or building.

7.   Individual Storage Areas. Enclosed storage areas shall be required and may be attached to the exterior of the dwelling unit to accommodate garden equipment, patio furniture, barbeques, bicycles, etc. Storage areas may be provided within garages if the required storage area is in addition to the required parking areas required.

8.   Carports and Garages. If carports and garages are provided, the form, materials, color and construction shall be compatible with the complex they serve.

9.   Shared Outdoor Recreation Areas. Multifamily residential development shall provide usable recreation areas for developments containing more than five dwelling units at the rate of two hundred (200) square feet per dwelling unit. Such areas shall be counted as part of the required landscaping. Examples include, but are not limited to, playgrounds, exercise trails, swimming pools, etc. Usable recreation area may also include slopes, wetlands, natural resource buffer areas, and other natural site features, however, at least fifty (50) percent of the recreation area must be located outside the boundaries of such areas and slopes may not exceed ten (10) percent in the fifty (50) percent usable recreation area. Gazebos and other outdoor covered spaces are encouraged and qualify as one and one-fourth square feet for every one square foot of required shared recreation area. The shared outdoor recreation area shall be located and designed in a manner which:

a.     Provides approximately the same accessibility to the maximum number of dwelling units possible;

b.     Windows shall be located to encourage watching over entry areas, shared recreational areas, laundry areas, walkways and parking areas from windows in at least two adjacent dwelling units. These windows must be located in kitchen, living room, dining room, or other activity rooms (bedrooms or bathrooms are not included);

c.     Provides a separation from parking and driveway areas with a landscaped transition area measuring a minimum of ten (10) feet wide;

d.     Controls access to shared outdoor areas from off-site as well as from on-site parking and entrance areas with features such as fencing, walls and landscaping;

e.     Provides a usable surface materials such as lawn, decks, wood chips, sand and hard surface materials (concrete/asphalt).

10. Safety and Security.

a.     Provide an outdoor lighting system that facilitates police observation and resident observation through strategic location, orientation and brightness without being obtrusive by shining into residential units or adjacent residential developments.

b.     Establish a directory for apartment complexes of five or more units, which clearly orients visitors and emergency service providers as to the location of residential units. Where possible, this system should be evident from the primary vehicle entryway.

11. Service, Delivery and Screening.

 

a.     Locate postal delivery areas in a convenient location efficiently designed for residents and mail delivery personnel and in accordance with U.S. Postal Service requirements.

b.     Provide pedestrian access from unit entries to postal delivery areas, garbage and recycling collection areas, shared activity areas and parking areas. Elements such as, but not limited to, concrete paths, striped walkways or raised walkways through vehicular areas or gravel trails will meet this requirement.

c.     Provide garbage collection and recycling areas in convenient locations for the service provider and residents.

d.     Garbage collection areas shall have a concrete floor surface and shall have a gate on the truck-loading side and a separate pedestrian access.

e.     Outdoor storage areas, garbage containers and recycling bins shall be screened from view in one of the following manners:

i.      A solid sight obscuring wall or fence not less than six feet in height and constructed of durable materials compatible with the primary structure(s) shall surround these areas;

ii.     Evergreen plant materials that will retain their screening ability year-round and will reach the height of six feet within three years from time of planting. An overlap of three inches is required of the evergreen plant screening. The material shall completely screen the area from the public view.

f.      Electrical and Mechanical Equipment. On and above-ground electrical and mechanical equipment such as transformers, heat pumps and central air conditioner units shall be completely screened with sight-obscuring fences, walls or landscaping.

12. The Planning Official or designee may allow exceptions to these standards without the need to obtain a formal variance pursuant to Chapter 16.71 provided at least one of the following circumstances is met:

a.     The applicant demonstrates that the physical characteristics of the site or existing structure make compliance impractical (e.g., they include, but are not limited to, steep slopes, wetlands, other bodies of water, trees or other nature features of the site, buildings or other existing development, utility lines and easements, etc.); or

b.     The applicant demonstrates that the alternative design is exceptional in the quality of detailing, appearance or materials and/or creates a positive unique relationship to other structures, views or open space in a manner that accomplishes the purpose of design review standards for multifamily and attached single-family developments in Section 16.44.010.

13. A request for exception under this provision may be processed as part of the underlying application or separately as a Design Review II application.

14. Lighting Standards.

a.     For residential properties including multiple residential properties not having common areas all outdoor luminaires shall be fully shielded and shall not exceed the allowed lumen output in Table G, column LZ2 and row 2.



b.   Exceptions to this standard include the following: one partly shielded or unshielded luminaire at the main entry, not exceeding the allowed lumen output in Table G, column LZ2 and row 1; any other partly shielded or unshielded luminaires not exceeding the allowed lumen output in Table G, column LZ2 and row 3; low voltage landscape lighting aimed away from adjacent properties and not exceeding the allowed lumen output in Table G row; shielded directional flood lighting aimed so that direct glare is not visible from adjacent properties and not exceeding the allowed lumen output in Table G, column LZ2 and row 5; open flame gas lamps; Lighting installed with a vacancy sensor, where the sensor extinguishes the lights no more than fifteen (15) minutes after the area is vacated; and, lighting within the public right-of-way or easement for the principal purpose of illuminating streets or roads.

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.020 Wireless communications facilities.
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assure that wireless communication facilities are located, designed, installed, maintained and removed in a manner that provides for the effective provision of wireless communications within the City, while protecting and promoting the health, safety, and welfare of the City and its residents by:

1.   Requiring the collocation, to the greatest extent possible, of new wireless communication facilities on existing facilities in order to minimize the number of support towers and related equipment;

2.   Carefully considering the topography, natural features, and adopted overlay zones in selecting potential wireless communication facility sites;

3.   Encouraging the use of existing structures, including, but not limited to, freestanding structures such as light or utility poles and water towers, instead of constructing new support towers;

4.   Encouraging the location of new support towers and related equipment in nonresidential zones;

5.   Limiting new structures and regulating the enlargement or expansion of existing structures in the right-of-way for the purpose of providing wireless communication facilities; and

6.   Providing wireless communication services using facilities with minimal visual impact.

B.  Excluded Facilities. The following facilities are exempt from the requirements of this section:

1.   Siting of dish antennas solely for the benefit of persons residing on a property.

2.   Amateur or “ham” radios and associated equipment.

3.   Public safety communication facilities.

4.   “Utility facilities” as defined in Section 16.12.030.

5.   “Small wireless facilities” placed in the public right-of-way as defined and outlined in Chapter 12.06.

6.   Maintenance of existing wireless communication facilities, as defined in this section.

C.  General Provisions: Siting Priority, Land Use Districts, Collocation Requirements.

1.   Siting Priority. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(3)of this section, a wireless communication facility shall be sited according to the following priority, by descending order of preference:

a.     First priority: collocation of an antenna or antenna array, including small wireless facilities, on an existing support tower, support structure, or utility structure;

b.     Second priority: collocation of an antenna or antenna array, including small wireless facilities, on a replacement structure;

c.     Third priority: substantial change in the physical dimensions of a support tower or replacement with a support tower that represents a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the original support tower;

d.     Fourth priority: construction of a new support tower.

2.   Land Use Districts.

 

a.     Wireless communication facilities are allowed subject to the provisions of this section, the applicable requirements in each land use district, and subject to the following additional limitations:

 

 

Zones

Collocation with No Substantial Change and Small Wireless Facilities (located outside of the public right-of-way)

Other New Facility or Substantial Change

Residential

Permitted

Collocation with substantial change permitted as a conditional use subject to the development and design standards. New support tower permitted as a conditional use subject to the requirements of Section 16.44.020.D and the development and design standards of this section.

Steep Slopes and Natural Resources Overlay

Small wireless facilities permitted

Prohibited.

Institutional & Public Use

Permitted

Permitted, subject to the development and design standards of this section.

Commercial

Permitted

Permitted, subject to the development and design standards of this section.

Industrial

Permitted

Permitted, subject to the development and design standards of this section1.

Future Urban – 10 acres

Permitted

Permitted as a conditional use subject to the development and design standards of this section.

1 WCF are permitted outright in the industrial districts, with a height maximum of 200 feet.

 

b.     Small wireless facilities are permitted in all zones within and/or outside of the public right-of-way, per the size requirements found within Section 16.12.130 (Definitions), above. Small wireless facilities located within the public right-of-way are further subject to Chapter 12.06 (Small Wireless Facilities) of this code.

c.     The siting of new speculation support towers is prohibited in all zones.

 

d.     All wireless communication facilities, except for small cell facilities not proposed on a new support tower or support tower system, located in the right-of-way shall be attached to existing utility structures or replacement structures.

e.     Modifications are permitted in all zones, provided the modification does not result in a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the existing support tower or base station.

3.   Collocation Required.

a.     Except for a small cell facility or a new support tower or structure proposed in an industrial district, a wireless communication facility located outside the right-of-way shall be collocated, unless the applicant demonstrates that:

i.      No existing support structures or support towers which meet the applicant’s coverage, capacity and engineering requirements are located within the identified geographic area;

ii.     Existing support towers, support structures, utility structures or replacement structures are not of sufficient height to provide the identified service within the geographic area;

iii.    Collocation would interfere with other wireless communication facilities located on an existing support structure or support tower or would jeopardize the physical integrity of the facility upon which collocation would be made;

iv.    Consent cannot be obtained for the collocation on an existing support structure or support tower despite the applicant’s reasonable efforts to obtain such consent; or

v.     It is not feasible from an engineering or structural standpoint to achieve collocation on an available existing support structure or support tower either due to structural limitations or because the needed auxiliary support equipment cannot be accommodated at the site.

b.     All wireless communication service providers shall cooperate with other providers to achieve collocation of facilities and all new support structures and support towers shall be designed so as to not preclude collocation provided collocation can be accommodated in a manner consistent with the applicable design and development standards.

c.     In the event collocation is represented to be infeasible, the City may retain a technical expert in the field of telecommunications engineering to evaluate whether collocation at the site is feasible.

d.     A wireless communication service provider shall exercise good faith in attempting to achieve collocation with other providers and sharing antenna sites, provided that such shared use does not technically impair its ability to provide wireless communication service. Such good faith shall include sharing of technical information to evaluate the feasibility of collocation. The City may deny a permit application for a wireless communication facility if it determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to collocate on an existing support structure or support tower.

4.   Collocation/Modification Standards.

a.     All collocations and modifications shall be designed in such a way as to be visually compatible with the structures on which they are placed. If the existing support structure incor porates stealth technologies or camouflage in its design, collocated and modified facilities shall be similarly designed.

b.     Except for small cell facilities, auxiliary support equipment shall be located within the existing enclosure and shall not result in any material exterior changes to the enclosure.

c.     Collocations and modifications to existing support structures, support towers or base stations shall meet all applicable building code requirements. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Building Official that the collocation or modification will not adversely affect the structural integrity of the support structure, support tower or base station.

d.     A collocation or modification proposed for a building listed in the Happy Valley Register of Historic Structures shall be designed to incorporate or enhance the existing architectural and design elements of the building.

D.  Permit Required—Siting Limitations—Interference—Abandonment.

1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a new wireless communication facility shall not be sited within the City unless a permit is obtained consistent with this section and the applicable requirements of this Code.

2.   New support towers are permitted as conditional uses in all residential land use districts if, in addition to demonstrating compliance with the conditional use, development and design standards, the applicant also demonstrates compliance with the collocation requirements in subsection C.3.a and the following conditions exist:

a.     The proposed facility is necessary to satisfy the applicant’s coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements within the identified geographic area and the facility is the least intrusive means to meet these requirements, including documentation from a radio frequency (RF) engineer or a licensed civil engineer regarding the nature and necessity of the coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements;

b.     The proposed facility must be sited in a residential zone to satisfy the applicant’s coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements;

c.     The characteristics of the site (size, shape, location, topography, and location of improvements and natural features) are suitable for the proposed facility;

d.     The proposed facility will not substantially change the character of the surrounding residential area in a way which limits or precludes use of the surrounding properties consistent with the provisions of the residential zone;

e.     The proposed facility is designed to minimize the negative impacts on the surrounding properties and uses by utilizing existing site characteristics, including but not limited to the site’s size, shape, location, topography, improvements, and natural features, as well the incorporation of camouflage and/or stealth technology. Negative impacts are minimized if there is:

i.      A decrease in negative visual impacts, including, but not limited to, visual clutter;

ii.     Better preservation of views or view corridors; and

iii.    A decrease in any other identifiable negative impacts to the surrounding area’s primary uses.

 

3.   A new support structure or support tower shall not be constructed, installed or erected within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other support structure or support tower that is owned, operated or occupied by the same wireless communication service provider. This separation standard does not apply to small cell facilities that work together in a small cell network. Exceptions to this standard may be permitted by the Planning Official or person designated by the Planning Official if, after reviewing evidence submitted by the service provider, the Planning Official or designee finds: (a) that closer spacing is required in order to provide adequate wireless communication service to the subject area; and (b) the service provider has exhausted all reasonable means of collocating on other existing structures located within the proposed service area. The Planning Official’s or designee’s decision may be appealed to the review body provided the appeal is filed with the Planning Official or designee within ten (10) calendar days of the decision. The appeal shall include the appropriate fees, as set by the City Council by resolution.

4.   A support structure or support tower that has not had an antenna or antenna array mounted on it for a period of one hundred eighty (180) successive days, or if the antenna or antenna array mounted thereon are not operated for a period of one hundred eighty (180) successive days, shall be considered abandoned and the owner shall remove the structure or tower and any accompanying auxiliary support equipment within ninety (90) days from the date of written notice from the City. During the ninety (90) days, the owner may apply, and upon a showing of good cause, may be granted an extension of time on such terms as the Planning Official or designee shall determine. If the structure and auxiliary support equipment are not removed, the City may declare the abandoned facility to be a nuisance and seek enforcement pursuant to the Happy Valley Municipal Code and/or may seek and obtain a court order directing the structure or tower to be removed and placing a lien on the real property upon which the structure(s) is located in an amount equal to the cost of removal.

E.  Application Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements for the applicable approval type in Chapter 16.61, an application for a new wireless communication facility shall include the following:

1.   Collocation/Modification/Small Cell Facility Installation Application.

a.     A site plan that includes a description of the proposed new facility or modification, the design and dimensions, together with elevations showing all components of the existing support structure or support tower and its connection to utilities;

b.     Documentation that the proposed facility meets the radio frequency emissions requirements of the Federal Communications Commission;

c.     Documentation that any auxiliary support equipment will not emanate noise at levels that exceed City standards, or designs showing how the sound will be effectively modified to meet those standards by means of baffling, barriers, or other suitable means;

d.     An engineer’s certification that the proposed support structure or support tower will safely handle the load created by the collocation, modification or attachment and comply with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and other industry safety and structural codes and standards.

2.   Application for a new Wireless Communication Facility, Other Than a Collocated/Modified/Small Cell Facility Subject to Subsection E.1. In addition to the submittal requirements listed in subsection E.1, an application for a new wireless communication facility or modification shall include the following:

 

a.     An engineer’s certification that the proposed support structure or support tower will safely handle the load created by the new facilities and future collocation facilities, and complies with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and other industry safety and structural codes and standards.

b.     For new support towers, documentation from a radio frequency (RF) engineer or a licensed civil engineer that the necessary service cannot be provided by collocation on, or modification to, an existing support tower or support structure or utility structure, or by attachment on a replacement structure for one or more of the following reasons:

i.      No existing support structures, or utility structures are located within the geographic area where service will be provided;

ii.     There are no existing support towers, support structures or towers that meet the applicant’s coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements within the identified geographic area;

iii     Collocation would interfere with other wireless communication facilities location on an existing support structure or tower, or would jeopardize the physical integrity of the facility upon which collocation would occur;

iv.    Consent cannot be obtained for the collocation on an existing support structure or tower despite the applicant’s reasonable efforts to obtain such consent; or

v.     It is not feasible for engineering or structural reasons to collocate on an available existing support structure or tower either due to structural limitations or because the needed auxiliary support equipment cannot be accommodated at the site.

c.     An alternatives analysis for new support towers demonstrating compliance with the siting priorities of subsection C.1; provided, however, that an applicant is not required to consider small cell facilities as an alternative to a proposed new support tower.

d.     The number and type of antennas that the support tower is designed to accommodate.

e.     A signed statement of compliance from the owner of the wireless communication facility that the owner will allow timely collocation by other users, provided all safety, structural, technological, and monetary requirements are met.

f.      A visual study containing, at a minimum, color simulations showing the appearance of the proposed support tower, antennas, and auxiliary equipment from at least three viewpoints within reasonable proximity of the site. The viewpoints shall be chosen by the applicant, but shall include representative views from residential buildings, historic resources, or historic districts located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the proposed site. If the support tower must comply with the design standards applicable to historic structures, the graphic simulation shall include the proposed design.

g.     If applicable due to the nature of the proposal, coverage maps showing any gap in the service provider’s coverage, capacity or technologies and the minimum height or configuration of the facility needed to fill the gap.

3.   Application for New Support Tower in Residential Zones. In addition to the submittal requirements of subsections E.1 and E.2, an application for a new support tower in any residential zone shall also provide documentation that:

 

a.     The proposed facility is necessary to satisfy the applicant’s coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements within the identified geographic area and the facility is the least intrusive means to meet these requirements, including documentation from a radio frequency (RF) engineer or a licensed civil engineer regarding the nature and necessity of the coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements;

b.     The proposed facility must be sited in a residential or future urban zone to satisfy the applicant’s coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements;.

c.     The characteristics of the site (size, shape, location, topography, and location of improvements and natural features) are suitable for the proposed facility;

d.     The proposed facility will not substantially change the character of the surrounding residential area in a way which limits or precludes use of the surrounding properties consistent with the provisions of the residential zone;

e.     The proposed facility is designed to minimize the negative impacts on the surrounding properties and uses by utilizing existing site characteristics, including but not limited to the site’s size, shape, location, topography, improvements, and natural features, as well the incorporation of camouflage and/or stealth technology. Negative impacts are minimized if there is:

i.      A decrease in negative visual impacts, including, but not limited to, visual clutter,

ii.     Better preservation of views or view corridors, and

iii.    A decrease in any other identifiable negative impacts to the surrounding area’s primary uses.

F.  Procedures.

1.   Applications for collocation on an existing support structure, support tower, base station or utility structure, or modification that will not result in a substantial change in the physical dimension of the existing facility shall be reviewed pursuant to the Type I Administrative procedure provided at Section 16.61.020.

2.   An application for small cell facilities shall be reviewed pursuant to the Type I Administrative procedure provided in Section 16.61.020. At the applicant’s discretion, a consolidated application addressing all or part of a small cell network may be submitted for Type I review as an alternative to individual permitting for each small cell facility in a small cell network.

3.   An application for a modification that will result in a substantial change in the physical dimension of the existing facility shall be reviewed pursuant to the Type II Administrative procedure provided at Section 16.61.030, unless the application is for a site in a residential or future urban zone.

4.   An application to site a new wireless communication facility on a new support structure or support tower in zones other than residential or future urban zones shall be reviewed pursuant to the Type II Administrative procedure provided at Section 16.61.030.

5.   Except as provided above in subsections F.1 and F.2, an application to site a new wireless communication facility on a new support structure or support tower in all residential or future urban zones shall be reviewed pursuant to the Type III Quasi-judicial procedure provided at Section 16.61.040.

 

6.   The City shall issue a final decision on all applications consistent with the timing requirements of ORS 227.178 and applicable federal regulations.

G.  Approval Criteria.

1.   Collocated Facilities and Modifications.

a.     A new wireless communication facility or modification to an existing facility that does not result in a substantial change in the physical dimension of the existing facility shall meet the applicable collocation requirements and standards of this section.

b.     A new wireless communication facility or modification to an existing facility that would result in a substantial change in the physical dimension of the existing facility shall meet the applicable collocation requirements and standards of this section.

 2.  New Support Structure or Tower.

a.     A new support structure or support tower is subject to all provisions of this section.

b.     In addition, a new support structure or support tower shall meet the following criteria:

i.      The application as approved will minimize and/or mitigate reasonably likely adverse impacts of the use on the adjacent properties, surrounding neighborhood and neighborhood character. In order to mitigate and minimize the impact of the support structure or tower, the City may impose conditions relating to the size, design, operating conditions, or other features of the proposal, including those which may be applicable to conditional uses under this Code; and

ii.     The application demonstrates compliance with the collocation requirements in subsection C.3.a.

H.  Development and Design Standards.

1.   Setback Requirements.

a.     New support structures and support towers and auxiliary support equipment shelters must meet the applicable setback requirements of the zone in which they are proposed to be sited, except as required in subsection b or c below.

b.     A new support structure or support tower proposed on property that is adjacent to a residential zone or an existing residential structure must be set back from the relevant property line or structure by a distance equal to the height of the proposed support structure or support tower.

c.     The review body may require greater setbacks for a proposed new support structure or support tower to assure that the proposed facility complies with the visual impact standards of this section or to address identified safety concerns.

2.   Height Limitations.

a.     A new support structure or support tower located in an institutional, commercial or industrial zone shall meet the applicable height limitation for the zone in which it will be located, provided that the facility may exceed the height limit in the zone by demonstration by the applicant that additional height is necessary to meet the applicant’s coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements for an identified technology or service. However, a new support structure or support tower may not exceed two hundred (200) feet in an Industrial zone or one hundred fifty (150) feet in any other zone. A “speculative height” support structure or support tower designed to accommodate unknown future users are not allowed in any zone.

b.     A new support structure or support tower proposed in a residential or future urban zone shall meet the otherwise applicable height standards in the zone, provided that the facility may exceed the height limit in the zone by demonstrating that additional height is necessary to meet the applicant’s coverage, capacity and/or engineering requirements for an identified technology or service. A new support structure or support tower in a residential or future urban zone must be constructed using stealth technology.

c.     An antenna attached to an existing support structure, including utility structures and replacement utility structures, may add twenty (20) feet to the overall height of the existing structure regardless of the height standard of the underlying zone.

3.   Development Standards.

a.     The area around the base of support towers (including any auxiliary support equipment) must be fenced, with a sight-obscuring fence a minimum of six feet in height. The fenced area is to be surrounded by evergreen shrubs (or a similar type of evergreen landscaping), placed within a landscaped strip a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. In the event that placement of a proposed support tower and/or auxiliary support equipment is located in a unique area within a subject site that would not benefit from the addition of landscaped screening, the Planning Official or designee may require that the applicant submit a landscape plan illustrating the addition of a proportional landscape area that will enhance the subject site either at a building perimeter, parking lot, or street frontage, adjacent to or within the subject site. Although barbed wire is permitted, no concertina (razor) wire shall be installed atop any fence or barrier.

b.     All support structures, support towers, antennas, and antenna arrays and associated facilities shall be finished in a non-reflective neutral color. For a new support structure or tower, the Review body may require camouflaging or stealth technology.

c.     Construction and installation of a new support structure or a new support tower is subject to all applicable building code requirements.

d.     Antennas, antenna arrays, support structures and support towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental agency.

e.     Signs, symbols, flags, banners or other such devices or things may not be attached to, painted or inscribed on a wireless communication facility, except for signs with standard public safety warnings, contact information or similar signage.

f.      The applicant shall maintain and, if necessary, improve, the existing access to City standards. If there is no existing access, the applicant shall provide a paved access driveway a minimum of ten (10) feet wide to accommodate service vehicles.

I.   Wireless Communication Facility Adjustment.

1.   Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a wireless communication facility shall not be used or developed contrary to any applicable development standard unless an adjustment has been granted pursuant to this section. These provisions apply exclusively to wireless communication facilities and are in lieu of the generally applicable variance provisions in Chapter 16.71.

2.   Procedure Type. A wireless communications facility adjustment is a Type II procedure.

3.   Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general submittal requirements for a Type II application, an application for a wireless communication facility adjustment shall include:

a.     A written statement demonstrating how the adjustment would meet the criteria.

b.     A site plan that includes:

i.      Description of the proposed facility’s design and dimensions, as it would appear with and without the adjustment.

ii.     Elevations showing all components of the wireless communication facility as it would appear with and without the adjustment.

iii.    Color simulations of the wireless communication facility after construction demonstrating compatibility with the vicinity, as it would appear with and without the adjustment.

4.   Criteria. An application for a wireless communication facility adjustment may be granted if the following criteria are met:

a.     The adjustment is consistent with the purpose of the development standard for which the adjustment is sought.

b.     Based on a visual analysis, the design minimizes the visual impacts to residential zones through mitigating measures, including, but not limited to, building heights, bulk, color, and landscaping.

c.     The applicant demonstrates the existence of either of the following:

i.      Gap in Service.

(A)   A gap in the coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service network exists;

(B)   The gap can only be filled through an adjustment in one or more of the standards in this section; and

(C)   The adjustment is narrowly tailored to fill the service gap such that the wireless communication facility conforms to this section’s standards to the greatest extent possible.

5.   Minimization of Impacts. The adjustment must minimize or eliminate negative impacts to surrounding properties and uses through by utilizing existing site characteristics including, but not limited to, the site’s size, shape, location, topography, improvements, and natural features. Negative impacts are minimized or eliminated if there is:

a.     A decrease in negative visual impacts, including, but not limited to, visual clutter;

b.     Better preservation of views or view corridors; or

c.     A decrease in any other identifiable negative impacts to the surrounding area’s primary uses.

J.   Special Provisions.

 

1.   Temporary Facilities. In order to facilitate continuity of services during maintenance or repair of existing facilities or prior to completion of construction of a new facility, temporary wireless communication facilities are allowed through administrative review. Temporary facilities authorized under this subsection may not be used in excess of ninety (90) days, may not have a permanent foundation and shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the permanent facility is completed. A permit for a temporary facility under this subsection may not be renewed or extended, nor may a new permit be issued for the same facility within the succeeding six months after the expiration of the initial permit.

2.   Third-Party Review and Associated Fees. The City may engage a third-party expert to review evidence presented by an applicant under this section to demonstrate compliance with this section as to the infeasibility of collocation or the need to fill a service gap. The City Council may establish reasonable fees in amounts sufficient to recover all of the City’s costs to retain such consultants.

3.   Issuance of Building Permit. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a wireless communication facility until the application for the specific type of siting has been approved, including any local appeal.

4.   Exception for Public Utilities. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a public utility, as defined in ORS 757.005 from installing or constructing a new utility structure, or enlarging, expanding, or reconstructing an existing utility structure in right-of-way, if the installation, construction, enlargement, expansion, or reconstruction of the utility structure would otherwise be permitted under law and the utility can demonstrate that the need for the new utility structure is not related to or created by a wireless communication facility.

5.   Relocation.

a.     The City may require a wireless communication facility located in the right-of-way to be relocated when the public convenience requires the relocation, and the expense thereof shall be paid solely by the owner of the wireless communication facility.

b.     Prior to requiring relocation, the City will provide the owner with notice substantially similar to that given to franchisees, licensees, or grantees.

c.     Should an owner fail to remove or relocate the wireless communication facility or facilities by the date stated in the notice, the City may cause removal or relocation of the wireless communication facility or facilities, and the expense thereof shall be paid by the owner, including all enforcement and other costs incurred by the City due to the owner’s failure to remove or relocate the wireless communication facility or facilities.

d.     If an owner must relocate its wireless communication facility or facilities in the right-of-way as the result of a request by the City, the City will make a reasonable effort to provide the owner with an alternate location for the relocated facility.

6.   Measurements. Unless otherwise specified in this section, all references to existing, allowed or modified height in this section are measured from the original grade at the base of the wireless communications facility as originally approved to the highest point on the wireless communication facility, including all antennas approved prior to February 22, 2012, and excluding any lightning rods.

(Ord. 552 § 1, 2020; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 481 § 1, 2015)

 

16.44.030 Model homes.
A.  Purpose. This section permits construction of model homes in conjunction with preliminary approval of a residential subdivision pursuant to Sections 16.63.050 through 16.63.070 of this title.

B.  Process. A model home may be approved by the review body concurrently with an application for preliminary approval of a residential subdivision or subsequent to preliminary approval of a residential subdivision and prior to final plat approval. Model homes that are applied for subsequent to a preliminary subdivision approval shall be evaluated pursuant to a Type I procedure.

C.  Approval Criteria. A model home may be constructed and occupied only for the purpose set forth in this section and consistent with its definitions prior to final plat recording and subject to the following approval criteria:

1.   The lot and home foundation for the proposed model home must be surveyed by a person who is registered in Oregon as a land surveyor and holds a valid certificate consistent with State law. The surveys must establish the location of the model home structure consistent with the dimensional requirements of the underlying development district pursuant to Articles 16.2 and 16.3 or as otherwise provided in this title.

2.   The proposed model home shall be in compliance with all applicable dimensional requirements including, but not limited to, maximum height, maximum lot coverage, minimum setbacks and minimum lot size.

3.   Adequate parking shall be available to serve the model home site. No model home may be occupied where on-street parking is not available on a public right-of-way or private street that is immediately adjacent to the lot. Where adjacent on-street parking is inadequate, additional temporary off-street parking may be required. Temporary off-street parking must be removed and adequate landscaping installed consistent with this title prior to any sale of the model home or lot. At least four parking spaces shall be provided for each model home.

4.   Adequate emergency vehicle access shall be provided to each model home lot, as approved by the City Public Works Director.

5.   Adequate water supply for fire fighting, as approved by the City Public Works Director, shall be provided to each model home lot prior to installation of combustible materials.

6.   All required public and private utilities within the public right-of-way or private street shall be installed prior to occupancy of the model home. All utility installation must be inspected and approved by the City consistent with this title. This provision is in addition to any other requirements for public utility improvements as may be provided in this title or other applicable law.

7.   The number of model homes in a residential subdivision may be allowed as follows:

a.     Between one and fifty (50) residential lots, two model homes;

b.     Between fifty-one (51) and one hundred (100) residential lots, three model homes;

c.     Between one hundred one (101) and one hundred ninety-nine (199) residential lots, six model homes;

d.     Two hundred (200) or more residential lots, eight model homes.

8.   If more than one model home is proposed, the lots on which the model homes are to be located shall be contiguous to one another and within the first phase of development.

9.   No variances under Chapter 16.71 shall be permitted to accommodate the model home.

D.  Remedial Action. In the event the City determines the model home has encroached on a property line or violated any applicable standards, the following steps shall be taken to correct the violation:

1.   The City shall provide notice to the applicant identifying the violation and requesting correction of the violation within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice. The City may require more or less time on a case-by-case basis. The time required to cure the encroachment does not extend or modify the timeline for submitting a final plat or the termination of the model home approval as set forth in Section 16.44.030.

2.   The applicant shall correct the violation within the time provided in the notice unless otherwise agreed to by the City in writing.

3.   In the event the applicant fails to correct the violation to the satisfaction of the City within the time provided in the notice, the City may at its discretion use the security provided pursuant to subsection (D)(1) above, for purposes of correcting the violation.

4.   The City will not accept an application for a final plat until such time as the violation is corrected. In the event an application is already filed before the violation is detected, the City shall deny the final plat as not consistent with the preliminary approval unless the violation is corrected.

E.  Termination of Model Home Approval. The model home use shall be discontinued no later than two years from the date of the recording of the final plat of the entire subdivision or, where there is phasing, the first phase of the subdivision. Approval may be extended for a maximum of one additional year by the Planning Official or designee with the concurrence of the building official and public works director. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.040 Manufactured home standards.
Minimum standards for a manufactured home on an individual lot as a single-family dwelling:

A.  The manufactured home shall be multisectional (double-wide or wider) and enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet (exclusive of the garage) of living space i.e., total of exterior dimensions of all habitable rooms, as determined by measurement of the length and width of the manufactured home.

B.  Manufactured homes shall be allowed in any residential zone of the City that allows single-family dwellings.

C.  The manufactured home shall be placed on a poured-in-place, concrete backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than twelve (12) inches above grade.

D.  The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof which shall have a minimum slope of two and one-half to three feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width.

E.  The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings used within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the City as the local permit approval authority.

F.  The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce heat loss to levels equivalent to the performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the State Building Code as defined in ORS 455.010.

G.  The manufactured home shall have a garage constructed with exterior materials matching the manufactured home’s exterior material. Carports are not allowed because garages are consistent with the predominant construction of immediately surrounding dwellings in all residential zoning districts in the City.

H.  A manufactured home and the lot upon which it is to be sited are subject to any development standard, architectural requirement and minimum size requirement to which conventional single-family residential dwellings on the same lot would be subject which also includes specific design, landscaping, and exterior siding and roofing requirements.

I.   A manufactured home shall not be sited in any area designated as an historic district or residential land immediately adjacent to an historic landmark.

J.   All manufactured homes (except for manufactured homes located within a manufactured homes subdivision or in mobile home parks) shall utilize at least two of the following design features:

1.   Dormers;

2.   Recessed entries;

3.   Cupolas;

4.   Bay or bow windows;

5.   Attached garage;

6.   Window shutters;

7.   Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum twelve (12) inches);

8.   Gables;

9.   Covered porch entry;

10. Pillars or posts;

11. Eaves (minimum six inches);

12. Tile or shake roof;

13. Horizontal lap siding;

14. A roof with a pitch greater than nominal 3-12.

K.  If the manufactured home is removed from its foundation, the owner of the property shall remove the foundation and all accessory structures and additions to the manufactured home, and permanently disconnect sewer, water and other utilities unless otherwise authorized by the City. In the event the owner fails to accomplish such work within thirty (30) days from the date on which the manufactured home is moved from its foundation, the City may perform such work and place a lien against the property for the cost of such work. This condition shall not apply in the event that the manufactured home is replaced on the original foundation, on the original foundation as modified, or by another approved manufactured home within thirty (30) days of the original manufactured home’s removal. (Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.045 Mobile home parks.
A.  The standards of this section supersede the standards of Section 16.64.040, when applicable in regard to the underlying comprehensive plan designation/zoning district, of the LDC in reviewing applications for mobile home parks. The standards of this section are applicable to proposed new mobile home parks and mobile home park expansions, including the provision of all Level 1 services, per the requirements of this title.

B.  Density and Setbacks. The maximum density allowed in a mobile home park shall not exceed that of the underlying zone. A minimum ten (10) feet distance shall be maintained between mobile homes.

C.  Landscaping and Screening. Except as required for vision clearance, a landscaped area of at least twenty (20) feet in depth which attains a height of at least five feet within two growing seasons is required along the perimeter of the park. A fence may be provided in addition to the required perimeter landscaping, its placement to be approved by the review body. In addition, all open spaces not occupied by structures, mobile homes or paved areas, shall be planted or otherwise landscaped and shall be properly maintained.

D.  Roadways and Circulation. All private roads in mobile home parks shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width if parking is prohibited, or thirty (30) feet if on-street parking is allowed. All private roads must meet City standards for construction and must be paved and named. An internal walkway system must connect each mobile home with the street system and recreation facilities. Circulation plans for mobile home parks must be approved by the fire district.

E.  Fire Hydrants. An adequate number of fire hydrants shall be provided within the mobile home park, so that no mobile home space or structure within the park shall be more than four hundred (400) feet measured along a roadway from a hydrant.

F.  Street Lights. Standard street lights shall conform to the standards of the lighting district.

G.  Numbering of Spaces. Each mobile home space shall be legibly numbered so that it may be easily found, in a manner to be approved by emergency services. A site plan showing the general layout of the park, the location of each numbered space and all roadways shall be furnished to the fire district and to the City.

H.  Recreational Vehicle Parking Area. For proposed new mobile home parks and mobile home park expansions, each mobile home park shall have a separate paved area designated for the parking and storage of recreational vehicles, campers, boats, trailers, etc. Such area shall be enclosed by a sight-obscuring fence. There shall be at least one recreational vehicle parking space for each six mobile home spaces in the mobile home park.

I.   Recreation Area. For proposed new mobile home parks and mobile home park expansions accommodating children under fourteen (14) years of age, a minimum of twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet, or one hundred (100) square feet per mobile home space, whichever is greater, shall be provided and maintained by the mobile home park owner for a recreation area. A separate play area is not required if an existing mobile home park can document that it was in existence before March 13, 1989, and rented spaces as an all adult park.

J.   Accessory Structures. Other structures within the mobile home park for uses accessory to the park such as a service building, laundry area, recreational facilities, manager’s office, etc., are permitted provided they do not draw trade from outside the park. All such accessory structures shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any mobile home and from other structures, roadways and property lines.

K.  Parking. A minimum of one paved parking space per unit is required.

L.  Patio. Each mobile home space shall have a patio or deck of concrete, brick, stone or wood at least one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size.

M. Utility Connections. Each mobile home shall be equipped with connections for running water, electricity and sanitary sewage disposal. All utility connections shall be located underground. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.050 Accessory dwelling units.
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish appropriate locations, site development standards, and permit requirements to allow for the provision of accessory dwelling units (ADUs) within the City. ADUs, commonly referred to as “granny flats” or “mother-in-law apartments,” are a well-established housing strategy that utilize an additional living unit in areas zoned for single-family use. By creating a self-contained unit with a separate entrance and kitchen from existing space in the primary dwelling; a combination of existing and newly created space; space in an existing accessory building; or, from the addition of a new accessory building, secondary living areas can be created in association with existing or new homes. Such living space can aid in the housing and dependent care of family members, provide rental income to offset the costs of home-ownership, and add to the supply of affordable housing options available to the citizens of Happy Valley.

B.  Development Standards. In addition to the applicable standards of the underlying residential zone, ADUs shall comply with the following development standards:

1.   An ADU shall meet all applicable health, fire safety and building codes, pursuant to the Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

2.   ADUs shall be allowed only in conjunction with parcels containing one single-family dwelling. Only one ADU per parcel is permitted.

3.   The ADU may be created by converting existing living area or adding floor area, or construction of a new structure that is either attached or detached. For example, conversion of space above a primary dwelling’s detached garage would qualify as a detached ADU. However, no detached ADU structure may include a secondary garage (one garage for the primary structure and one for the ADU) separate from the primary dwelling, unless said secondary garage existed prior to the submittal of development plans for the ADU. In addition, the building height of the ADU may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the building height of the primary structure or twenty-six (26) feet, whichever is higher.

4.   The maximum gross habitable floor area (GHFA) of an ADU involving the conversion of existing space within a primary dwelling such as a basement or addition shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the GHFA of the primary residence on the lot. Construction of a new structure that is attached by means of a breezeway or similar feature does not qualify as an attached structure. For a detached ADU, the GHFA shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the GHFA of the primary residence on the lot, and shall not exceed a maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less. The floor area of any garage in the primary dwelling shall not be included in the total calculation of GHFA.

5.   Only one entrance shall be located on the front of the primary dwelling or any portion of the primary dwelling abutting a street, unless the dwelling contained additional entrances before the accessory residential unit was created.

6.   In order to maintain an architectural character similar to the primary dwelling, the ADU shall have siding and roofing materials and exterior paint colors that generally match the siding and roofing materials, and exterior paint colors of the primary dwelling.

7.   The development of the ADU, if utilized for the purposes of short-term rental housing, shall provide an additional on-site parking space if the primary dwelling has less than four on-site spaces (for example, inclusive of a garage and driveway) available before construction of the accessory unit.

8.   A minimum six-foot hedge or site-obscuring fence may be required by the Planning Official or designee to buffer a detached ADU from dwellings on adjacent lots, when buffering is necessary for the privacy and enjoyment of yard areas of adjacent properties.

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.055 Accessory uses and structures.
An accessory use shall comply with all requirements of a principal use, except as this title specifically allows to the contrary, and shall comply with the following limitations:

A.  Fence limitations shall be as follows:

1.   A fence made of wood, vinyl or similar materials that is constructed or installed on an interior or rear property line shall not exceed the height of seven feet unless it is structurally engineered and receives an approved building permit in which case the fence may be constructed to a maximum height of eight feet. Typical field fencing constructed of woven wire or chain link does not require a building permit unless it is more than eight feet high.

2.   A fence located in a required front yard or side yard on the street side of a corner lot, forward of the front building line, shall not exceed a height of four feet, unless located within a sight visibility area and/or easement, in which case said fence shall not exceed a height of two and one-half feet measured from the curb elevation.

3.   Fence height restrictions do not apply to public utility fences or to chain link fences enclosing school and public playgrounds.

B.  A greenhouse or hothouse may be maintained accessory to a dwelling only if there are no sales.

C.  Accessory structures larger than two hundred (200) square feet in size and fourteen (14) feet in height, such as a separated garage, accessory storage structure, play structure, treehouse, workshop building, etc., may be constructed accessory to a primary dwelling. Accessory structures require conformance with the underlying development district setbacks, lot coverage and all other applicable development standards except for building height. Accessory structure building height, as measured by this title, shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the height of the primary structure or twenty-six (26) feet, whichever is higher. Treehouse height shall be measured from the floor level. Treehouses of this size shall require submittal of an arborist’s report and structural engineering calculations demonstrating that the tree(s) and structure will support the load of the treehouse.

D.  An uncovered swimming pool may be located within a required rear yard or side yard behind the rear building line provided it is no closer than five feet to the property line.

1.   Any pool forty-eight (48) inches in height above grade level is to be considered its own fence if the following conditions are met:

a.     The method of entering the pool is a removable ladder or stair that is moved a safe distance from said pool when the pool is not in use.

b.     If a deck or walkway is constructed around aforesaid pool that is over thirty (30) inches above grade, this deck or walkway must be equipped with a guardrail with either vertical or horizontal members that will not permit passage of a nine-inch sphere. If no fence with self-closing and locking gates encloses the yards, one must be installed on the stair or ladder that serves as entry onto the deck or walkway. If more than one entry to deck or walkway is provided, all entries shall have self-closing and locking gates.

c.     The pool must be set and maintained as pursuant to manufacturer’s instructions.

2.   Any pool installed at ground level or below ground level shall be protected against accidental entry by a fence not less than forty-eight (48) inches nor more than eighty-four (84) inches in height with a self-closing, self-locking gate not less than forty-eight (48) inches from the edge of the pool.

a.     The pool must be set and maintained as pursuant to manufacturer’s instructions;

b.     Any pool less than forty-eight (48) inches in height shall be considered to be at ground level installation and treated as same for protective fencing; or

c.     The pool and/or spa and hot tub must be covered by a power safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 as listed in Appendix G of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

E.  An accessory building measuring no greater than two hundred (200) square feet in size and fourteen (14) feet in height may be located within a required rear yard or the required side yards behind the front building line of the primary structure. An accessory building component that extends from the foundation wall, including, but not limited to: eaves; fireplace chases; bay windows; and, similar accessory building components, may be located within a required rear yard or the required side yards behind the front building line of the primary structure, provided that a minimum three-foot setback is maintained between the accessory building component and any pertinent rear or side property line. Covered porticos (commonly referred to as “outdoor rooms”), may be located within a required rear yard provided that a minimum ten (10) foot setback is maintained between the covered portico and the rear property line. Habitable floor area or accessory storage area shall not be considered an accessory building component.

F.  A covered front porch that equals a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the lineal frontage of the front building line may be placed in front yard of a residence provided that no part of the porch (excluding eaves) is closer than fifteen (15) feet to a front property line. An unenclosed covered patio or a covered deck enclosed only by railings may be placed in the rear yard of a residence provided that no part is closer than ten (10) feet to a rear property line. An uncovered deck constructed thirty (30) inches or higher above grade may be located within the required rear yard or the required side yard behind the front building line provided that it may not be closer than three feet to a property line. An uncovered deck constructed lower than thirty (30) inches above grade may be built up to a property line.

 

G.  Athletic Court or Facility. Athletic courts or facilities, typically associated with expansive single-family residences, take many forms, including those constructed for tennis, full-court basketball, volleyball, etc. Although a specific land use action is not associated with the review of sport courts, a building permit is required, which in turn requires signature by the Planning Official or designee, and shall be evaluated according to the following criteria:

1.   Lighting Plan. The applicant shall submit a photometric lighting plan delineating the relationship between exterior lighting, the subject site, and surrounding residential properties within two hundred (200) feet.

2.   Storm Water Management. The applicant shall be subject to the rules and requirements of Clackamas County Service District No. 1 (Water Environment Services).

3.   Screening and Buffering. For athletic courts or facilities over two thousand (2,000) square feet in size, the applicant shall provide a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaped buffer between the athletic court or facility and abutting residential properties. For all athletic courts or facilities, the applicant shall provide a landscape plan that illustrates planting materials, sizes, and overall design (which may include lawn), to include a minimum six-foot tall solid wood fence, cyclone fence with slats, or a solid vegetative screen on property lines surrounding the athletic court or facility that abut residential development.

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 443 § 1, 2013; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.060 Affordable housing.
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to offer incentives to developers for providing housing that is affordable to the types of households and qualifying residents identified in subsection B (Eligibility for Bonus and Incentives), below. The incentives include the ability to construct up to twenty-five (25) percent more residential dwelling units than normally allowed by the applicable Comprehensive Plan map/zoning map district, and other incentives provided by this section.

B.  Eligibility for Bonus and Incentives. In order to be eligible for a density bonus and other incentives provided by this section, a proposed residential project shall:

1.   Consist of five or more dwelling units;

2.   Be designed and constructed so that at least:

a.     Twenty (20) percent of the total number of proposed dwelling units are for lower income households, as defined by HUD;

b.     Ten (10) percent of the total number of proposed dwelling units are for very low income households, as defined by HUD; or

c.     Fifty (50) percent of the total number of proposed dwelling units are for qualifying residents (senior citizens of any income level) as determined by HUD; and

d.     Comply with all applicable provisions of this title.

C.  Types of Bonuses and Incentives Allowed. A residential project that satisfies all applicable provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to the following density bonus and other incentives. If a density bonus and/or other incentives cannot be accommodated on a parcel due to strict compliance with the provisions of this Development Code, the review body is authorized to waive or modify development standards as necessary to accommodate all bonus units and other incentives to which the development is entitled. The housing developer shall show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible.

1.   Density Bonus. The density bonus allowed by this section is a permitted use within the following planned mixed use (PMU) districts: Mixed-Use Residential Multifamily Dwellings (MUR-M); Mixed-Use Residential Mixed-Use Buildings (MUR-X); Mixed-Use Commercial (MUC); Mixed-Use Employment (MUE); and the Mixed-Use Employment Neighborhood Commercial Subdistrict (MUE-NC). In addition, the density bonus is permitted use within the Single-Family Attached Residential District (SFA); General Commercial (GC) and Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zones; and, shall consist of either:

a.     At least a twenty-five (25) percent  increase in the number of dwelling units normally allowed by the zoning district applicable to the parcel as of the date of the project land use permit application;

b.     Other incentives of equivalent financial value based upon the land cost for each dwelling unit; or

c.     Any combination of an increase in the number of dwelling units normally allowed by the zoning district and other incentives of financial value equivalent to a twenty-five (25) percent increase in the number of dwelling units.

If a developer agrees to construct both twenty-five (25) percent of the total units for persons and families of low income and ten (10) percent of the total units for very low income households, the developer is entitled to only one density bonus, although the City may, at its discretion, grant more than one density bonus. If a developer agrees to construct less than the percentages of low or very low income housing indicated in subsection (C)(1) above, the City may grant density bonuses or provide other incentives which vary from those prescribed in subsection (C)(1).

2.   Other Incentives. A qualifying residential project shall be entitled to at least one of the following concessions or incentives:

a.     A reduction in the parcel development standards of this Development Code (e.g., coverage, setback, zero lot line and/or reduced parcel sizes, architectural design requirements, public works improvements, and/or parking requirements);

b.     Approval of a mixed-use component in conjunction with the housing project if nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing project, and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing project and surrounding existing and planned land uses;

c.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City that will result in identifiable cost reductions;

d.     A higher density bonus consisting of up to a thirty-five (35) percent increase in the number of dwelling units normally allowed by the zoning district applicable to the parcel or up to a fifty (50) percent increase if the project site is located within one-quarter mile of a commer-cial center with a grocery store/drug store anchor and within one-quarter mile of a transit route; and

e.     A waiver or reduction of planning application fees, building permit application fees, Transportation SDCs and/or Parks SDCs.

 

D.  Continued Availability. The land use permit application for the residential project shall include the procedures proposed by the developer to maintain the continued affordability of the density bonus units in the following manner:

1.   Projects with City Funding—Thirty (30) Years. Projects receiving a direct financial contribution or other financial incentives from the City, or a density bonus and at least one other concession or incentive as provided by Section 16.45.060 above, shall maintain the availability of the lower income density bonus units for a minimum of thirty (30) years, and shall enter into a development agreement with the City of Happy Valley stipulating said retention. Lower income density bonus units shall mean those affordable housing units for which a density bonus or other financial incentive was granted for the project; or

2.   Projects Receiving Density Bonus Only—Ten (10) Years. Projects that receive a density bonus as the only incentive from the City shall maintain the availability of lower income density bonus units for a minimum of ten (10) years.

E.  Location of Bonus Units. The location of density bonus units within the qualifying residential project may be at the discretion of the developer. However, the inclusionary units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the development where feasible, shall contain on average the same number of bedrooms as the non-inclusionary units in the development, and shall be compatible with the design or use of the remaining units in terms of appearance, materials, and finish quality.

F.  Processing of Bonus and Incentive Requests. Proposed bonus and incentive requests shall be included as part of the land use application required for the residential project by this title, including the application of all relevant criteria, particularly for road, sewer and water capacity.

1.   Findings for Approval. In addition to the findings required for the approval of the pertinent land use applications, the approval of the bonuses and incentives by the review body shall also require the following special findings:

a.     In the event that the City grants a density bonus, the project would not be a hazard or nuisance to the City at large or establish a use or development inconsistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan;

b.     In the event that the City grants a density bonus, the number of dwellings approved by the land use permit can be accommodated by existing and planned infrastructure capacities;

c.     Adequate evidence exists to indicate that the development of the property in compliance with the permit would result in the provision of affordable housing in a manner consistent with the purpose and intent of this section;

d.     In the event that the City does not grant at least one financial concession or incentive in addition to the density bonus, that additional concessions or incentives are not necessary to ensure affordable costs or the sales price or rent for the targeted dwelling units; and

e.     There are sufficient provisions to guarantee that the dwelling units would remain affordable in the future.

G.  Priority Processing of Affordable Housing Projects. A residential project that satisfies all applicable provisions of this section shall be given priority over other types of projects and permits by all City de-partments in the processing of land use permit and building permit applications, and in inspections of the project during the construction process. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.070 Agricultural use regulations.
A.  Under no circumstances shall any livestock animals, domestic or farm animals, poultry, or fowl be kept for commercial purposes in a residential, commercial or other nonagricultural zone. Cows, horses, sheep or goats may not be kept on lots less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. The total number of such animals (other than their young under the age of six months) allowed on a lot is limited to the square footage of the lot divided by the total minimum areas required for each animal as listed below. The raising of swine is not permitted on lots less than five acres without prior approval by the city.

 

 

 

Gross Area Required

Horses and Cows

 

l or 2

40,000 sq. ft.

3

60,000 sq. ft.

4

80,000 sq. ft.

5 or more

95,000 sq. ft. plus 15,000 sq. ft. for each animal over 5

Goats and sheep

 

per animal

10,000 sq. ft.

Llamas

 

1 or 2

10,000 sq. ft.

3 or more

15,000 sq. ft. plus 5,000 sq. ft. for each llama over 3

 

B.  Large animal runs or barns or pens shall be located on the rear half of the property but not closer than seventy (70) feet from the front property line or closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residence other than the residence of the owner.

1.   Roosters, peacocks, and any other fowl known for its loud call are prohibited. Other types of fowl, as well as rabbits, may be kept, subject to one of the following options:

2.   Hutches, coops, barns, or pens for a maximum of six rabbits or five hens shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner and behind the front building line of the dwelling.

C.  Animals, chickens and/or fowl shall be properly caged or housed, and proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times. All animal or poultry food, except fodder, shall be stored in metal or other rodent-proof containers. All animal byproducts and waste shall be kept a minimum of five feet from all lot lines. Hutches, coops, barns, and pens shall be enclosed on those sides that are not otherwise screened from adjacent lots by a sight-obscuring fence, wall, or hedge a minimum of six feet in height.

D.  Commercial Activity in Conjunction with Agriculture. In agricultural zones, processing, selling (retail and wholesale), and/or distribution of agricultural products raised on-site are subject to the laws of the State of Oregon. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2020; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.080 Special standards for neighborhood commercial uses.
A.  Purpose and Applicability. Neighborhood commercial standards allow for small-scale commercial uses that are compatible with adjacent residential development. All neighborhood commercial uses shall comply with standards in this section, which are intended to promote land use compatibility and transition between neighborhood commercial and adjacent residential uses.

 

B.  Permitted Uses. Only those neighborhood commercial uses specifically listed in Tables 16.22.040-1, 16.22.050-1 and 16.22.060-1 may be permitted.

C.  Location. Neighborhood commercial uses are limited to lots located adjacent to the intersection of the following types of streets, as designated in the City’s transportation system plan:

1.   Major or minor arterial street and collector street or local street;

2.   Collector street and collector street;

3.   Collector street and local street.

D.  Building Mass Supplemental Standard. The maximum width or length of a neighborhood commercial or mixed-use (residential and commercial) building shall not exceed sixty (60) feet (from end-wall to end-wall).

E.  Floor Area Supplemental Standards. Floor area is measured by totaling the interior floor area of all building stories, except crawl spaces (i.e., with less than seven and one-half feet of vertical clearance). The maximum commercial floor area shall not exceed:

1.   Seven thousand (7,000) square feet per building. For buildings located adjacent to the intersection of a major or minor arterial street and collector street.

2.   Five thousand (5,000) square feet per building. For buildings located adjacent to the intersection of a collector street and collector street.

3.   Three thousand (3,000) square feet per building. For buildings located adjacent to the intersection of a collector street and local street.

F.  Minimum Setback.

1.   Front: Twenty (20) feet.

2.   Rear: Ten (10) feet.

3.   Side: Ten (10) feet.

4.   Street side: Eight (8) feet.

5.   Maximum lot coverage: Seventy-five (75) percent.

G.  Hours of Operation. Neighborhood commercial land uses shall be limited to the following hours of operation: 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

 

Figure 16.44.080-1 Neighborhood Commercial (Typical Site Layout)



(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.090 Design standards for drive-up/drive-in/drive-through uses and facilities.
When drive-up or drive-through uses and facilities are allowed, they shall conform to all of the following standards, which are intended to calm traffic, and protect pedestrian comfort and safety.

A.  The drive-up/drive-through facility shall orient to an alley, driveway, or interior parking area, and not a street (Figure 16.44.090-1);

B.  None of the drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities (e.g., driveway queuing areas, windows, teller machines, service windows, kiosks, drop-boxes, or similar facilities) are located within twenty (20) feet of a street and shall not be oriented to a street corner. Walk-up only teller machines and kiosks may be oriented to a street or placed adjacent to a street corner;

C.  Drive-up/in queuing areas shall be designed so that vehicles do not obstruct a driveway, fire access lane, walkway, or public right-of-way; and

D.  No more than one drive-up, drive-in, or drive-through facility shall be permitted for a distance of four hundred (400) linear feet along the same block face (same side of street).

 

Figure 16.44.090-1 Drive-Up and Drive-Through Facilities



(Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.44.100 Special standards for solar apparatus.
A.  The installation and use on a residential structure of a solar photovoltaic energy system or a solar thermal energy system is an outright permitted use in any zone in which residential structures are an allowed use.

B.  The installation and use on an institutional, commercial or industrial structure of a solar photovoltaic energy system or a solar thermal energy system is an outright permitted use in any zone in which institutional, commercial or industrial structures are an allowed use.

C.  Approval of solar photovoltaic energy systems or solar thermal energy systems require:

1.   Building permit approval only, land use fees and development standards outside of building height do not apply.

2.   Roof-mounted solar photovoltaic energy systems or solar thermal energy systems require conformance with peak building height, must be located no higher than eighteen (18) inches off the roof and must be mounted so that the plane of the system is parallel to the slope of the roof.

3.   Subsection (C)(2) does not apply to structures that are:

a.     A federally or locally designated historic building or landmark or structures located in a federally or locally designated historic district.

b.     A conservation landmark designated by a city or county because of the historic, cultural, archaeological, architectural or similar merit of the landmark or located in an area designated as a significant scenic resource unless the material used is designated as anti-reflective or eleven (11) percent or less reflective.

(Ord. 427 § 1, 2012)

 

Chapter 16.45 SIGNS
16.45.010 Purpose.
This section regulates the erection, placement and maintenance of signs to protect and enhance public health, safety, welfare and property, more specifically to:

A.  Purpose.

1.   Allow those signs compatible with the character and uses allowed in the zoning district in which they are located;

2.   Maintain the effectiveness of traffic signs;

3.   Prohibit certain signs or portions thereof, which conflict with the safe movement of people and emergency services, constitute a public nuisance or hazard, are of unsafe construction, or which demand attention by their dominating size or appearance of motion;

4.   Maintain and enhance the scenic and other aesthetic qualities of the City.

B.  Scope. All signs, including sign structures and display areas or building walls with lettering on them shall be erected and maintained only as provided by this section, except for the following: Signs inside a building, except for strobe lights, floating lights, or neon lights visible from a public right-of-way, private road or other private property. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.020 Permit required.
A.  Permit Required. No sign shall be erected, constructed, maintained, modified, or relocated, except as provided by this section. This permit requirement applies to all signs, except those specifically exempt by a provision of this section and signs existing on the date of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, which shall be subject to subsection D of this section.

B.  Permit Application. Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the Sign Official. A permit application fee shall accompany the application for it to be processed by the City. The amount of the fee shall be proportionate to the value of the sign proposed and shall be calculated according to a permit fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. The application shall include all plans and information necessary to establish that the proposed sign complies with all applicable requirements of this chapter and applicable buildings, structural and life safety codes. The permit shall be valid if the sign is erected and maintained in compliance with the Happy Valley Municipal Code, and the applicant did not misrepresent or falsify any information supplied in the application. Any permit issued under this chapter shall be void if no substantial physical action be taken, in accordance with any conditions of the permit and the applicable requirements of this chapter, within ninety (90) days following the date of its issuance. Any permit issued under this chapter shall remain in effect as long as the sign is maintained in compliance with any permit conditions and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

C.  A separate sign permit application shall be submitted for each sign erected, constructed, modified, relocated, replaced, face changed or structurally altered and for sign repair that includes these activities. Sign maintenance requires no permit. All proposed work on a sign shall be shown in the sign permit application.

D.  When required by the Uniform Building Code or the Building Official, a separate building permit shall be obtained from the City for the erection, construction, modification, relocation, replacement, change of sign face or alteration of a sign or sign structure.

E.  When required by the State Electrical Code or the Building Official, an electrical permit shall be obtained from the issuing authority before connecting an electrical sign to a source of electricity. The electrical components of signs shall meet the applicable electrical standards as shown by certification from those testing laboratories approved by the State of Oregon meeting the testing standards for electrical safety as required by Oregon Revised Statutes 479.510-479.855 and Oregon Administrative Rule 918-330-000, as constituted on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code or as may hereafter be amended.

F.  Building and electrical permits shall be applied for in accordance with the procedures of the issuing agency, provided such permits are not issued until a sign permit has been issued.

G.  The Planning Official or designee may require that a sign permit application be submitted for each sign on a property required to have a permit, if no permit for such sign has been previously issued.

H.  Appeals. A person aggrieved by a decision of the Sign Official may appeal the decision to the Hearings Officer. The appeal shall be in writing and be received by the City Recorder no later than ten (10) days after the date the challenged decision is final. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.030 Sign permit process.
A.  A person may apply for a sign permit and any required building permit and/or electrical permit concurrently. A decision on the sign permit shall be issued first, followed by a decision on the related building or electrical permits.

 

B.  A sign permit application form, checksheet and instruction sheet shall be established by the Sign Official. Sign permit applications which do not provide the information required by this Code, the application form, checksheet and instruction sheet may be rejected by the Sign Official. The Sign Official shall determine if an application provides the required information.

C.  A complete sign permit application shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Sign Official or designee. The application is not complete unless the application fee is submitted with the application. The application shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied by the Planning Official or designee. An application for a sign that is erected prior to submitting the application and does not meet the requirements of this chapter shall be denied.

D.  Where a sign permit is required, a sign contractor registered with the State of Oregon Construction Contractors Board shall be the applicant. A person, other than the registered sign contractor, may deliver and submit the application to the Planning Official or designee. The application shall contain or include the following information:

1.   Completed sign application form;

2.   Payment of fee;

3.   Three site plans (8-1/2″ x 11″) to scale. Site plans shall show the following information:

a.     Placement of sign on property,

b.     Setbacks of sign from property line,

c.     Indicate any easements;

4.   Three drawings (8-1/2″ x 11″) of sign to scale. Drawings shall include:

a.     Size of lettering,

b.     Dimensions of sign (height and width),

c.     How the sign will be mounted or affixed.

E.  After a complete sign permit application has been submitted and accepted, the applicant may request in writing that the application be withdrawn. The Planning Official or designee may return the application, and reimburse the application fee, less compensation for any work that has already been completed.

F.  If the work authorized by the sign permit is not completed within ninety (90) days after the date of the sign permit issuance, the permit shall expire and be null and void. Upon written request of the applicant, submitted to the Planning Official or designee prior to the expiration date, one ninety (90) day extension of the sign permit approval may be granted by the Planning Official or designee if there have been no amendments to the specific sign regulations that applied to the proposed sign at the time the sign permit was first approved. The Planning Official or designee’s decision shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant.

G.  The Planning Official or designee may revoke any sign permit where there has been a violation of the provisions of this chapter or a misrepresentation of fact on the permit application, the materials submitted as a part of the application, or both.

H.  The Planning Official or designee may issue a sign permit, if a sign permit is required, to erect a temporary sign on a property with no building, provided the proposed temporary sign meets all applicable regulations.

 

I.   The Planning Official or designee shall not issue a sign permit to erect a permanent sign, or to change a sign face on an existing permanent sign, on an unoccupied building. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.040 Variances.
Variances to the standards of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 16.71, Variances. Applications for variances shall be submitted at the same time as an application for a sign permit, and the applications shall be reviewed concurrently. (Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.050 Prohibited signs.
It is unlawful for the following signs to be erected or to be maintained except as otherwise provided in this section:

A.  Billboards;

B.  A sign that interferes in any way with a traffic control sign or device or prevents clear and unobstructed view of official traffic control signs or devices or approaching or merging traffic;

C.  A sign that contains, includes or is illuminated by any flashing or revolving, rotating or moving light or moves or has any animated or moving parts. This subsection does not apply to traffic control signs or devices and “readerboard” signs less than twenty-four (24) square feet in size as authorized by this chapter;

D.  A sign with lighting which is not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the main traveled right-of-way of a State highway, or is of such low intensity or brilliance as not to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle or otherwise to interfere with the operations thereof;

E.  A sign in excess of three square feet, located upon a tree, or painted or drawn upon a natural feature;

F.  An obsolete sign;

G.  Permanent inflatable signs (including “blimp” type signs typically extended from a building roof), permanent streamers, balloons, hulas, flags, banners, pennants, etc., or vehicle mounted signs, excepting traditional holiday decorations or temporary signs pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;

H.  A sign that obstructs free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, alley, drive or fire lane, or is attached to a fire escape;

I.   A sign erected or maintained on public property or within the public right-of-way without permission of the public body having jurisdiction. This shall include signs placed on utility poles located within public right-of-way;

J.   A sign not able to withstand a wind pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square foot of exposed surface, or is insecurely erected, or is constructed so as to constitute a fire hazard;

K.  A sign not maintained in a safe, neat, clean and attractive condition and in good repair;

L.  Any sign larger than four square feet on an undeveloped lot or parcel of property other than temporary signs as provided by this chapter;

M. A sign not otherwise in compliance with any provision of this Code, Oregon law or the terms and conditions of any valid sign permit issued under this chapter;

N.  Signs with rotating or moving parts or any portion thereof designed to move unless specifically allowed by the provisions of this chapter;

O.  Electronic display signs or readerboards, including any video display board of television quality in which the rate of change is electronically programmed that exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in size. Electronic readerboards of any size are prohibited in residential zones unless authorized by a conditional use permit;

P.  Signs with exposed lighting or neon tubes on the sign face in residential zones;

Q.  Roof signs;

R.  Signs with light intensity in excess of the standards of the sign industry, as provided by the Oregon Electric Sign Association;

S.  Hazards. No sign, light, electrical cord, streamer, flag, or other apparatus shall be situated or used in a manner which creates a hazard. (Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.060 Signs not requiring a permit.
A.  In any commercial or industrial zoning district, the following signs may be placed and maintained without a permit, so long as they comply with all applicable provisions of this section:

1.   A single, temporary or permanent sign per street frontage where the display surface area does not exceed six square feet per sign face;

2.   Window signs, up to nine square feet, situated on the indoor side of a window or door;

3.   Signs attached to, or carried by, a person;

4.   Signs required by law or legal action, including, but not limited to, signs warning of hazardous or dangerous conditions on a premises and land use application and hearing notice signs.

B.  In any residential or institutional zoning district, the following signs may be placed and maintained without a permit, so long as they comply with all applicable provisions of this section and are not illuminated:

1.   Signs required by law or legal action including, but not limited to, signs warning of hazardous or dangerous conditions on a premises and land use application and hearing notice signs; and

2.   Four temporary signs where the display surface area does not exceed six square feet per sign face and sign height does not exceed six feet. A person or entity selling a property or advertising a public election shall remove temporary signs twelve (12) days within the closing of the sale, all other temporary signs shall be removed twelve (12) days after placement.

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.070 General provisions.
A.  Location. Except for traffic control devices, public signs and special event banner signs, signs shall be located on private property outside of the public right-of-way and shall not extend over or into the public right-of-way. Signs shall not be constructed in or extend over or into easements for public sewer, water or storm drain lines or within five feet of such lines, or within the dripline of existing trees.

 

B.  Vision Clearance Area. Signs may be located in the vision clearance areas provided they do not extend into the space between thirty (30) inches and ten (10) feet in height measured from the top of the curb. When no curb is present, measurements shall be taken from the established centerline grade. The following shall be exempt from the clear vision areas:

1.   Light and utility poles with a diameter less than two inches;

2.   An existing tree, trimmed to the trunk, twelve (12) feet above the curb;

3.   Official warning or street sign.

 

C.  Pedestrian Clearance Area. Signs erected over or extending over private or public pedestrian walkways or paths shall provide a vertical clearance of at least ten (10) feet from the surface of the walkway or path to the lowest portion of the sign.

D.  Signs Incorporated into Fences. Except for signs at subdivision entrances located in a private tract median island within a public right-of-way, monument signs may be affixed to and be part of a masonry fence. Pole signs shall be affixed only to the ground.

E.  Copy. Copy shall be placed only on the sign face.

F.  Dedication of Right-of-Way. Signs and their structures and foundations shall be removed from property subject to dedication to the public before such dedication shall be accepted by the City.

G.  Illumination.

1.   Lights providing indirect illumination onto signs shall be directed so the source of light is not visible from public right-of-way or from properties in residential planning districts.

2.   Neon lighting is the only permitted lighting for direct illumination. Neon, incandescent and fluorescent lighting are permitted for indirect or internal illumination.

3.   The surface brightness of any sign shall not exceed that produced by the diffused output obtained from eight hundred (800) milliampere fluorescent light sources spaced not closer than eight inches on center.

H.  Sign Maintenance and Repair. All signs shall be maintained in good order and repair at all times. Signs which have become faded, worn, damaged or are unsafe or pose a danger to the public shall be maintained, repaired, or removed. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.080 Measuring signs and building/structure elevation.
The diagrams provided in this section are intended for illustration only. For purposes of this section, signs and building or structure elevations shall be measured as follows:

A.  Freestanding Pole Signs.

1.   Height of Sign. The measurement shall be from the grade to the highest point of the sign, including the sign face structure, pole and any projections, decoration or trim of the sign face structure or pole.

 



 

2.   Height of Sign Face. The measurement shall be from the lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including the sign face structure and any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face or structure.

 



 

3.   Width of Sign Face. The measurement shall extend from the outer edges side to side and include the structure projection, decoration or trim of the sign face or structure, but not the supporting pole.

 



 

4.   Sign Face Area, Single and Double-Sided Signs. Only one side of a sign shall be measured. When the sides of a double sided sign are not equal, the larger side shall be measured. The measurement shall enclose the sign face, including any projections, decoration or trim of the sign face and any direct illumination on the sign pole, within not more than three squares or rectangles or both which touch and sum the areas. The squares or rectangles may be rotated. The minimum dimension of a square or rectangle connecting two sign faces is one foot.

 



 

5.   Sign Face Area for Signs With More Than Two Sides (Multifaceted Signs). The measurement shall enclose the sign faces and structures, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign faces and structures and any direct illumination of the sign pole, within a square or rectangle and summing the area of the six sides.

 



 

6.   On-site Separation Between Signs. When freestanding signs are required to be separated by a specific distance from each other, the distance shall be measured beginning at the center of the footprint of one sign, then measuring by the shortest route to the nearest property line, then along the property line to the point on the property line nearest to the second sign and then by the shortest route to the center of the footprint of the second sign. If the above directions result in two or more different measurements, the shortest shall be used.

 



 

B.  Freestanding Monument Signs.

1.   Height of Sign. The measurement shall be from the grade to the highest point of the sign, including the sign face, structure and any projection, decoration or trim of the structure.

 



 

2.   Height of Sign Face. The measurement shall be from the lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face.

 



 

3.   Width of Sign Face. The measurement shall be from the outer edges side to side and include any projection, decoration, or trim of the structure.

 



 

4.   Sign Face Area. Only one side of the sign shall be measured. When the sides of a double-sided sign are not equal, the larger side shall be measured. The measurement shall enclose the sign face, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face, within not more than three squares or rectangles may be rotated. The minimum dimensions of a square or rectangle connecting two sign faces is one foot.

 



 



 

5.   On-site Separation Between Signs. See Section A.6 above.

C.  Wall Signs.

1.   Height of Sign Face. The measurement shall be from the lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including any projection, decoration, individual letters, cabinet or trim of the sign face.

 



 

2.   Width of Sign Face. The measurement shall extend from the outer edges side to side and shall include any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face.

 



 

3.   Sign Face Area. The measurement shall enclose the sign face, including any projections, decoration or trim of the sign face, within not more than three squares or rectangles or both which touch and sum of the areas. The squares or rectangles may be rotated. The minimum dimension of a square or rectangle connecting two sign faces is one foot.

 



 

4.   Building and Structure Elevations. The measurement shall be of the tenant’s owned or leased wall and from the perspective of an architectural elevation.

5.   Height of Elevation. The measurement shall be from the grade to the highest point, except flagpoles and similar spires, of the building or structure wall, including all vertical surfaces and non-vertical surfaces which have a vertical surface above them as shown below.

 



 

6.   Width of Elevation. The measurement shall be from the outer edges side to side, including all vertical surfaces and non-vertical surfaces which have a vertical surface above them. The following figures illustrate the methods.

 



(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.090 Signs in residential zones.
A.  Signs Allowed. In the MUR, VTH, R-5, R-7, R-8.5, R-10, R-15, R-20, and R-40 zones, the following signs are allowed:

1.   Monument Signs.

a.     The sign shall be a permanent monument sign.

b.     Signs are only allowed in a recorded subdivision that has been given approval through the planning process of the City of Happy Valley.

c.     Signs shall be located on private property, at a subdivision entrance or on a private tract median island within the public right-of-way.

d.     Only one sign per public street entrance is allowed.

e.     No more than two sides are allowed.

f.      Signs shall not extend any higher than six feet above grade, unless located in a private median tract, in which case the height shall not exceed two and one-half feet. In all cases, signs shall comply with the clear vision requirements.

g.     When a sign is located in a private median tract, the width of the sign shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the width of the median measured from curb to curb or, where there is no curb from edge of pavement to edge of pavement, provided the area limitation below is met, and it shall be centered in the median.

h.     Sign face area shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet. Sign area shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in length and six feet in height.

i.      Indirect illumination is allowed, unless the sign is located in a median, in which case no illumination is allowed.

j.      There shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet separation from other subdivision signs and all other permanent signs, with the exception of directional signs.

k.     All required permits shall be obtained prior to placement of sign.

2.   Temporary Signs.

a.     Temporary signs shall not be internally or externally illuminated.

b.     Temporary signs shall not be located or extend into or over public right-of-way or into the clear vision area with the exception of special event banner signs (please see definitions section for description).

c.     Temporary signs shall be maintained and kept neat and clean. Materials shall not be allowed to fade, tear, rip or otherwise become unsightly during the period of installation.

d.     Temporary signs shall not be attached to fences, trees, shrubbery, utility poles, or like items. They shall not obstruct or obscure primary signs on adjacent premises. They shall not create a traffic hazard because of distractive character to motorists of any such device or the cumulative effect of all such devices.

e.     Temporary signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.

f.      Only one temporary sign advertising a residential development shall be allowed.

g.     The Sign Official shall establish a timeframe for placement for each temporary sign approved at the time of permit issuance.

h.     All required permits shall be obtained prior to placement of signs.

(Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.100 Signs in institutional and public use (IPU) zone.
A.  Signs Allowed. In the IPU zone the following signs are allowed.

1.   Freestanding Signs.

a.     Freestanding signs shall be supported by no more than two poles, posts, columns, or similar supports. Guy wires and similar stabilization methods are not permitted.

b.     The poles, posts, columns, or similar supports for freestanding pole signs shall be closed to present a round, oval, polygon or similar exterior appearance. Exposed angle-iron supports such as I-beams are not permitted.

c.     The poles, posts, columns or similar supports for freestanding pole signs may be covered with a pole-cover as a method of improving the appearance of the support(s).

d.     The total width, including any pole-cover, of the poles, posts, columns or similar supports for freestanding pole signs shall be no wider than twenty-five (25) percent of the sign face’s width.

e.     The poles, posts, columns or similar supports for freestanding pole signs shall be plumb (straight up).

f.      No portion of a freestanding pole sign shall extend on or over a building.

g.     The surface display area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet, with fifty (50) square feet maximum area per sign face.

h.     The faces of two-sided pole signs shall be parallel to each other.

i.      All required permits shall be obtained prior to placement of sign.

j.      One freestanding sign per street frontage is allowed, provided no monument sign exists along the same frontage.

2.   Monument Signs.

a.     Monument signs shall be erected on grade or set into a hillside. If the monument sign is supported by a pole, the sign shall extend down to within four inches of grade to cover the pole so that no more than four inches of the pole is visible.

b.     No more than two sides are allowed.

c.     Signs shall not extend any higher than six feet above grade.

d.     Signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area.

e.     Only indirect or internal illumination is allowed.

f.      Signs shall be placed in accordance with the clear vision area.

g.     All required permits shall be obtained prior to placement of sign.

h.     One monument sign per street frontage is allowed, provided no freestanding sign exists along the same frontage.

3.   Wall Signs.

a.     Display surface area shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of the wall on which the sign is erected.

b.     One sign per each owned or leased wall is permitted. This shall not exceed four walls of a building.

c.     No more than one side is permitted for each sign.

d.     Indirect or internal illumination is permitted.

e.     All required permits shall be obtained prior to placement of sign.

4.   Readerboard Signs.

a.     Readerboard signs are allowed in an IPU zone as a part of another sign. The Sign Official may impose conditions of approval regarding the frequency of copy change, the hours of operation, and the method by which the message is changed in order to assure compliance with the standards of this section and this chapter.

b.     Readerboard signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in size. The readerboard and associated sign shall not exceed the total allowable sign area for the IPU district.

c.     The design and placement of the readerboard and associated sign shall not adversely affect vehicular or pedestrian safety.

d.     The readerboard and associated sign shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter.

e.     Temporary signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.

5.   Height. The height of any sign in an IPU district shall not exceed ten (10) feet above grade, plus five feet for each two hundred (200) feet, or portion thereof, of street frontage. In no event shall any sign exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

B.  Signs Exempt. In the IPU zone, “gateway” signs erected by the municipal government are exempt from area and height restrictions. (Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.110 Signs in mixed-use zones and commercial zones.
A.  Signs Allowed. In mixed-use, commercial and industrial zones, the following signs are allowed:

1.   Wall Signs.

a.     Single-Story Structures.

i.      Display surface area shall not exceed ten (10) percent wall coverage. There is no limit on the number of signs allowed if within the total permitted wall coverage limit.

b.     Single-Story Structures with Multiple Tenants or Businesses.

i.      Display surface area shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of the wall on which the sign is erected;

ii.     One sign per each owned or leased wall is permitted. This shall not exceed four walls of a building;

iii.    Indirect or internal illumination is permitted;

iv.    All required permits shall be obtained prior to placement of sign.

c.     Total signage for multi-story structures containing single or multiple businesses shall be limited to ten (10) percent wall coverage. There is no limit on the number of signs allowed if within the total permitted wall coverage limit.

2.   Freestanding and monument signs, so long as a permit is first obtained as required by this chapter and the following standards are met:

a.     Number. One sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of premises, provided minimum lot frontage of thirty (30) feet is met. No sign shall be permitted on the same frontage where there is a projecting or roof sign. Signs on the same premises but on different frontages shall be separated by a minimum of fifty (50) feet distance.

b.     Area.

i.      Where the street frontage is less than fifty (50) feet, the maximum display surface area shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet, with twenty-five (25) square feet maximum area per sign face;

ii.     Where the street frontage is greater than fifty (50) feet but less than two hundred (200) feet, surface display area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet, with fifty (50) square feet maximum area per sign face;

iii.    Where the street frontage is two hundred (200) feet or greater, the surface display area shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, with a maximum area of one hundred (100) square feet per sign face;

iv.    In no case shall any sign have a surface display area in excess of two hundred (200) square feet.

c.     Projection. Freestanding signs shall not project over a public right-of-way.

d.     Clearance. A minimum clearance of ten (10) feet from grade shall be maintained over pedestrian or vehicular areas, fourteen (14) feet over areas of truck access.

e.     Horizontal Dimension. The greatest horizontal dimension shall not exceed twenty (20) feet for any freestanding sign.

f.      Height. The height of any freestanding or monument sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet above grade, plus one foot per ten (10) feet of street frontage, or portion thereof, in excess of two hundred (200) feet abutting the sign location. In no event shall any sign exceed fifteen (15) feet in height

g.     Illumination. Indirect or internal illumination is permitted.

3.   Projecting Signs. Projecting signs are allowed so long as a permit is first obtained as required by this chapter and the following standards are met:

a.     Number. One projecting sign may be permitted for each business frontage. No projecting sign shall be permitted for the same business frontage where there is a freestanding sign.

b.     Area. Sign area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per sign face, with total area of all faces not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.

c.     Projection. Maximum projection from a building wall shall be four feet. No sign shall project within two feet of the curb line.

d.     Vertical Dimension. The greatest vertical dimension of a projecting sign shall not exceed four feet; provided, however, for any reduction in projection, the sign may be increased in height a like distance. The maximum projection above the wall on which the sign is erected shall be one foot, and the visible supporting structure shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible consistent with safe structural support.

e.     Clearance. A minimum clearance of eight feet from grade shall be maintained over pedestrian areas, ten (10) feet from grade over vehicular areas and fourteen (14) feet over areas of truck access.

f.      Separation. The minimum distance from another projecting sign shall be twenty (20) feet in the same horizontal plane.

g.     Projecting Signs on Other Project Structures. Awnings, marquees, canopies, false fronts and wall extensions, safely constructed and approved by the Building Code Official, may extend beyond the limits for projecting signs. Projecting signs on such structure shall not exceed the limits as to number, area, projection, vertical dimension, clearance and separation as provided for any projecting sign. The only exception shall be for those instances in which a projecting structure would prohibit a projecting sign within sight of pedestrians; in these instances, the clearance under the marquee or other permanent structure may be reduced to eight feet.

4.   Readerboard Signs.

a.     Readerboard signs are allowed in mixed use and commercial zones as a part of another sign or as a stand-alone window sign. The Sign Official may impose conditions of approval regarding the frequency of copy change, the hours of operation, and the method by which the message is changed in order to assure compliance with the standards of this section and this chapter.

b.     Readerboard signs that are part of an accompanying sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in size. Readerboard signs located within window areas shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in size. The readerboard and associated sign shall not exceed the total allowable sign area for the underlying mixed use or commercial zoning district, a window readerboard sign combined with any other signage shall not exceed the building face signage square-footage allowed by this chapter.

c.     The design and placement of the readerboard and any associated sign shall not adversely affect vehicular or pedestrian safety.

d.     The readerboard and any associated sign shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.115 Temporary commercial signs and political signs.
A.  Temporary commercial signs may include board signs, canvas signs, plastic signs, inflatable signs, banners, flags, balloons, pennants, streamers, etc., subject to the following:

1.   Temporary commercial signs shall not be internally or externally illuminated.

2.   Temporary commercial signs shall not be located or extend into or over public right-of-way or into the clear vision area with the exception of special event banner signs as defined in this title.

3.   Temporary commercial signs shall be maintained and kept neat and clean. Materials shall not be allowed to fade, tear, rip or otherwise become unsightly during the period of installation.

4.   Temporary commercial signs shall not be attached to trees, shrubbery, utility poles or like items. They shall not obstruct or obscure primary signs or adjacent premises. They shall not create a traffic hazard because of distractive character to motorists.

5.   Temporary commercial signs shall range in size from greater than six square feet to a size not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size.

6.   The Sign Official shall establish a timeframe for placement of each temporary commercial sign approved. Approval periods shall not exceed sixty (60) days in one calendar year. The sign shall be removed at the end of the approval period. Any costs associated with temporary commercial sign removal by the City shall be at the expense of the sign owner.

7.   All required permits shall be obtained prior to placement of temporary commercial signs, unless exempted by this title.

B.  Temporary political signs may include wooden board signs, canvas signs and banner signs subject to the following:

1.   Temporary political signs shall not be internally or externally illuminated.

2.   Temporary political signs shall not be located or extend into or over public right-of-way or into the clear vision area.

3.   Temporary political signs shall be maintained and kept neat and clean. Materials shall not be allowed to fade, tear, rip or otherwise become unsightly during the period of installation.

4.   Temporary political signs shall not be attached to trees, shrubbery or utility poles. They shall not obstruct or obscure primary signs or adjacent premises. They shall not create a traffic hazard because of distractive character to motorists.

5.   Temporary political signs shall range in size from greater than four square feet to a size not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size at a four-foot by eight-foot dimension.

6.   Temporary political signs shall be permitted for a timeline of thirty (30) days prior to any given election to seven days post the election outcome. Any costs associated with temporary political sign removal by the City shall be at the expense of the candidate.

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.120 Signs in Sunnyside Village.
A.  Village Townhouse (VTH). See Section 16.60.070, Signs in residential zones.

B.  Village Commercial (VC).

1.   South of the designated accessway, only hanging, on-building, or monument signs shall be used. Hanging signs shall be eight square feet maximum, with eight-foot pedestrian clearance.

C.  Village Office (VO).

1.   Signs in the village office district shall have a maximum of two colors in addition to black and white.

2.   Only hanging, on-building, or monument signs shall be used. Hanging signs shall be eight square foot maximum, with eight-foot pedestrian clearance. Monument and on-building signs twenty-four (24) square foot maximum.

3.   Except for neon signs, all illumination shall be external.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.130 A-frame signs.
A.  Within all mixed-use employment, mixed-use residential multifamily, and mixed-use commercial zones, A-board signs shall be permitted subject to the following criteria:

1.   May be displayed outdoors during business hours only and shall be removed at the end of the business day.

2.   The sign is placed within four feet of the main entrance to the building or individual business entry.

3.   Sign placement shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic nor with on-street parking and shall have a minimum of five feet of unimpeded pedestrian sidewalk maneuvering space for accessibility. It shall not extend into clear vision areas or vehicular circulation areas. The sign shall not be attached to fences, trees, shrubbery, utility poles or like items and shall not obstruct or obscure primary signs on adjacent premises.

4.   Sign area is limited to twelve (12) square feet per face.

5.   The applicant provides a notarized statement acceptable to the City assuming liability for a sign on a public sidewalk.

6.   No more than one sign per street level business is permitted.

 

7.   Shall be constructed of wood, chalkboard and/or finished metal. Lettering may be painted or handwritten. Readerboards are not permitted.

8.   Shall be non-illuminated.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.140 Nonconforming signs and their removal.
A.  A sign that was lawfully erected and maintained as of the date of the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, but which does not meet the requirements of this chapter, shall be regarded as a lawful nonconforming sign if a permit for the same is obtained under this section. The sign may be continued for a period not to exceed ten (10) years from the date of adoption of this section for the purpose of amortization of investment. A person may request a longer amortization period by following the variance procedures of Chapter 16.71 of this Code. The variance application must demonstrate that the applicant requires a longer period in which to amortize its investment in the sign in question. In the case of an application for a longer amortization period for an alleged nonconforming billboard, the applicant must prove, at a minimum, that the sign structure cannot reasonably be used for a sign with an area smaller than three hundred (300) square feet.

B.  Signs located on premises annexed into the City after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance and which signs do not comply with the provisions of this Code, shall be brought into compliance with the this Code within a period of time not to exceed six months after the effective date of annexation; provided, however, that a landowner may, within thirty (30) days of annexation, request a variance as provided in subsection A of this section.

C.  Any sign which is structurally altered, relocated or replaced shall immediately be brought into compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that a landowner may, within thirty (30) days of annexation, request a variance as provided in Chapter 16.28.

D.  All existing signs or portions thereof prohibited in Section 16.45.050, except as provided in subsection A of this section, shall be removed or altered to comply within six months from the date of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance.

E.  Within one year from the date of adoption of this Code, the Sign Official or an authorized representative may inspect any sign regulated hereunder. The Sign Official shall have right of reasonable entry onto private premises to enforce the provisions of this chapter. After inspection, a notice shall be issued to the owner of the sign or property that lists the signs and identifies those signs which, in the opinion of the Sign Official, need repair or modification to bring them into compliance with this chapter and those which are in violation of the provisions of this chapter and must be removed, including the expiration of the grace period for the particular sign. The Sign Official may repeat such on-site inspections, with reasonable notice, from time to time as deemed necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

F.  Any sign regulated under this chapter found to be in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance. Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction, subject to code enforcement procedures of the City. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.45.150 Violation—Penalty.
A.  In addition to any other provisions hereof, it is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to maintain a sign or advertising structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Violation of any provision of this chapter is subject to the code enforcement procedures of the City.

B.  Signs in violations of this chapter which create a safety or traffic hazard, are located within the public right-of-way, or are located on a utility pole within the public right-of-way may be removed by the City without prior notice and are subject to the code enforcement procedures of the City. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.46 HAPPY VALLEY STYLE DESIGN STANDARDS
16.46.010 Happy Valley Style design standards.
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Happy Valley Style design review standards is to guide building siting and design and to promote a comprehensive identity for nonresidential developments within the community that are three stories or below in height through the application of the Happy Valley Style (Appendix B) and the standards of Chapter 16.46 so that:

1.   The location, size, shape, height and spatial and visual arrangement of the uses and among buildings, building entrances, existing and proposed structures are compatible with each other, with consideration given to increased setbacks, building heights, shared parking, common driveways and other similar design considerations; and

2.   That there are interrelationships between transit stops, transit facilities and routes, parking and loading areas, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, open spaces, landscaping and related activities and uses on the site.

B.  Relationship to Other Standards. The standards of this section apply in addition to other standards of this title. Where standards in this section conflict with standards in other sections of this Code, the standards of this section shall govern.

C.  Applicability.

1.   The Happy Valley Style design standards apply to all mixed-use commercial, retail commercial, office and institutional office buildings that are three stories in height or less, except as exempted in subsection D of this section.

2.   New buildings shall be designed using building design elements of the Happy Valley Style to create distinctive buildings with richly textured, visually engaging façades and that are pedestrian friendly. Expansion or substantial exterior remodeling of existing nonresidential development which is greater than fifty (50) percent of the building’s gross floor area shall be designed to maintain or increase the building’s overall compliance with the Happy Valley Style standards.

3.   Buildings that are greater than three stories in height are encouraged to utilize practical design elements from the Happy Valley Style.

D.  Exemptions to the Happy Valley Style.

1.   Residential dwellings, including residential care facilities, are exempt from the standards of Chapter 16.46. However, single-family attached and/or multifamily dwellings and residential care facilities are encouraged to utilize the Happy Valley design standards.

2.   Master Plan areas over ten (10) acres in size within the employment district of the Rock Creek employment area containing specific design standards.

3.   Buildings designed for military or related uses; manufacturing or other industrial uses; non-institutional buildings in the Hwy. 212/224 Industrial Corridor (west of 135th Avenue); and small institutional buildings such as maintenance sheds, pump stations, wireless communication facilities shelters, etc., as determined by the Planning Official.

4.   Institutional office buildings and schools are exempted from Section 16.46.010.H.2 (Storefront Appearance for Commercial and Office Buildings).

E.  Character of the Happy Valley Style. As described in more detail in Section 2 of Appendix B, the Happy Valley Style promotes a residential character for projects by drawing on features from certain historical architectural styles as well as through the use of complex massing and varied rooflines. Materials of the Happy Valley Style draw on the Pacific Northwest’s natural resource heritage. Equally important to incorporating a residential character, the Happy Valley Style also promotes a pedestrian friendly environment, using façade design that creates a storefront appearance at the ground level. The overall development pattern should contribute to a sense of arrival and departure to and from the City core. Happy Valley’s unique topography and natural features should be incorporated into project design where feasible. While it is influenced by historic architectural styles, the goal of the Happy Valley Style is not a literal replication of historic residential buildings, but appropriate contemporary interpretation of time-tested and proven design principles. The Happy Valley Style is also flexible enough to allow for variety, acknowledging different needs and preferences of various uses. Projects do not need to include all features that make up the Happy Valley Style. However, projects should reflect the Style’s characteristic elements in varying combinations.

F.  Pedestrian-Oriented Building Siting Standards. In order to orient buildings to the pedestrians walking on the pedestrian network and to activate the pedestrian environment and emphasize pedestrian movements, development shall meet the minimum standards in this section. Additional recommendations for pedestrian-oriented building siting are included in Section 3 of Appendix B:

1.   Maximum Setback.

a.     At least fifty (50) percent of the building frontage must meet the maximum setback of eight feet from a property line along a public or private street.

b.     Surface parking facilities and vehicular circulation facilities, such as driveways and queues, are prohibited between the fifty (50) percent of the building frontage regulated by this section and the public or private street.

2.   Multiple Frontages. In scenarios involving multiple frontages, the developer shall have the option to designate and orient the front, side and rear façades of a structure. In no case shall buildings be required to have dual front façades. However, where development is proposed on a corner lot, buildings shall be located to preserve or create strong building edges at public or private street corners.

Figure 16.46.010-1: Maximum Setback



 

3.   Exceptions. The Design Review Board may approve an exception to the maximum setback standards in the circumstances described in subsections (a) through (d), below, provided the exception is the minimum necessary and the proposed design accomplishes the intent of the Happy Valley design standards. Where the proposed adjustment will allow parking or vehicle circulation between the building and the street, the building shall include a pitch roof, high quality materials and other design elements to ensure that the intent of the Happy Valley design standards is achieved.

a.     The proposed building is interior to a development site and the maximum setback is met by other buildings on the site.

b.     An increase in the maximum setback is necessary for the protection of natural resource, or to accommodate topographic constraints or required utility easements.

c.     To allow for the placement of pedestrian amenities within the maximum setback, including, but not limited to, seating areas, water features, and plazas. Plazas shall include construction materials that differ from the surrounding sidewalk, and shall be approved by the Design Review Board. Materials include (but are not limited to), paving bricks, stamped concrete, etc.

d.     The proposed building has been oriented to a private street which has been designed and built to function as a public street.

G.  Building Massing.

1.   Complex Massing Required. New buildings shall use massing characteristic of the Happy Valley Style and asymmetrical composition to avoid the monolithic expanse of frontages and roof lines and break up building sections using elements including variable planes, projections, bays, dormers, setbacks, canopies, awnings, parapets, changes in the roof line, materials, color, or textures (see 4.1, Appendix B).

2.   Street Corners. Where development is proposed on a corner lot, the following standards shall be met:

a.     Buildings shall be designed to preserve or create strong building edges at public street corners (see 4.2, Appendix B).

b.     Buildings shall reinforce street corners by repeating façade elements such as signs, awnings and window and wall treatments on both sides of the building facing the corner.

c.     Buildings located on public street corners shall contain an architectural corner element which exceeds the eave height of the primary roof by at least five feet (see Figure 16.46.010-2). If the façade of the corner element exceeds twenty-five (25) feet in height, then windows are required to provide the appearance of a habitable second story (see Figure 16.46.010-3). Additional façade details such as cornice lines and material changes are encouraged.

Figure 16.46.010-2: Typical Corner Element



Figure 16.46.010-3: Two-Story Corner Element



d.     Two-story building elements, which shall be located to reinforce the corner, include, but are not limited to:

i.      Tower;

ii.     Enclosed porch;

iii.    Entrance pavilion.

3.   Roof Forms.

a.     Roof forms shall promote architectural diversity and interest (see 4.3, Appendix B). While pitched roofs are desired to support Happy Valley Style’s residential character, larger building footprints make flat roofs often the only practical solution. However, the edges of flat roofs can be articulated to make large buildings more compatible with the desired character. To address the wide range of building sizes permissible in nonresidential developments, the roof standards are divided into two distinct types based on building size.

b.     Roofs shall meet the following standards:

i.      Building footprints five thousand (5,000) square feet in size or smaller are required to have pitched (gabled or hipped) roofs or flat roofs with an applied pitch;

ii.     Building footprints greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size may have pitched (gabled or hipped) roof or flat roofs with either an applied pitch or parapet, per the requirements found in subsection d (Requirements for flat roofs), below.

 

Figure 16.46.010-4: Typical Roof Forms

 



c.     Requirements for Pitched or Applied Pitch Roofs. Dormers, cupolas and similar roof elements that break up and project from the primary roof shall be provided to create variety to the massing of structures and relieve the effect of a single, long roof. Secondary roof elements shall be provided in the quantity specified below. Secondary roof elements may be located anywhere on the roof, although groupings and orderly arrangements are preferred. Roof length is the longer horizontal distance between the outside faces of the walls supporting the roof. In contrast to roof length, for the purpose of these standards, the roof span is the shortest horizontal distance between the outside faces of the walls supporting the roof.

 

 

Roof Length

Number of Secondary Roof Elements

Less than 30 feet

None required

30—45 feet

1

46—90 feet

2

91 feet and greater

4

 

Figure 16.46.010-5: Roof Span and Length



d.     Requirements for Flat Roofs.

i.      All rooflines (span or length) facing a public street or clearly visible from a public right-of-way shall be detailed with either an applied pitch or parapet, as follows:

(A)   Applied Pitch. An “applied pitch” gives a flat roof the general appearance of a pitched roof in terms of materials, pitch, and overhang, but does not extend all the way from the eave of the building to the ridge of the roof as a typical pitched roof.

At a minimum, the applied pitch shall:

(1)    Extend at least eight feet horizontally from the eave on buildings of five thousand (5,000) square feet in size or smaller.

 

(2)    Extend at least twelve (12) feet horizontally from the eave on buildings greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size.

The applied pitch shall extend vertically above the plane of the flat roof sufficiently to effectively screen all roof mounted equipment from public viewpoints. The slope of the applied pitch shall be consistent across the entire span. Breaks in the roof pitch to create a mansard or bonnet roof effect where the lower portion of the roof is steeper or less steep than the upper portion are not permitted.

 

Figure 16.46.010-6: Flat Roof with Applied Pitch—Overview



 

Figure 16.46.010-7: Flat Roof with Applied Pitch—Detail



 

(B)   Parapet. A parapet is a vertical extension of the façade above the plane of a flat roof. The parapet shall extend vertically above the plane of the flat roof sufficiently to effectively screen all roof mounted equipment from public viewpoints. The parapet may have a simple edge or may be adorned with an articulated cornice. The parapet may, but is not required to, be distinct from the façade in terms of materials.

 

Figure 16.46.010-8: Flat Roof with Parapet



ii.     To avoid the effect of a single, long roofline and to create a variety to the massing, variations to any roofline (span or length) facing a public street or clearly visible from a public right-of-way shall be provided at intervals of forty-five (45) feet or less. These variations may be achieved through combination of the following techniques:

(A)   Vertical Offset. Change in the height of the eave by at least three feet.

(B)   Horizontal Offset. Change in the horizontal position of the eave of at least three feet.

(C)   Varying use of parapet and applied pitch roof edges.

(D)   Attached or Applied Shed, Gable, or Hip. Building elements that are attached to a building’s façade and covered with a shed roof, a gabled roof, or a hipped roof may be used to articulate the roofscape and break up the perceived façade length. Those building elements can be used in combination with parapets or applied pitches and may include covered walkways or porches, vestibules or covered entrances, bays projecting from the building façade, tower elements projecting above the primary roof line.

 

Figure 16.46.010-9: Roofline Variations for Flat Roofs



e.     The Design Review Board may approve a modification of this standard only where the building façade otherwise provides the variations and offsets necessary to avoid a monolithic appearance.

H.  Building Design.

1.   Entrances.

a.     To encourage increased pedestrian activity on public and private streets and sidewalks, primary building entrances should be oriented to, or be at an angle no more than forty-five (45) degrees from the street (public or private), to the maximum extent practicable. For multi-tenanted buildings or buildings with multiple entrances, or both, only one primary entrance must comply with this standard. In addition, for buildings with multiple frontages, only one primary entrance on one building frontage must comply with this standard (see 5.1, Appendix B).

b.     Primary building entrances shall be architecturally emphasized.

2.   Storefront Appearance for Commercial and Office Buildings. Commercial and office buildings fronting on public or private streets shall create a storefront appearance on the ground floor by implementing the following standards:

a.     Changing buildings planes, materials or window patterns, or by creating a break in awning or canopy construction at intervals not exceeding forty (40) feet in length; and

b.     Ground Floor Windows. To avoid blank walls and create a storefront appearance at the ground level, exterior building walls facing a public or private street shall incorporate ground floor windows.

i.      Required Window Areas. Windows must be a minimum of forty (40) percent of the length and twenty (20) percent of the ground level wall area. Ground level walls include all exterior walls from three feet above finished grade up to nine feet above the finished grade.

ii.     Qualifying Window Features. Required window areas must either be windows that allow views into working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display windows set into the wall. Display cases attached to the outside wall do not qualify. The bottom of the windows must be no more than three feet above the adjacent exterior grade.

 

Figure 16.46.010-10: Required Window Area



 

3.   Façade Design.

a.     Buildings shall include changes in relief on façades facing public or private streets for pedestrian interest and scale. Relief changes may include (see 5.2, Appendix B):

i.      Cornices;

ii.     Bases;

iii.    Fenestration;

iv.    Fluted masonry;

v.     Other treatments.

b.     Buildings with two or more stories shall have a strong ground floor cornice designed to separate the ground floor functions and materials from the upper story or stories and to provide continuity with cornice placement on abutting buildings (see 5.2, Appendix B).

c.     Ornamental Devices. Ornamental devices characteristic of the Happy Valley Style, such as molding, entablature and friezes, are required at the roofline. Where such ornamentation is present in the form of a linear molding or board, the band must be at a thickness in proportion to the height of the wall (see 5.2, Appendix B).

4.   Awnings and Weather Protection.

 

a.     Except as required by subsection (H)(4)(b), buildings shall provide awnings or canopies extending a minimum of two feet from window walls (see 5.2, Appendix B). Awnings may have a front valance.

b.     Where window walls are adjacent to walkways, buildings shall provide awnings or canopies for weather protection extending a minimum of six feet from window walls (see 5.2, Appendix B). Awnings may have a front valance.

c.     Weather protection shall be provided at building entries/exits extending a minimum of six feet from the entry/exit.

5.   Materials. Building materials shall reflect the Happy Valley Style (see 5.3, Appendix B). Exterior colors shall have earth-tone shades, such as gray, tan, brown, rust, green, red, etc.

a.     Primary Materials. A “primary material” is the predominant building material that covers a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the building’s exterior walls. Acceptable primary materials are identified in Table 16.46.010-1.

b.     Secondary Materials. A “secondary material” is not the predominant building material. Any one secondary material shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the building’s exterior walls. Acceptable secondary materials are identified in Table 16.46.010-1.

c.     Base Materials. The building base shall be defined as the lower portion of a wall just above where it meets ground, often an extension of the foundation wall above grade. For the purpose of these standards, the base shall not extend beyond twenty-four (24) inches above grade. The base typically is exposed to water for extended periods and is at higher risk of physical impacts. Consequently, the base materials may differ from the materials used for the remainder of the façade in order to withstand these conditions. Base materials are identified in Table 16.46.010-1. Use of these materials shall be limited to the building base unless the material is also identified as an acceptable primary or secondary material. Where a foundation wall extends beyond twenty-four (24) inches above grade, for instance on a sloped site, the portion of the foundation wall above twenty-four (24) inches shall be finished with permitted primary and/or secondary materials. In all cases, foundations and base materials shall be designed to match the scale of the building being supported.

 

Table 16.46.010-1: Building Materials

 

Materials

Allowed on Façade*

Primary

Secondary

Base

Masonry, which includes natural and natural-looking stone, and rusticated brick or split-faced, colored concrete blocks that are residential in character and appearance

Yes

Yes

Yes

Wood board siding or wood shingles. Fiber cement boards or fiber reinforced extruded composite boards are also acceptable provided they have the appearance of natural wood

Yes

Yes

No

Architectural grade plywood, fiber cement, or wood composite panels (T1-11 plywood or OSB siding are not permitted)

No

Yes

No

Glass (except mirrored glass)

Yes

Yes

No

Typical commercial-grade stucco

No

Yes

Yes

Typical commercial-grade brick

No

Yes

Yes

Vertical, ribbed, non-corrugated, non-anodized aluminum metal or steel siding that is residential in character and appearance through variation in texture, stamping or offsets in elevation or material

No

Yes

No

Cast-in-place or pre-cast concrete

No

No

Yes

Plastic, except when used to replicate old styles (e.g., vinyl clad windows, polyurethane moldings, plastic columns, etc.)

No

No

No

Vinyl siding

No

No

No

Mirrored glass

No

No

No

Corrugated metal or fiberglass

No

No

No

Standard form concrete block (not including split-faced, colored or other block designs that mimic stone, brick or other similar masonry)

No

No

No

Back-lighted fabrics, except that awning signs may be backlit fabrics for individual letter or logos

No

No

No

* Materials for architectural accents and details (e.g., window frames, trim) are exempt from this requirement.

 

Figure 16.46.010-11: Building Base on Flat Site



 

Figure 16.46.010-12: Building Base on Sloped Site



d.     Multiple-Story Buildings. When buildings have two or more stories, the material used at the ground level shall differ from that used at upper levels in order to create a clear distinction between the ground and upper levels.

e.     Roof. New buildings or substantial remodeling that involve modifications to the roof shall use the following roofing materials:

i.      Slate, tile, shakes or wood shingles, or synthetic materials (e.g., concrete, pressed wood products, metal or other materials) that are designed to and do appear to be slate, tile, shake or wood shingles.

ii.     If a new or remodeled building utilizes a flat roof, materials that will not cause roof repairs (patching) to be readily visible.

6.   Enclosure or Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Other Appurtenances.

a.     Roof mounted mechanical equipment on flat roofed structures shall be screened by parapet walls to the maximum degree possible. Site located mechanical equipment shall be installed in below grade vaults where possible or screened by a site obscuring fence or landscaping. Other building mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view to the maximum degree possible.

b.     Trash enclosures shall be located away from the primary vehicular and pedestrian entries and shall be screened by a site obscuring fence or landscaping.

7.   Parking Structures. A proposed parking structure or garage shall comply with the following design standards:

a.     Retail storefronts at the ground level of parking structures shall be located at the periphery of parking areas and structures. The street side of residential parking structures may contain facilities or services for residents, such as laundry rooms, lobbies, or exercise rooms.

b.     Building materials shall complement abutting building materials.

c.     In cases where a parking structure extends to the periphery of a site, the design of the structure shall reflect the massing, fenestration and detailing of adjacent and abutting buildings.

d.     Architectural elements such as a frieze, cornice, trellis or other device, shall be continued from a residential portion of the building onto a parking structure (see 5.2, Appendix B).

e.     Entries shall be designed to be subordinate to the pedestrian entry in scale and detailing. If possible, parking structure entries shall be located away from the street, to the side or rear of the building.

f.      If possible, parking structures should be designed so that portions of the parking structure decks are used for landscaping or entry courts to abutting buildings.

g.     Parking structures shall be detailed at ground level in a manner similar to adjacent or abutting buildings in order to create a strong/emphasized base.

I.   Landscape/Hardscape Design. The following standards apply in addition to the landscaping standards in Chapter 16.42.

1.   Where new or substantially remodeled buildings are set back from property lines and sidewalks, intervening landscaping shall be designed to invite the public in, not to provide separation.

2.   Where non-pedestrian space is placed between a building and a sidewalk, benches, low sitting walls or other street furniture shall be placed in order to enliven the sidewalk.

3.   Small areas of landscaping and paving in courtyards, entryways, building nooks and other areas shall use materials and designs similar to adjacent public spaces where such use will make the area appear larger or more inviting. This requirement is intended to minimize the transition from public to private space, but is not intended to restrict changes in material where it is functionally necessary or where it will avoid visual monotony.

4.   Drinking fountains, display windows or other street furniture shall be located in stopping areas created outside of pedestrian circulation areas. Stopping areas may be created by an enclosure, a change in grade or a change in paving materials.

5.   Decorative iron gates and hangers for signs, flags and hanging baskets may be required as part of the landscape plan.

6.   Miscellaneous solid wood materials such as fences, decks, pergolas, etc. that are not painted in conjunction with the greater development color palette shall be uniformly stained any variety of the color brown.

J.   Additional Parking Requirements. Parking shall be designed to provide adequate, but not excessive, space.

 

1.   The number of parking spaces may be modified as follows:

a.     High turnover eating or drinking establishments such as coffee shops, ice cream parlors and “take-and-bake” food services may vary from the parking requirements for restaurants by providing evidence that demonstrates the short term nature of their employee and patron parking needs. In no case, however, shall parking be reduced below the number of spaces that would be required for an equal size retail store.

b.     Retail uses within one thousand (1,000) feet of one hundred (100) or more residential units may further reduce their total parking requirements to 0.9 of the total spaces required.

2.   Employee and Patron Parking Restrictions. Employee and patron parking shall be restricted to available parking as follows:

a.     On-site parking;

b.     Owned or easement parking for patrons within five hundred (500) feet of the business site;

c.     Owned or easement parking for employees within one thousand (1,000) feet of the business site;

d.     On street parking along the property frontage.

K.  Street, Alley and Sidewalk Design. Street, sidewalk and alley design shall safely and efficiently provide for vehicular and pedestrian travel while enhancing the character of the commercial and institutional developments within the community through compliance with the following design standards. These standards shall apply in addition to any other City requirements for street, alley or sidewalk design, located in the adopted transportation system plan. In the event of a conflict, the provisions of this section shall control.

1.   Intersection Design. Curb extensions shall be created at all intersections where feasible from a traffic management standpoint and unless such extensions would interfere with the turning and stopping requirements of emergency service vehicles (e.g., fire trucks, ambulances), buses or delivery vehicles. Such extensions will be designed to accommodate the turning and stopping requirements of such vehicles.

2.   Sidewalks. Sidewalk design shall consider and encourage opportunities for outdoor cafés, pushcart vendors, seasonal sidewalk sales, festivals and similar uses and activities which enliven pedestrian walkways.

3.   Alleys. Alleys shall be incorporated into design plans where feasible as pedestrian and vehicular accessways.

4.   Protecting Pedestrians. In areas of potential vehicle/pedestrian conflict, street furniture or bollards (see Section 6 of Appendix B for examples) shall be used to help create a “protected zone” for the pedestrian.

5.   Street Furniture and Lighting. New and substantially remodeled buildings shall incorporate street furniture and lighting within the public right-of-way and in private areas open to public pedestrian activity (see Section 6 of Appendix B) and per the requirements of Section 16.43.030 (Automobile parking standards).

6.   Street Trees. Street trees shall be required to be installed in compliance with Chapter 16.42, Landscaping, Street Trees and Buffering, as a condition of approval.

 

L.  Exceptions to the Happy Valley Design Standards.

1.   The Planning Official or designee may allow exceptions to these standards without the need to obtain a formal variance pursuant to Chapter 16.71. For each standard for which a design exception is sought, the applicant shall demonstrate that at least one of the following circumstances is met:

a.     The physical characteristics of the site or existing structure (e.g., steep slopes, wetlands, other bodies of water, trees or other significant natural features of the site, buildings or other existing development, utility lines and easements, etc.) make compliance with the standard impractical; or

b.     The alternative design better complies with the following:

i.      The purpose of the Happy Valley Style design standards in subsection A of this section;

ii.     The character of the Happy Valley Style in Section 2 of Appendix B; and

iii.    The intent of the standard as outlined in Appendix B.

2.   A request for exception under this provision may be processed as part of the underlying application or separately as a Design Review II application.

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.47 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
16.47.010 Property maintenance.
A.  Purpose. All properties within the City shall be maintained in a manner which will prevent the existence of hazards and life threatening conditions. Maintenance of properties shall include any vegetation, natural features and structures of any type located on the property.

B.  Vegetation.

1.   Any trees which are dead, harboring a nuisance, leaning or reclining at an angle which could create a danger if the tree were to fall, is a fire hazard or interferes with utilities or service delivery shall be removed from the property by or at the expense of the property owner.

2.   Grass and weeds growing on any property for noncommercial purposes shall not be allowed to grow above a height of ten (10) inches above ground level. Cutting or removal shall be at the owner’s expense.

3.   Noxious weeds and growth must be removed immediately upon appearance on any property. After official notice from the City, failure to remove such weeds and growth shall result in removal, disposal and spraying of the area by the City, which shall be reimbursed by the property owner. The City shall keep records of such costs and shall send an invoice to the property owner for such costs incurred. The bill is to be paid immediately upon receipt via registered mail.

C.  Natural Features.

1.   No water shall be allowed to pond where such ponded water has been or will become stagnant and act as a breeding area for insects or will harbor a nuisance of any type.

2.   Any slope or scarp which is steep enough to create a potential hazard from rockfall, mudslide or landslide shall be maintained in any practical and possible way to prevent damage to surrounding properties or injury to any person.

D.  Structures. Any structure which has been condemned by an official source or which has been judged unsafe by the Building Official shall be repaired if possible to become usable or habitable under current building codes as administered by the Building Official to become habitable or it shall be removed from the property. Any repair and/or removal of any structure from any property shall be at the expense of the property owner.

E.  Safety. No feature of any property, whether natural or manmade, shall lean, recline or lay across any property line or cause any hazard to any other property by such means as falling, creeping, sliding or any other means. (Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.48 INDUSTRIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
16.48.010 Employment Center (EC), Industrial Campus (IC) and Institutional and Public Use (IPU).
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the design standards within this section is to promote high quality employment development within the EC, IC and IPU areas. The intent is to encourage economic vitality and job creation, sustainability, efficiency, flexibility, connectivity and well-designed, mixed-use employment centers that can adapt over time to changes in market dynamics. The intent of the design standards is to:

1.   Preserve and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and workers of the City;

2.   Promote efficient utilization of land for business development;

3.   Incubate and support sustainable business and industry;

4.   Improve the function and appearance of industrial and commercial streets, and enhance the convenience, ease and enjoyment of transit use, walking and public gathering;

5.   Define building forms to be compatible with their context.

B.  Relationship to Other Standards. The standards of this section apply in addition to other standards of this title. Where standards in this section conflict with standards in other sections of this Code, the standards of this section shall govern.

C.  Applicability. The design standards in this section apply to all new employment, industrial, non-office institutional buildings and police/fire buildings.

D.  Building Siting and Design Standards and Characteristics.

1.   Exterior Materials. Exterior buildings materials should give the appearance of high-quality design. Materials must have a durability equivalent to that expected of contemporary office, flex and industrial buildings. Appropriate materials include, but are not limited to: masonry (e.g., brick or architectural block); glass; synthetic plaster; pre-cast concrete; or, stone. Materials of lesser durability or appearance shall be limited to the rear façade of the buildings. Materials considered of lesser durability or appearance include, but are not limited to: metal panels/sheet metal, fiberglass panels, vinyl or aluminum siding, or wood shingles.

2.   Exterior Colors. The contrast between trim or mortar and the dominant exterior finish should be moderate. The dominant exterior shall have earth-tone shades, such as gray, tan, brown, rust, green, red, etc.

3.   Complex Massing Required. New buildings shall use massing characteristics and asymmetrical composition to avoid the monolithic expanse of frontages and roof lines and break up building sections using elements including variable planes, projections, bays, setbacks, canopies, awnings, parapets, changes in the roof line, materials, color, or textures.

 

4.   Upper Floor Appearance. When buildings have two or more stories, the material used at the ground level shall differ from that used at upper levels in order to create a clear distinction between the ground and upper levels.

5.   Enclosure or Screening of Mechanical Equipment. Roof mounted mechanical equipment on flat roofed structures shall be screened by parapet walls to the maximum degree possible. Site located mechanical equipment shall be installed in below grade vaults where possible or screened by a site obscuring fence or landscaping. Other building mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view to the maximum degree possible.

6.   Site Lighting. Exterior illumination shall be designed per the requirements of Section 16.43.030 (Automobile parking standards).

E.  Open Space Requirements. All developments subject to this section shall comply with the following open space requirements.

1.   Minimum Open Space. A minimum of ten (10) percent of land area shall be useable open space, to include employee amenities such as outdoor break areas, outdoor eating areas, recreation activity space, etc.

2.   Aggregated Open Space. Open space should be aggregated in contiguous areas rather than dispersed throughout the site.

3.   Courtyards and Plazas. Courtyards and plazas shall be surrounded by at least one building. Building walls fronting courtyards and plazas shall include at least one entrance, outdoor weather protection, outdoor seating and ground floor façade transparency through windows and/or doors.

4.   Pedestrian Connections. Open space network shall include interior paths and common areas that link buildings with walkways, courtyards and plazas, functional open space and trails.

F.  Additional Landscaping and Site Design Requirements. All developments subject to this section shall comply with the following landscape and site design requirements.

1.   Street Trees. Street trees shall be required to be installed in compliance with Chapter 16.42, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls, as a condition of approval.

2.   Protecting Pedestrians. In areas of potential vehicle/pedestrian conflict, street furniture or bollards (see Chapter 16.46 for examples) shall be used to help create a “protected zone” for the pedestrian.

3.   Landscape Design.

a.     Where new or substantially remodeled buildings are set back from property lines and sidewalks, intervening landscaping shall be designed to invite the public in, not to provide separation.

b.     Where non-pedestrian space is placed between a building and a sidewalk, benches, low sitting walls or other street furniture shall be placed in order to enliven the sidewalk.

c.     Small areas of landscaping and paving in courtyards, entryways, building nooks and other areas shall use materials and designs similar to adjacent public spaces where such use will make the area appear larger or more inviting. This requirement is intended to minimize the transition from public to private space, but is not intended to restrict changes in material where it is functionally necessary or where it will avoid visual monotony.

 

G.  Additional Parking Requirements. Parking shall be designed to provide adequate, but not excessive, storage space for vehicles.

1.   Parking areas shall be screened with landscaped berms, shrubs, trees, or other materials providing a natural and harmonious appearance with the buildings and surrounding area. Vehicles need not be completely screened from sight, but rather a visible break should be provided between public areas and parking areas.

2.   Employee and Patron Parking Restrictions. Employee and patron parking shall be restricted to available parking as follows:

a.     On-site parking;

b.     Owned or easement parking for patrons within five hundred (500) feet of the business site;

c.     Owned or easement parking for employees within one thousand (1,000) feet of the business site;

d.     On street parking along the property frontage.

H.  Street, Alley and Sidewalk Design. Street, sidewalk and alley design shall safely and efficiently provide for vehicular and pedestrian travel while enhancing the character of the commercial and industrial developments within the community through compliance with the following design standards. These standards shall apply in addition to any other City requirements for street, alley or sidewalk design, located in the adopted Transportation System Plan (TSP). In the event of a conflict, the provisions of this section shall control.

1.   Intersection Design. Curb extensions shall be created at all intersections where feasible from a traffic management standpoint and unless such extensions would interfere with the turning and stopping requirements of emergency service vehicles (e.g., fire trucks, ambulances), trucks, buses or delivery vehicles. Such extensions will be designed to accommodate the turning and stopping requirements of such vehicles.

2.   Alleys. Alleys shall be incorporated into design plans where feasible as pedestrian and vehicular accessways.

I.   Exceptions.

1.   The Planning Official or designee may allow exceptions to these standards without the need to obtain a formal variance pursuant to Chapter 16.71 provided at least one of the following circumstances is met:

a.     The applicant demonstrates that the physical characteristics of the site or existing structure make compliance impractical (e.g., they include, but are not limited to, steep slopes, wetlands, other bodies of water, trees or other natural features of the site, buildings or other existing development, utility lines and easements, etc.);

b.     The applicant demonstrates that the alternative design is exceptional in the quality of detailing, appearance or materials and/or creates a positive unique relationship to other structures, views or open space in a manner that accomplishes the purpose of this section; or

c.     The applicant is proposing an expansion of an existing building that is solely designed and constructed to provide accessibility for the disabled, provide for energy conservation (e.g., addition of an entry vestibule), provide for screened recycling or trash storage, or relocate or screen visible exterior mechanical equipment so that such equipment is no longer visible.

2.   A request for exception under this provision may be processed as part of the underlying application or separately as a Design Review II application.

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.49 MARIJUANA TIME, PLACE, AND MANNER REGULATIONS
16.49.010 Applicability.
This chapter applies to:

A.  Marijuana production, processing and wholesaling in the IC and EC Districts (as limited); and

B.  Marijuana retailing in the CCC, MCC, MUC, and MUE Districts. (Ord. 503 § 1, 2016)

 

16.49.020 Procedure.
Marijuana production, marijuana wholesaling, and marijuana retailing require review as Type I applications pursuant to Section 16.61.020. Marijuana processing requires review as a Type II application pursuant to Section 16.61.030. The facility shall also be licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) or Oregon Health Authority (OHA) as applicable. (Ord. 503 § 1, 2016)

 

16.49.030 Marijuana production and marijuana processing.
Marijuana production, processing, and wholesaling shall be subject to the following standards and criteria:

A.  Indoor Production, Processing and Wholesaling. In the EC and IC Districts, marijuana production, processing, and wholesaling shall be located entirely within one or more completely enclosed buildings.

B.  Maximum Building Floor Space. The following standards apply in the EC and IC Districts:

1.   A maximum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of building floor space may be used for all activities associated with marijuana production, processing, and wholesaling on the premises; and

2.   If only a portion of a building is authorized for use in marijuana production, processing and wholesaling a partition wall at least seven feet in height, or a height as required by the Oregon Structural Specialty Code shall separate the marijuana production, processing and wholesaling space from the remainder of the building. A partition wall may include a door, capable of being closed, for ingress and egress between the marijuana production, processing and wholesaling space and the remainder of the building.

C.  Lighting. Lighting shall be regulated as follows:

1.   Light cast by light fixtures inside any building used for marijuana production or marijuana processing shall not be visible outside the building from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day;

2.   Outdoor marijuana grow lights shall not be illuminated from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day; and

3.   Light cast by exterior light fixtures other than marijuana grow lights (e.g., security lights, driveway lights) shall not be directed skyward and shall be directed within the boundaries of the subject property.

D.  Odor. As used in Section 16.49.030, building means the building, or portion thereof, used for marijuana production or processing and shall be regulated as follows:

1.   The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter;

2.   The filtration system shall consist of one or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three. The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM;

3.   The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed a minimum of once every three hundred sixty-five (365) days;

4.   Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building;

5.   Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum length of time needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building;

6.   The filtration system shall be designed by a mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Oregon. The engineer shall stamp the design and certify that it complies with this subsection (D); and

7.   An alternative odor control system is permitted if the applicant submits a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Oregon demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required.

E.  Noise. The applicant shall submit a noise study by an acoustic engineer licensed in the State of Oregon. The study shall demonstrate that generators as well as mechanical equipment used for heating, ventilating, air conditioning, or odor control will not produce sound that, when measured at any lot line of the subject property, exceeds fifty (50) dB(A).

F.  Security Cameras. If used, security cameras shall be directed to record only the subject property and may be directed to public rights-of-way as applicable, except as required to comply with licensing requirements of the OLCC or registration requirements of the OHA.

G.  Water. The applicant shall submit:

1.   A water right permit or certificate number for the proposed marijuana production or processing;

2.   A statement that water is supplied from a public or private water provider, along with the name and contact information of the water provider; or

3.   Proof from the Oregon Water Resources Department that the water to be used for marijuana production or processing is from a source that does not require a water right.

H.  Waste Management. Marijuana waste shall be stored in a secured waste receptacle in the possession of and under the control of the OLCC licensee or OHA registrant.

I.   Processing Limitations. The use of butane or other explosive materials in the processing of marijuana is prohibited. (Ord. 503 § 1, 2016)

 

16.49.040 Marijuana retailing.
Marijuana retailing shall be subject to the following standards and criteria:

A.  Hours. A marijuana retailer may only sell to consumers between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and may only permit consumers to be present in the building space occupied by the marijuana retailer between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.

B.  Odor. As used in this section, “building” means the building, or portion thereof, used for marijuana retailing per the following provisions:

1.   The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter;

2.   The filtration system shall consist of one or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for CFM equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three. The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM;

3.   The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed a minimum of once every three hundred sixty-five (365) days;

4.   Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building;

5.   Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum length of time needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building;

6.   The filtration system shall be designed by a mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Oregon. The engineer shall stamp the design and certify that it complies with Section 16.49.040(B); and

7.   An alternative odor control system is permitted if the applicant submits a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Oregon demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required.

C.  Window Service. The use shall not have a walk-up window or drive-thru window service.

D.  Waste Management. Marijuana waste shall be stored in a secured waste receptacle in the possession of and under the control of the OLCC licensee or OHA registrant.

E.  Minors. No one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted to be present in the building space occupied by the marijuana retailer, except as allowed by State law.

F.  Co-Location of Related Activities and Uses. Marijuana and tobacco products shall not be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed in the building space occupied by the marijuana retailer. In addition, marijuana retailing shall not be co-located on the same lot of record or within the same building with any marijuana social club or marijuana smoking club.

G.  Minimum Separation Distances.

1.   The use shall be located a minimum of:

a.     Two thousand (2,000) feet from a public elementary or secondary school for which attendance is compulsory under Oregon Revised Statutes 339.020, including any parking lot appurtenant thereto and any property used by the school; or a private or parochial elementary or secondary school, teaching children as described in ORS 339.030(1)(a), including any parking lot appurtenant thereto and any property used by the school;

b.     One thousand (1,000) feet from a public park, public playground, public recreation facility (athletic field, court, gym, swim pool, etc.), public community center, public library, licensed treatment center, light rail transit station, or a multifamily dwelling owned by a public housing authority.

i.      A natural area or open space is exempt from this setback if the natural area is simultaneously owned by a public body and the area is not open to the public for regular usage;

c.     Five hundred (500) feet from a licensed daycare facility or licensed preschool, including any parking lot appurtenant thereto and any property used by the daycare facility or preschool; and

d.     One hundred (100) feet from a residentially zoned property.

2.   If the use is licensed by the OLCC pursuant to Section 22, Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015, it shall be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any other marijuana retailer so licensed by the OLCC.

3.   If the use is registered with the OHA pursuant to ORS 475.314, it shall be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any other marijuana retailer so registered with the OHA.

4.   For purposes of subsection (G)(1), distance shall be measured from the lot line of the affected property (e.g., a school) to the closest point of the building space occupied by the marijuana retailer. For purposes of subsections (G)(2) and (3), distance shall be measured from the closest point of the building space occupied by one marijuana retailer to the closest point of the building space occupied by the other marijuana retailer.

5.   A change in use (including a zone change) to another property to a use identified in subsection (G) after a complete Type I application for marijuana retailing has been filed shall not result in the marijuana retailer being in violation of subsection (G).

(Ord. 503 § 1, 2016)

 

16.49.050 Approval period.
A.  Approval of a permit under this chapter shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of final approval. The approval shall lapse if:

1.   A public improvement plan or building permit application for the project has not been submitted within two years of approval; or

2.   Construction on the site is in violation of the approved plan.

(Ord. 503 § 1, 2016)

ARTICLE 16.5 PUBLIC FACILITIES
Chapter 16.50 PUBLIC FACILITIES
16.50.010 Purpose and applicability.
This chapter governs planning and design standards for public and private transportation facilities and utilities. (Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.50.020 General public facilities standards.
A.  Any property that is developed within the City will be required to improve or upgrade the public facilities and services which directly serve the subject property. The required public improvements shall be paid for directly by the landowner or developer or by other means as arranged between the developer and the provider. Where physical or topographical condition, or other factors, make the extension of a public facility concurrent with development impractical, the Planning Official or designee may require a cash payment to the City in lieu of the facility design and construction. The amount of the payment shall be equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of City determined or agreed upon value for the design and construction of the facility, or the developer’s proportional share thereof as calculated by the City.

B.  The improvement and/or upgrading of public facilities shall be done in conformance with the design criteria, standard construction specifications and details maintained by the City Engineer, or any other authority with jurisdiction. The City’s specifications, standards, and details are hereby incorporated into this code by reference. See Section 16.50.030(A)(1).

C.  The need to improve or upgrade the public facilities and services as a result of the development of property shall be determined solely by the City or supplier of the facility or service. If the City makes such a determination for a City provided facility or service, such determination may be appealed to the City Council only if the council itself did not make the determination. Decisions on other determinations made by public or private utility companies, service districts, commercial businesses or other companies, agencies or organizations are outside the jurisdiction of the City and cannot be appealed to the Council nor held binding by this section.

D.  A developer may also be held responsible for a “fair share” part of the larger local improvement which is required as a result of the development of which the developer’s proposal is a part and the resultant pressures for increased, extended or improved facilities and services. Such “fair share” may be assessed and collected by the appropriate company, agency, organization or governmental unit.

E.  The City shall be held harmless in any improvement or upgrading activity carried on by the developer, even though such activity was required or approved by the City. The developer shall sign such an agreement as provided by the City Attorney.

F.  New individual subsurface sewage disposal systems may be installed at any time to replace an existing but failing system within an existing lot of record. A new individual subsurface sewage disposal system may be installed on a previously undeveloped lot of record formerly within unincorporated Clackamas County, but may not be utilized to serve parcels or lots created by any land division, or to serve any new nonresidential development. However, if public sanitary sewer service is available within three hundred (300) feet of any property line of the existing system and capable of serving the site of the failing system or undeveloped lot of record with a regular or gravity hookup, sanitary sewer service shall be utilized rather than a new replacement individual onsite subsurface sewage disposal systems. (Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.50.030 Transportation standards.
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish design standards and performance requirements for all streets and roads and other transportation facilities constructed or reconstructed within the City, as well as to establish a process for variation from the streets standards. For transportation facilities not under City jurisdiction, the applicable jurisdiction’s permitting standards may apply.

1.   All streets which are to be constructed must be designed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Oregon, and must conform to the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual developed by the City of Happy Valley.

2.   The public residential streets standards shall be considered as minimum design requirements under ideal circumstances. All public residential streets in the City shall be designed to one of the typical cross-sections found within the City’s Transportation System Plan (TSP), except as provided in subsection B. The typical street cross-section shall be approved by the City Engineer (based on consultation with the City’s Traffic Engineer) as part of the review process as provided in this title and shall be based on the following considerations:

a.     Street function needed within the existing proposed and future neighborhood and the City circulation networks;

b.     Anticipated daily traffic volumes;

c.     Individual property access requirements;

d.     Topographic variations and the amount of cut and fill required for the proposed street;

e.     Soil and other field conditions.

3.   New residential and mixed-use development proposals subject to site plan review must demonstrate consistency with Figure 8-2 Local Street Connectivity in the Transportation System Plan by providing a site plan that shows proposed new or extended street(s).

B.  Street and Road Standards.

1.   Horizontal and vertical street alignment shall be designed in accordance with the City’s Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

2.   Street Design Variations. Alternate design variations from the standards found within the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual and Transportation System Plan (TSP) or this chapter may be considered for approval by the City Engineer if one of the following conditions are found to be present:

a.     Existing local conditions create unusual circumstances where standards must be exceeded such as excessive or unstable slopes, mixed land uses to utilize the same street, or a pedestrian or bikeway link is needed;

b.     Existing local conditions create unusual circumstances, including, but not limited to, where standards must be reduced such as reducing sidewalks to one side of the street only, reducing street widths, reconstruction of a street in an existing neighborhood for reduction of excessive cuts and fills, or where steep cross slopes exist making reduced widths advisable and parking turnouts recommended;

c.     Variation is necessary to the overall design objectives of a particular proposed development such as green street design elements that are consistent with federal regulations for stream protection, parking turnouts, and landscaped islands and circles for traffic control.

3.   Specifications and Design Standards. Unless otherwise required by the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual, the City Engineer, or this chapter, road specifications shall conform to the most recent issue of the Oregon State Highway Division’s “Standard Specifications for Highway Construction.”

4.   Structural Section.

a.     Purpose. The typical structural sections that are to be used for each street classification are shown in the City’s Standard Details found in the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual. The City Engineer may increase the structural section to conform to projected traffic loads or unstable soil conditions.

b.     Variation. Sections utilizing other methods of construction than shown in the standard drawings (i.e., lime or cement treated subgrade, or Portland cement or asphaltic cement treated base, etc.) may be submitted for review and approval by the City Engineer.

c.     Structural Design. In areas determined unstable by the City Engineer, the Design Engineer will be required to submit a structural design for approval. Included in the submittal shall be the soils analysis on which the design was based.

5.   Asphalt Pavement Design.

a.     The wearing surface of asphalt concrete (AC) streets shall be HMAC, designed and placed in accordance with the requirements outlined in the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

b.     In areas requiring a specialized pavement design, the asphalt pavement may be designed using any nationally recognized procedure approved by the City Engineer.

c.     The minimum paving temperature limits for placement of HMAC shall be in accordance with the requirements outlined in the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

d.     The City’s Engineering Division shall be notified forty-eight (48) hours in advance of intent to place HMAC.

e.     The project geotechnical engineer shall be present while HMAC is being placed and shall perform compaction testing on each lift of HMAC.

f.      The compacting testing results shall meet the requirements of Section 00745.9, Compaction QC, “Oregon Standard Specifications for Highway Construction.”

g.     Failure to comply with the minimum compaction testing requirements may result in the removal of the substandard pavement surface upon direction of the City Engineer or designee.

6.   On-Street Parking Restrictions. On-street parking restrictions shall be per the most recent iteration of the Oregon Fire Code Applications Guide, as determined by Clackamas Fire District No. 1.

7.   Private Streets. Private streets shall conform to the typical cross-sections found within the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual, and the City’s Transportation System Plan. Private streets within single-family residential developments shall be designed to provide access to no more than five dwelling units. Private streets serving attached housing and multifamily housing developments shall provide commercial drives in conformance with the City’s Transportation System Plan and Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

8.   Rights-of-Way. Prior to issuance of building permits or recordation of final plat, the City shall require dedication of rights-of-way in accordance with the City’s Transportation System Plan. All dedications shall be recorded with the County assessor’s office.

a.     When a tract of land is divided into parcels of more than one acre each, the commission may require an arrangement of lots and streets such as to permit a re-dividing into smaller lots in conformity with the street and lot requirements specified in this chapter.

9.   Connectivity and Block Length. The following shall govern the design and layout for blocks within all subdivisions or planned unit developments:

a.     Block Length. The blocks shall be consistent with the requirements of topography and the needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic and the type of land use proposed. Block lengths shall not exceed five hundred thirty (530) feet or be less than two hundred (200) feet in length, except if prevented by barriers such as topography, water resources or significant natural resources, freeways, pre-existing development, leases, easements or covenants that existed prior to May 1, 1995. In a Water Quality Resource or Habitat Conservation Area (HCA) the distance between streets may be increased to eight hundred (800) to one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet where protected natural features are present.

b.     Block Width. Except for reverse frontage lots, the width of blocks shall be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots of depth consistent with the type of land use proposed.

c.     Pedestrian Paths and/or Multi-Use Paths.

i.      Spacing between pedestrian connections shall be no more than two hundred sixty-five (265) feet.

ii.     Pedestrian paths shall be provided when full street connections are not possible because of topography, barriers such as freeways or railroads, or environmental constraints.

iii.    Pedestrian access to schools, playgrounds and other community facilities shall be provided from the public right-of-way.

iv.    Path design and construction shall be in accordance with the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual and the City’s Transportation System Plan.

v.     Pedestrian paths shall be encompassed in a public access easement.

vi.    Pedestrian and multi-use paths shall have an all-weather surface to City standards and will include removable bollards to prevent use by unauthorized motorized vehicles.

vii.   In developments incorporating pedestrian paths within steep slopes, paths twenty (20) percent or greater in grade are required to incorporate stairs.

viii.  In natural resource areas, surfaces may include gravel or bark chip; in all other scenarios, pedestrian and muti-use paths shall be constructed of improved, all weather surface.

ix.    Pedestrian and multi-use paths are required to be maintained by a homeowner’s association or equivalent maintenance organization.

x.     Multi-use paths shall be constructed in conformance with the definition of a multi-use path within Section 16.12.030 of this title.

d.     Cul-de-Sacs and Loop Turn-Around Streets. A cul-de-sac or loop turn-around street shall only be proposed where the City Engineer recommends to the appropriate review body that environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other applicable City requirements preclude a street extension. Where the City determines that a cul-de-sac or loop turn-around street is allowed, all of the following standards shall be met:

i.      The cul-de-sac or loop turn-around street shall not exceed a length of two hundred (200) feet, unless the adjoining land contains barriers such as existing buildings, railroads or freeways, or environmental constraints such as steep slopes, wetlands, drainageways, creeks or streams, that prevent future street extension and connection. A central landscaped island with rainwater management and infiltration are encouraged in cul-de-sac design. No more than ten (10) dwelling units shall take access to a new cul-de-sac or loop turn-around street unless it is determined that the traffic impacts on adjacent streets will not exceed those from a development of ten (10) or fewer units. All other dimensional standards of cul-de-sac or loop turn-around streets shall be governed by the Engineering and Design Standards Manual and are based on the recommendation of the City Engineer. The length of the cul-de-sac or loop turn-around street shall be measured along the centerline of the roadway from the near side of the intersecting street to the farthest point of the street;

ii.     No more than ten (10) dwelling units shall take access to a new cul-de-sac or loop turn-around street;

iii.    Cul-de-sac or loop turn-around streets shall terminate in a configuration that meets Clackamas Fire District No. 1 guidelines and is consistent with Figure 8-8 of the City of Happy Valley Transportation System Plan; and

iv.    Cul-de-sac or loop turn-around streets shall provide pedestrian connections from the end of the street to adjacent developed and developable lands, and shall provide or not preclude the opportunity to later install bicycle access way between it and adjacent developable lands. Such access ways shall conform to Section 16.41.040.

10. Subsurface Drainage.

a.     Subsurface street drainage shall be an integral part of street design. Subsurface drains shall be designed and constructed to properly address the affected soil. In the event that no subsurface drainage is required based on a soils report, a transverse perforated drain pipe shall be installed below the sub-base rock at the point of each sag vertical curve. The subsurface drains are for the purpose of collecting and conveying subsurface water only, not surface runoff. They are not to be considered part of the storm drainage system for storm drainpipe sizing purposes;

b.     Subsurface drains shall connect and drain into the storm drainage system at catch basins, curb inlets, gutter inlets, manholes or roadside ditches. Surcharge from the storm drainage system shall not be allowed to back up into the subsurface drains. Alternative subsurface drainage measures may be used if approved by the City Engineer.

11. Guardrails. The following specifies the minimum requirements for the location and type of guardrails:

a.     The decision of whether to install a guardrail or not shall be based on information found in the AASHTO publication, “Guide for Selecting, Locating and Designing Traffic Barriers”;

b.     Guardrails shall be designed and constructed per ODOT’s Standard Drawings for Design and Construction.

12. Transitions. Street width transitions shall be designed in accordance with the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

13. Superelevation Cross-sections. Off-set crown cross-sections are not acceptable as superelevation sections.

14. Stub Streets. Stub streets allow for future street extensions. A barrier will be required at the end of a stub street. Notification that the street is planned for future extension shall be posted where the street improvement ends.

15. Utilities.

a.     On all phased (interim) road improvements, the necessary utilities shall be stubbed across the interim improvement to assure cuts are not necessary when the road is expanded to its full width.

b.     Underground utilities being constructed along existing paved streets shall not be located under the existing pavement unless approved by the City Engineer. Underground utilities that must cross an existing paved street shall be bored rather than open cut, unless approved by the City Engineer.

c.     Underground utilities shall be buried a minimum depth of thirty (30) inches as measured from finished grade to top of utility.

d.     Street lights shall be located as required to provide proper illumination but shall not physically or visually interfere with vehicle or pedestrian traffic.

 

16. Raised Medians. Raised medians are allowed on certain streets in accordance with the City’s Transportation System Plan. Where raised medians are allowed, they shall be designed in conformance with the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

17. Sight distance at intersections shall meet the minimum requirements set by AASHTO A Policy of Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, latest edition, based upon the design speed. When a sight distance easement is needed at an intersection, an open space tract shall be dedicated to obtain the correct sight visibility. Plantings or structures in the open space tract/sight distance easement shall conform to the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

18. Corner or Clear Vision Areas.

a.     A clear vision area shall be maintained on each corner of property at the intersection of any two streets, or a street and a driveway in accordance with the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual. No structures, plantings or other obstructions that would impede visibility between the height of thirty (30) inches and ten (10) feet shall be allowed within such area. Measurements shall be made from the top of the curb or when there is no curb, from established street centerline grade. However, the following items shall be exempt:

i.      Light and utility poles with a diameter less than twelve (12) inches;

ii.     An existing tree, trimmed to the trunk, ten (10) feet above the curb;

iii.    Official warning or street sign;

iv.    Natural contours where the natural elevations are such there can be no cross-visibility at the intersection and necessary excavation would result in an unreasonable hardship on the property owner or deteriorate the quality of the site.

b.     Driveways constructed on streets without curbs shall meet the minimum intersection sight distance requirements.

19. Vertical Clearance. A minimum clearance of fourteen (14) feet above the pavement surface shall be maintained over all streets and access drives.

20. Interim Improvement Standards. It is anticipated that all existing streets, except those in new subdivisions, will require complete reconstruction to support urban level traffic volumes. However, in most cases existing and short-term projected traffic volumes do not warrant improvements to full standards. Therefore, unless otherwise specified by the review body, interim standards as determined by the City Engineer shall apply.

21. In order to provide adequate travel lanes and stormwater drainage, roadway improvements that are constructed within areas abutting multiple properties are required to construct “three-quarter” streets along the applicable frontage of a subject site (curb, gutter, sidewalk, planter strip and a full paved section designed to accommodate stormwater drainage pursuant to CCSD#1 specifications).

a.     A Reserve or Access Control Strip. In cases where unimproved (gravel) or under-improved (paved section width less than that required by street classification) public rights-of-way serve a proposed development, off-site improvements shall, at a minimum, include the construction of a full paved section pursuant to the applicable street standard, designed to accommodate stormwater drainage pursuant to CCSD#1 specifications. Said improvements shall continue to an adequately improved public right-of-way, as determined by the City Engineer.

22. Miscellaneous Information. The expense related to modification of an existing street to accommodate proposed access, including all traffic control devices and lighting, shall be paid for by the developer.

C.  Street and Road Access Control.

1.   Cul-de-sac and Residential Streets—Residential and Commercial Uses. A permit is required for access, subject to general considerations of safety, function, etc.

2.   When a partition, subdivision or a planned unit development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street as defined within the City’s Transportation System Plan, the review authority shall require reverse frontage lots, thereby precluding access to the parkway streets.

3.   Access and Traffic Signal Spacing Standards. Access and traffic signal spacing standards are defined within the City’s Transportation System Plan. New development and roadway projects located on City street facilities shall meet the access and traffic signal spacing standards within the Transportation System Plan. Access points include public streets, private streets, and private commercial or residential driveways. A variation to the access and traffic signal spacing standards may be granted by the City Engineer in consultation with the City’s Traffic Engineer, in areas with limited property frontage and/or environmental constraints. Any variation to these spacing standards will require an access management plan to be approved by the City Engineer. Any approved variation shall be detailed within the conditions of approval of an applicable land use application, and said variations are distinctly different from, and unrelated to, variances per the provisions of Chapter 16.71 of this title.

D.  Appeals.

1.   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Engineer or other staff person under this chapter may appeal to the Hearings Officer.

2.   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Hearings Officer under this chapter may appeal to the City Council.

E.  Street Names. No proper street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an existing street or a connecting cul-de-sac or turn-around loop street. Street names shall conform to the established patterns of the City and surrounding area and are subject to the review and approval of emergency services organizations.

F.  Traffic Controls.

1.   Purpose. For any development, the City Engineer may require that the owner provide an engineering traffic analysis by a registered engineer to determine the number and types of traffic controls (traffic lights, signs, turn lanes, etc.) as may be necessary to accommodate anticipated traffic flow of the development. The recommendations reached in the engineering traffic analysis will be required by the City as a condition of issuance of a building permit and shall be approved by the City Engineer.

2.   Traffic Control Devices and Street Signs. All required street name signs, traffic control signs, and traffic control devices shall be installed at the expense of the developer.

 

3.   Variances. Variances may be granted for the conditions of this section when, in the judgment of the City Engineer, strict compliance would impose an undue hardship on the developer. (See Chapter 16.71.)

G.  Location of Utility Lines.

1.   To the maximum extent feasible, utilities shall be placed underground.

2.   Water mains shall be located on the south and east sides of the road.

3.   Power, natural gas and telephone shall be located within an eight-foot public utility easement (PUE) adjacent to the right-of-way line, or within the right-of-way, if approved by the city engineer, and shall be joint occupancy whenever possible.

4.   Pedestals for Buried Cable. Pedestals installed as part of a buried cable installation are to be located within an eight-foot public utility easement (PUE) adjacent to the right-of-way line, or within the right-of-way, if approved by the city engineer. In no case shall the pedestals be located within the road maintenance operating area, including mowing operations, or nearer the pavement edge than any official road sign in the same general location.

5.   Service crossings shall maintain the same depth as the main pipeline or buried cable to a point two feet behind the curb or center of the road or ditch, but in no case shall there be less than one foot cover from the bottom of the curb or ditch to the top of the service line.

6.   Storm sewer lines shall be located five feet south or east of centerline of street.

7.   Sanitary sewer lines shall be located five feet north or west of centerline of street.

8.   The depth of utilities on improved roads shall be thirty (30) inches minimum, forty (40) inches minimum on unimproved roads, and thirty (30) inches minimum below subgrade on proposed construction or reconstruction. All depths are to top of pipe lines or buried cable.

9.   Locations other than those noted above must be approved by the City Engineer.

H.  Sidewalks and Bikeways.

1.   Requirements for sidewalks and bikeways shall be as delineated within the Transportation System Plan.

2.   Sidewalks.

a.     Sidewalks may be either private or public, depending on their location inside or outside of the public right-of-way.

b.     Sidewalks shall tie to public streets at locations determined by the City Engineer.

c.     Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with the City’s Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual. Other materials must be specifically approved by the City Engineer.

d.     Sidewalks shall have a maximum grade of fifteen (15) percent.

e.     Ramps for handicapped use are required on all sidewalks used by the public at all points where a sidewalk or path intersects a curb.

f.      Sidewalks must be constructed in such a way as to allow the surface drainage to sheet flow across them, and not follow them longitudinally.

g.     Public sidewalks shall be located either in a public easement or over land dedicated to the public.

h.     Sidewalks may meander within the right-of-way with City Engineer approval.

i.      Alternate Sidewalk Location. It is the general policy of the City to place sidewalks off the traveled portion of any roadway. In areas where the placement of the sidewalk would result in the removal of significant trees or the construction of significant fill or cut slopes or in other cases deemed appropriate by the City Engineer, the sidewalk may be placed elsewhere with a design reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.

j.      Sidewalks must be constructed free of impediments within a minimum width of at least five feet.

3.   Bikeways.

a.     Bikeways shall be public.

b.     Bikeways facilities shall meet the requirements of this document and the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials publication, “Guide for Development of New Bicycle Facilities,” as amended and adopted by the Oregon Department of Transportation.

c.     Bikeways must be constructed in such a way as to allow the surface drainage to sheet flow across them, and not follow them longitudinally.

d.     A bikeway may be constructed adjacent to the curb within the pavement area.

e.     The design of bikeways shall conform to City standards.

f.      Structural sections of bikeway facilities on streets shall conform to that of the street or be integral with the curb. Bikeway facilities off street shall be constructed over a sterilized, compacted subgrade with a surface that meets the requirements set out in the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

g.     Design standards regarding horizontal alignment, grade, sight distance, intersections, signing, marking, structures, drainage and lighting shall conform to the AASHTO standards. When bikeways are integrated with a curb, all inlet grates shall be designed to protect the bicyclist from the grate or opening.

h.     Bikeways shall be located either in a public easement or over land dedicated to the public.

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.50.040 Public use areas.
A.  Dedication of Public Use Areas.

1.   Where a proposed park, playground, or other public use shown in a plan adopted by the City is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the City may require the dedication or reservation of this area on the final plat for the subdivision, provided that the impact of the development on the City park system is roughly proportionate to the dedication or reservation being made.

2.   The Parks District may purchase or accept voluntary dedication or reservation of areas within the subdivision that are suitable for the development of parks and other public uses; however, the Parks District is under no obligation to accept such areas offered for dedication or sale.

 

B.  System Development Charge Credit. Dedication of land to the City for public use areas, voluntary or otherwise, shall be eligible as a credit toward any required system development charge for parks. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.50.050 Sanitary sewer, storm drainage and water service improvements.
A.  Sanitary Sewerage Disposal and Storm Drainage Requirements.

1.   The sanitary sewerage disposal requirements for any development within the City shall be in accordance with standards established by the State of Oregon, Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) as administered by Clackamas County. Any variances or waivers to these standards shall be granted only in accordance with established standards, criteria and procedures of DEQ.

2.   All sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Clackamas County Service District No. 1 or its successor.

3.   All storm sewers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of Clackamas County Service District No. 1 or its successor.

B.  Domestic Water and Fire Protection Service Requirements.

1.   All subdivisions or planned unit developments shall be served by a community or public water supply as defined and governed by state regulations. All design and construction shall be in accordance with the requirements of the water service provider.

2.   All subdivisions or planned unit developments shall have an adequate water supply for fire protection purposes as required by the fire district, and shall have fire hydrants located as required by the fire district.

3.   Any proposed public or private road shall be reviewed by the appropriate fire district for compliance with all applicable and appropriate standards, and a statement of compliance shall accompany the application for any subdivision or PUD (See Section 16.50.030 and any other applicable sections).

(Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.50.070 Utilities.
A.  Purpose. Approval of a partition, subdivision or planned unit development within the City shall include an express condition that requires all utility lines, including, but not limited to, those required for electric, communication, street lighting and cable television services and related facilities, to be placed underground. Whether the underground facilities have supporting containers or are buried in the earth shall be determined by the utility involved in compliance with all applicable safety regulations.

B.  Variances. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to surface mounted transformers, surface mounted connection boxes and the meter cabinets which may be placed above ground, or to temporary utility service facilities during construction, or to high capacity electric and communication feeder lines, or to utility transmission lines operated at fifty thousand (50,000) volts or above.

C.  Procedure. The developer shall be responsible for and shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving utilities to provide the underground services as required in subsection A of this section. All such underground electric and communication facilities as described above shall be constructed in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Public Utility Commissioner of the State of Oregon, relating to the installation and safety of underground lines, plant, system, equipment and apparatus. When any public property including, but not limited to, streets and parks is disrupted by the installation, hookup or provision of services or facilities, the developer shall insure that the public property is returned as nearly as possible to the condition existing prior to the disruption. A bond, security agreement or cash deposit with the City for the estimated cost of repair of the public property shall be deposited with the City prior to the commencement of any work. The developer shall sign a statement supplied by the City Attorney which will hold the City harmless for all disruption, repair and liability involved with such project.

D.  Availability. Easements or utility strips satisfactory to the serving utilities shall be provided for by the developer and shall be set forth on the plat before recording in the County records or in the records of any other governmental agency entitled to recordation by law or agreement. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.50.080 Construction plan approval, bonding and assurances.
A.  Plan Approval and Permit. No public improvements, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, streets, sidewalks, curbs, lighting, parks, or other requirements shall be undertaken except after the plans have been approved by the City, permit fee paid, and permit issued. The permit fee is required to defray the cost and expenses incurred by the City for construction and other services in connection with the improvement. The permit fee shall be set by City Council.

B.  Bonding and Assurances.

1.   Performance Bonds for Public Improvements. Prior to obtaining City approval to construct any public improvements, the developer shall, by agreement with the City, carry out the minimum improvements required by the City’s implementing ordinances and subject conditions of approval by installing the required improvements, subject to inspection and final review of the City, prior to the approval of any structural building permits and shall furnish the City with a performance bond or other financial guarantee, such as an irrevocable letter of credit or set aside account, in a form and amount satisfactory to the City. The performance bond or other financial guarantee is required to be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the construction value for improvements within the City’s right-of-way as determined by the City or agreed upon by the City and developer. A performance guarantees for erosion control and site stabilization outside of the public right-of-way shall equal twenty-five (25) percent of the on-site construction value as determined or agreed upon by the City.

If the developer fails to construct the required minimum public improvement requirements or otherwise fails to perform any conditions of approval, and the City has unreimbursed expenses resulting from such failure, the City shall place a claim against the bond or other security for reimbursement, including, but not limited to, staff time, mileage and legal expenses. If the amount of the bond or other security exceeds the expenses incurred by the City, it shall release the remainder. If the amount of the bond or other security is less than the expenses incurred by the City, the developer shall be liable to the City for the difference and a lien may be filed by the City in the City lien docket against the property to insure payment.

Any improvement that is not under City jurisdiction shall be improved pursuant to the procedures established by the responsible jurisdiction or service provider.

2.   Warranty Guarantee. After satisfactory completion of the necessary public facilities, private open space landscaping and partial or full release of the performance bond by the City, the responsible party constructing the facilities shall commence satisfactory maintenance of the facilities. A warranty guarantee to be used at the discretion of the City Engineer or designee to correct deficiencies in materials or maintenance of constructed public infrastructure, or to address any failure of engineering design, must be posted with the City and maintained throughout the two-year maintenance period. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the construction cost of the facilities as approved by the City Engineer or designee. Maintenance bonds for vegetation shall not be allowed to expire without submittal of an arborist’s report documenting plant health. The City may, at its option, require the maintenance bond be extended should the need arise to finalize inspections or determine plant health.

3.   Liability Insurance. The responsible party constructing the facility shall maintain general liability insurance in the following amounts: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for medical expense; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) personal and advertising injury; two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) general aggregate; and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) products/completed operations aggregate. The City of Happy Valley shall be named as additional insured using the appropriate additional insured endorsement, which shall protect the City from any and all liability related to the construction or maintenance of the facility.

4.   Consolidation of Bonds. Where such persons have previously posted, or are required to post other such bonds with the City Recorder either on the facility itself or on other construction related to the facility, such person may, with the permission of the City Engineer or designee and to the extent allowable by law, combine all such bonds into a single bond. At no time shall the amount thus bonded be less than the total amount which would have been required in the form of the separate bonds, and provided further that such bond shall on its face clearly delineate those separate bonds which it is needed to replace.

5.   Release of Performance Bonds. The bond or assurance shall be released by the City Recorder only when authorized by the City Engineer and Planning Official or designees find that the completed project conforms to the site development approval, including all conditions of approval.

6.   Completion of Planter Strips, Street Trees and General Landscape Installation.

a.     Common open space or tract landscaping; planter strips and street trees abutting common open spaces or tracts; center street medians; stormwater detention facility landscaping; and any other miscellaneous landscaping not associated with a single residential lot or parcel shall be installed prior to final infrastructure inspection and/or authorization to submit building permits. If the developer is unable to install landscaping due to extreme weather or other constraints not within the control of the developer, landscaping within common elements, open space tracts, planter strips, center medians, etc., shall be guaranteed by the submittal of a liquid financial guarantee (traditional performance bonds are not accepted) acceptable to the Planning Official, to be retained until final installation and inspection. Said guarantee shall be in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the landscaping installation estimate provided by a professional landscape contractor and shall assure such installation within six months of authorization to submit building permits. If the installation of the landscaping is not completed within the six-month period, the security may be used by the City to complete the installation.

b.     Planter Strip Landscaping (Groundcover) and Street Trees Within the Public Right-of-Way, Abutting Residential Subdivision Lots. Planter strips are public improvements located within the right-of-way and as such are required to be installed by the developer. The developer is required to submit a planter strip and street tree plan as part of the construction plan set, detailing to the greatest extent practicable the placement of street trees in conformance with all spacing requirements for street intersections, street lights, driveways, fire hydrants, etc. Based on this planter strip and street tree plan, the developer and/or builder shall install the planter strip landscaping minus street trees prior to building occupancy. Prior to building permit release, the developer and/or builder shall finalize street tree planting by one of two methods. One, submit a street tree installation fee for all street trees located along public street frontages, assuming a value of five hundred twenty-five dollars ($525.00) per tree. The City of Happy Valley street tree contractor shall install all street trees located along public street frontages when the development reaches substantial buildout based on the discretion of the Planning Official or designee, but generally incorporating an eighty (80) percent benchmark. Alternatively, substantially built-out streets, blocks or neighborhoods may also be authorized for street tree planting per the discretion of the Planning Official or designee. Second, if in the interest of an expedited timeline for installation by the developer, street tree installation may be carried out by the developer, with submittal of an adequate street tree plan; performance bond for one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of the approved street tree plan as demonstrated by a bid from a professional landscape company; and, a two-year maintenance bond for the developer installed street trees.

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.50.090 Installation.
A.  Conformance Required. Improvements installed by the developer either as a requirement of these regulations or at the developer’s own option, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, approved construction plans, in accordance with the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual.

B.  Commencement. Work shall not begin until the City has been notified in advance in writing.

C.  Resumption. If work is discontinued for more than one month, it shall not be resumed until the City is notified.

D.  City Inspection. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the City. The City may require minor changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arising during construction warrant such changes in the public interest. Modifications to the approved design requested by the developer may be subject to review under Chapter 16.66, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. Any survey monuments that are disturbed before all improvements are completed by the subdivider shall be replaced and accepted by the County Surveyor prior to final acceptance of the improvements.

 

E.  Engineer’s Certification and As-Built Plans. A registered civil engineer shall provide written certification in a form required by the City that all improvements, workmanship, and materials are in accord with current and standard engineering and construction practices, conform to approved plans and conditions of approval, and are of high grade, prior to City acceptance of the public improvements, or any portion thereof, for operation and maintenance. The developer’s engineer shall also provide a mylar set of “as-built” plans and a CD containing electronic copies of “as-built” plans in conformance with the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual. (Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.50.100 Grading requirements.
In addition to the provisions for Grading Plans as required in Section 16.62.030, the following standards shall be met for all projects undergoing building permit and/or construction plan review:

A.  Grading on new project sites shall blend with the contours of adjacent properties. Abrupt or unnatural appearing grading design is not allowed unless otherwise approved by a condition of approval through land division or design review processes.

B.  Proposed cut and fill slopes shall be rounded off both horizontally and vertically.

C.  Where graded building pads are proposed, they should extend three feet to five feet beyond the building foundation to allow a transition to the natural setting.

D.  The height and length of retaining walls visible from public areas including public streets and/or abutting private properties shall be minimized and screened with appropriate landscaping, to be reviewed and approved by the Planning Official. Retaining walls shall incorporate, where possible, design elements of other architectural or natural features of the project.

E.  Grading under the drip line of protected trees is prohibited to prevent soil compaction and significant root damage. A protected tree is one that is outside the building envelope or infrastructure improvement area pursuant to Section 16.42.050. On sites in the open space, the restriction on grading is extended to one and one-half times the distance from the trunk to the drip line unless mitigation by replanting native species or eradication of unwanted plant species has been approved by the City.

F.  Placement and design of retaining walls over four feet in height requires approval through the design review process.

G.  Retaining walls over four feet in height shall be set back from the property line, including property lines that are the shared property line/public right-of-way, a minimum distance of two feet or one-half of the retaining wall height, whichever is greater, except where a recorded slope easement exists and/or a maintenance agreement for the wall is in place. Maintenance agreements for retaining walls abutting the public right-of-way shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner.

H.  Terracing shall be considered as an alternative to the use of tall or prominent retaining walls, particularly in highly visible areas on hillsides.

I.   When designing a grading plan, balancing the cut and fill is highly encouraged when it does not result in further damage to the natural topography.

J.   Excavation or Filling of Soil.

 

1.   Purpose. This section covers the layout and improvement of land, including drainage; the excavating, filling and grading of lots; the location and construction of buildings and other structures and parts and appurtenances of such buildings and structures.

2.   Layout. Prime consideration in the placement of all buildings and other structures, including concrete or paved driveways or walkways, streets of any type of construction, or fills or excavations shall be the maintenance of the natural absorption through the soil of septic tank effluent, natural groundwater and water runoff.

3.   Drainage. The City must approve any and all proposals that will, in the opinion of the City Engineer or designated representative, change water runoff, sewage effluent absorption or natural groundwater absorption. Natural flows of groundwater and surface water and stormwater drainage shall be maintained so as to prevent harmful effects on surrounding property. Erosion shall be controlled in accordance with an erosion control plan.

4.   Procedure. It shall be the applicant who shall bear the sole burden of providing to the City any and all information, documentation, evidence and proof that any proposed development of the land will conform to and fulfill the requirements of this section.

(Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

ARTICLE 16.6 ADMINISTRATION OF LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 16.61 TYPES OF REVIEW PROCEDURES
16.61.010 Purpose and applicability of review procedures.
A.  Purpose. This chapter sets forth the provisions, conditions, procedures and fees administering the adopted Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code. This chapter establishes decision-making procedures that enable the City, the applicant and the public to reasonably review applications and participate in the local decision-making process in a timely and effective way. Table 16.61.010-1 provides a key for determining the review procedure and the decision-making body for specific applications and decisions.

B.  Review Procedures. All land use and development permit applications and approvals described in Title 16, except building permits and final plat reviews, shall be decided by using the procedures contained in this chapter. The procedure “type” assigned to an application governs the decision-making process for that permit or approval. There are eight types of permit/approval procedures: Types I, II, II-DR, III-PC, III-PC/CC, III-DRB, III-HO and IV. These procedures are described in subsections 1 through 6 below. Table 16.61.010 lists all of the City’s land use and development approvals and the required review procedure(s).

1.   Type I Procedure (Administrative). A Type I decision is made by the Planning Official or designee, without public notice and without a public hearing. The Type I procedure is used when there are clear and objective approval criteria and applying City standards and criteria does not require the use of discretion.

2.   Type II Procedure (Administrative). A Type II decision is made by the Planning Official or person designated by the Planning Official following public notice. Appeal of a Type II decision is heard by the Hearings Officer.

3.   Type II-DR Procedure (Administrative). A Type II-DR decision is made by the Planning Official or person designated by the Planning Official following public notice. Appeal of a Type II-DR decision is heard by the Hearings Officer (with assistance from contract architect).

4.   Type III-PC Procedure (Quasi-Judicial). A Type III-PC decision is made by the Planning Commission after a public hearing, with appeals reviewed by the City Council.

5.   Type III-PC/CC Procedure (Quasi-Judicial). A Type III-PC/CC decision (e.g., Land Use/Comprehensive Plan Map Amendments under the City’s “one-map” system twenty (20) acres or above) is considered initially by the Planning Commission which makes a recommendation to the City Council.

6.   Type III-DRB and Type III-HO Procedures (Quasi-Judicial). A Type III-DRB decision is made by the Design Review Board after a public hearing. A Type III-HO decision is made by the Hearings Officer. Appeal of a Type III-DRB or Type III-HO decision is heard by the City Council.

7.   Type IV Procedure (Legislative). Type IV procedures apply to legislative matters. Legislative matters involve the creation, revision, or large-scale implementation of public policy initiated by the City (e.g., adoption of Comprehensive Plan amendments, adoption of ancillary documents to the Comprehensive Plan, land use regulations, government initiated changes to the Comprehensive Plan map/land use district map, etc.). Except for an expedited annexation, a Type IV decision is considered initially by the Planning Commission which makes a recommendation to the City Council. The final decision is made by the City Council.

C.  Official Action. All officials, departments, commissions and employees of the City vested with the authority to make decisions regarding the Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code, or issue permits, certificates or licenses, shall adhere to and require conformance with all applicable sections of all plans, codes and regulations with regard to land use in the City.

D.  Interpretation of this Chapter. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be construed as the minimum requirement for all promotion of the public safety, health, peace and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or annul any other covenants or agreements between private parties. However, from the effective date of this Land Development Code, all divisions and development of land shall conform to this chapter. When this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger space than is imposed or required by other codes, ordinances, rules, regulations, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.

E.  Conditional Approval. The following limitations apply to conditional approval of an application for a land use or limited land use permit:

1.   Conditions shall be fulfilled within the time limits set forth in the approval.

2.   The review authority may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, Land Development Code and other applicable review criteria including conditions necessary to insure the construction of transportation facilities described in the transportation system plan.

3.   A request for modifications of conditions may, at the City’s discretion, be processed as a new land use action.

4.   The City may require a guarantee or agreement, or both, between the City and the owner, and any contract purchasers.

5.   The City may refuse to grant approval for a development on land if a prior permit of any kind on the same land has not been complied with.

 

6.   Unless otherwise noted in the conditions of approval, the applicant or its successors and assigns shall bear the entire expense of compliance with the conditions imposed.

7.   The City may delay surface work (except for surveying and staking) on land if the City finds a danger of uncontrollable erosion exists, in the City’s opinion, that cannot be adequately controlled by present erosion control methods. No surface work other than surveying and staking on land having slopes of more than fifteen (15) percent shall be permitted during the months of November through April, inclusive.

F.  Legislative Comment. The City has experienced land washouts, flooding of downhill sites, turbidity of streams and damage to downhill properties as a result of surface work on land during heavy precipitation and during the months of November through April despite the best of erosion control measures. The City does not want to unreasonably delay development, but finds that controls on surface work are necessary in an effort to prevent the conditions described in this legislative comment. The City further notes that it has adopted the most recent iteration of the “Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan Technical Guidance Handbook” produced by Clackamas County. These erosion control measures represent latest efforts for erosion control, and although they have been applied in Happy Valley there have still been erosion control problems.

G.  Noncompliance. A violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any conditions of approval are subject to the enforcement and violations provisions provided in Sections 16.13.010 and 16.13.020. The City may withhold a certificate of occupancy until such time as the use or development is consistent with this chapter, including any conditions of approval required to assure compliance with this chapter.

 

Table 16.61.010-1 Summary of Approvals by Type of Review Procedure

 

 

Approvals1

Review Procedures

Applicable Regulations

Access Permit (public street)

Type I

Chapters 16.41, 16.62, 16.63; Engineering Standards

Annexation (non-expedited)

Type III-PC

Chapter 16.67

Annexation (expedited)

Type IV

Chapter16.67

Code Interpretation

Type I

Chapter 16.68

Comprehensive Plan Map/Land Use District Map Amendment

Less than 20 acres (applicant initiated): Type III-PC

20 acres or above (applicant initiated): Type III-PC-CC

City initiated: Type IV

Chapter 16.67, Comprehensive Plan

Conditional Use Permit

Type III-PC

Chapter 16.64

Design Review—Minor

Type I

Chapter 16.622

Design Review—Minor

Type II-PO

Chapter 16.622

Design Review—Minor

Type II-HO

Chapter 16.622

Design Review—Major

Type III-DRB

Chapter 16.622

Flood Plain Development Permit

Type I

Building Code

Home Occupation Permit

Type III-HO

Section 16.69.020

Land Use Review

Type I

Chapter 16.62, Building Code

Lot Line Adjustments and Lot Consolidations, including Re-Plat

Type I

Chapter 16.63

Lot of Record Determination

Type I

Chapter 16.72

Master Planned Development

Type III-PC

Chapter 16.65

Modification to Approval

Chapter 16.66

Minor

Type I/II

Major

Type II/III-HO

Environmental Review Permit

Type II

Chapters 16.32, 16.34, and 16.35

Nonconforming Use or Development Confirmation

Type I

Chapter 16.72

Partition

Type II

Chapter 16.63

Planned Unit Development (4—9 lots)

Type II

Chapter 16.63

Planned Unit Development (10—49 lots)

Type III-HO

Chapter 16.63

Planned Unit Development (50 lots or larger)

Type III-PC

Chapter 16.63

Plat or Easement Vacation or Re-Plat

Type I

Chapter 16.63

Sign Permit

Type I

Chapter 16.45

Public Right-of-Way Vacation

Type IV

Chapter 16.63

Subdivision (4—9 lots)

Type II

Chapter 16.63

Subdivision (10—49 lots)

Type III-HO

Chapter 16.63

Subdivision (50 lots or larger)

Type III-PC

Chapter 16.63

Temporary Use Permit

Type I

Section 16.69.010

Text Amendment

Type III-PC/CC/IV

Chapter 16.67

Tree Removal

Class A

Type I

Section 16.42.050

Class B

Type I

Section 16.42.050

Variance

Class A

Type I

Section 16.71.030

Class B

Type II

Section 16.71.040

Class C

Type III-PC

Section 16.71.050

NOTES:

1        The applicant may be required to obtain approvals from other agencies, such as a road authority or sewer district for some types of approvals. The City notifies agencies of applications that may affect their facilities or services.

2        For an explanation of the design benchmarks delineating these types of reviews, see Table 16.62.020-1.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.020 Type I procedure (administrative).
A.  Application Requirements.

1.   Application Forms. Type I applications shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Official or designee.

2.   Application Requirements. Type I applications shall:

a.     Include the information requested on the application form;

b.     Address the criteria in sufficient detail for review and action; and

c.     Be filed with the required fee.

 

B.  Administrative Decision Requirements. The Planning Official or designee’s decision shall address all of the approval criteria, including applicable requirements of any road authority. Based on the criteria and the facts contained within the record, the Planning Official or designee shall approve or deny the requested permit or action. A written record of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and kept on file at City Hall.

C.  Final Decision. A Type I decision is the final decision of the City. It cannot be appealed to City officials.

D.  Effective Date. A Type I decision is final on the date it is made. (Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.030 Type II procedure (administrative).
A.  Pre-application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for a Type II review. Pre-application conference requirements and procedures are described in Section 16.61.060.

B.  Application Requirements.

1.   Application Forms. Type II applications shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Official or designee.

2.   Submittal Information. The application shall:

a.     Include the information requested on the application form;

b.     Be filed with three copies of a narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision making. Note: additional information may be required under the specific application requirements for each approval, e.g., Chapters 16.62 (Land Use Review), 16.63 (Land Divisions), 16.66 (Modifications), 16.68 (Code Interpretations), and 16.69 (Miscellaneous Permits);

c.     Be accompanied by the required fee; and

d.     Include one set of mailing labels for all real property owners of record who will receive a notice of the application as required in Section 16.61.040. The records of the Clackamas County Assessor’s Office are the official records for determining ownership. The applicant shall prepare the public notice mailing list. The applicant shall use the most current County real property assessment records to produce the notice list. The City shall mail the notice of application.

C.  Notice of Application for Type II Administrative Decision.

1.   Before making a Type II Administrative Decision, the Planning Official or designee shall mail notice to:

a.     All property owners of record within three hundred (300) feet of the subject site;

b.     The owner of property within six hundred (600) feet of the subject site who submits a written request for notice;

c.     All City-recognized neighborhood groups or associations whose boundaries include the site;

d.     Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City. The City may notify other affected agencies; and

e.     Clackamas County, METRO, and the Oregon Department of Transportation when the proposed development abuts or affects agency’s transportation facility.

2.   At the request of the applicant, notice shall be provided to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development.

3.   The purpose of the notice is to give nearby property owners and other interested people the opportunity to submit written comments about the application before the Type II decision is made. The goal of this notice is to invite people to participate early in the decision-making process.

4.   Notice of a pending Type II administrative decision shall:

a.     Provide a twenty-one (21) day period for submitting written comments before a decision is made on the permit;

b.     List the relevant approval criteria by name and number of code sections;

c.     State the place, date and time the comments are due, and the person to whom the comments should be addressed;

d.     Include the name and telephone number of a contact person regarding the administrative decision;

e.     Describe the proposal and identify the specific permits or approvals requested;

f.      Describe the street address or other easily understandable reference to the location of the site;

g.     State that if any person fails to address the relevant approval criteria with enough detail, they may not be able to appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals or Circuit Court on that issue. Only comments on the relevant approval criteria are considered relevant evidence;

h.     State that all evidence relied upon by the Planning Official or designee to make this decision is in the public record, available for public review. Copies of this evidence can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the City;

i.      State that after the comment period closes, the Planning Official or designee shall issue a Type II administrative decision, and that the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to anyone else who submitted written comments or who is otherwise legally entitled to notice;

j.      Contain the following notice: “Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The City of Happy Valley Development Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser.”

D.  Administrative Decision Requirements. A Type II written decision shall address all of the relevant approval criteria and standards. Based upon the criteria, standards and the evidence in the record, the Planning Official or designee shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Alternatively, the Planning Official or the applicant may refer the application to the Hearings Officer for a public hearing, in which case the review shall follow the Type III procedures in Section 16.61.040, including payment of all applicable fees.

E.  Notice of Decision.

1.   Within five days after the Planning Official or designee signs the decision, a notice of decision shall be sent by mail to:

a.     The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the site that is the subject of the application;

b.     Any person who submits a written request to receive notice, or provides comments during the application-review period;

c.     Any City-recognized neighborhood group or association whose boundaries include the site; and

d.     Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City, and other agencies that were notified or provided comments during the application review period.

 

2.   The Planning Official or designee shall cause an affidavit of mailing the notice to be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall show the date the notice was mailed and shall demonstrate that the notice was mailed to the parties above and was mailed within the time required by law.

3.   The Type II notice of decision shall contain:

a.     A description of the applicant’s proposal and the City’s decision on the proposal (i.e., may be a summary);

b.     The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area, where applicable;

c.     A statement of where the City’s decision can be obtained;

d.     The date the decision shall become final, unless appealed;

e.     A statement that all persons entitled to notice may appeal the decision; and

f.      A statement briefly explaining how to file an appeal, the deadline for filing an appeal, and where to obtain further information concerning the appeal process.

4.   Posted Notice. In addition to any other notice, the applicant shall post the property subject to the application with at least one sign for every three hundred (300) feet of frontage. The sign shall be purchased from the City. Such sign shall remain continuously posted from at least fourteen (14) days prior to the end of the public written comment period or public hearing date, until the day after the final decision. A notarized statement of posting shall be submitted to the City recorder prior to the final decision. Failure to post the sign may result in invalidating the final decision.

F.  Final Decision and Effective Date. A Type II administrative decision is final for purposes of appeal, when it is mailed by the City. A Type II administrative decision is effective on the day after the appeal period expires. If an appeal is filed, the decision is effective when the appeal is decided.

G.  Appeal. A Type II administrative decision may be appealed to the Hearings Officer as follows:

1.   Who May Appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal a Type II administrative decision:

a.     The applicant or owner of the subject property;

b.     Any person who was entitled to written notice of the Type II administrative decision;

c.     Any other person who participated in the proceeding by submitting written comments.

2.   Appeal Filing Procedure.

a.     Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in subsection (G)(1), above, may appeal a Type II administrative decision by filing a notice of appeal according to the following procedures;

b.     Time for Filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Planning Official or designee within ten (10) days of the date the notice of decision was mailed;

c.     Content of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain:

i.      An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision;

ii.     A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal;

iii.    A statement explaining the specific issues being raised on appeal;

iv.    If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period;

v.     Filing fee.

3.   Scope of Appeal. Appeal of a Type II administrative decision shall be heard de novo before the Hearings Officer. The appeal is not limited to the record that was before the Planning Official. The Hearings Officer shall allow additional evidence, testimony or argument concerning any relevant standard, criterion, condition, or issue.

4.   Appeal Procedures. The notice, hearing procedures and decision process for a Type III decision shall be used for Type II administrative appeals, as provided in Section 16.61.040.

5.   Further Appeal to City Council. The Hearings Officer’s decision on appeal of a Type II administrative decision is the City’s final decision unless appealed to City Council. An appeal to City Council shall follow the same notice and hearing procedures as the hearing before the Hearings Officer. The City Council’s decision is final and effective on the date it is mailed by the City.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.035 Type II-DR procedure (administrative).
A.  Procedures. Except as noted below, Type II-DR applications shall follow the same procedures as Type II applications.

B.  Initial Appeal. A Type II-DR administrative decision may be appealed to the Design Review Board using the appeal procedures as for an appeal of a Type II decision.

C.  Appeal to the City Council. The Design Review Board’s decision on appeal of a Type II-DR administrative decision is the City’s final decision unless appealed to City Council. An appeal to the City Council shall follow the appeal procedures as an appeal of a Type II decision. The City Council’s decision is final and effective on the date it is mailed by the City. Appeal of a Type II-DR decision shall not be heard de novo before the City Council. The appeal is limited to the record that was before the Design Review Board. The City Council shall not allow additional evidence, testimony or argument concerning any relevant standard, criterion, condition, or issue. In limited circumstances involving the need to correct information or include information inadvertently omitted from the record by the City, the record may be re-opened by a vote of the City Council. In such limited circumstances, the City Council shall determine the scope to which the record shall be reopened. (Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.040 Type III-HO, Type III-PC and Type III-PC/CC procedure (quasi-judicial).
A.  Type III-HO, Type III-PC and Type III-PC/CC procedures apply to all quasi-judicial decisions that involve the use of discretion and include but are not limited to: non-expedited annexations; own-initiated Comprehensive Plan map/land use district map amendments or text amendments; minor Design Review; home occupation permits; Class C variances; major modifications; master plans; planned unit developments; expedited subdivisions; and conditional use permits. With the exception of an expedited annexation or Comprehensive Plan map/land use district map amendments, the public hearing for these applications occur before either the Planning Commission, Design Review Board or Hearings Officer as specified in Table 16.61.010-1.

1.   An expedited annexation is processed as an ordinance pursuant to the City’s Municipal Code. The City Council makes the final decision. The City Council is the only local review authority and shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny an expedited annexation request.

2.   For a master plan that is combined with a Comprehensive Plan map/land use district map amendment, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council is the final review authority.

B.  Pre-application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for all Type III applications. The requirements and procedures for a pre-application conference are described in Section 16.61.060(C).

C.  Application Requirements.

1.   Application Forms. Type III applications shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Official or designee; if a Type II application is referred to a Type III hearing, either voluntarily by the applicant or staff, or upon appeal, no new application is required.

2.   Submittal Information. When a Type III application is required, it shall:

a.     Include the information requested on the application form;

b.     Be filed with three copies of a narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision-making. Note: additional information may be required under the specific application requirements for each approval, e.g., Chapters 16.62 (Land Use Review), 16.63 (Land Divisions), 16.66 (Modifications), 16.68 (Code Interpretations), and 16.69 (Miscellaneous Permits);

c.     Be accompanied by the required fee; and

d.     Include one set of pre-addressed mailing labels for all real property owners of record who will receive a notice of the application as required in Subsection 16.61.040(D). The records of the Clackamas County Assessor’s Office are the official records for determining ownership. The applicant shall prepare the public notice mailing list. The applicant shall use the most current County real property assessment records to produce the notice list. The City shall mail the notice of application.

3.   Statement of Disclosure. All applications for annexations, Comprehensive Plan map/zoning map amendments, text amendments, variances, conditional use permits, subdivisions, planned unit developments, etc. and all appeals shall be accompanied by a statement of ownership or interest disclosure.

D.  Notice of Hearing.

1.   Mailed Notice. The City shall mail notice of a Type II or Type III hearing to the record owner of real property as shown in the records of the Clackamas County Assessor’s Office. Notice of a Type III hearing or Type II appeal hearing shall be given by the Planning Official or designee in the following manner:

a.     At least twenty-one (21) days before the hearing date, notice shall be mailed to:

i.      The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the property that is the subject of the application;

ii.     All property owners of record within three hundred (300) feet of the subject site;

iii.    An owner of real property within six hundred (600) feet of the subject site who submits a written request for notice;

iv.    Clackamas County, Clackamas Fire District No. 1 or its successor in interest, Sunrise Water Authority, Clackamas River Water or its successor in interest, school districts, public or private utility districts or agencies and any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City. The City may notify other affected agencies;

v.     The road authority, and rail authority and owner, when the proposed development abuts or affects their transportation facility;

vi.    The owner of an airport in the vicinity shall be notified in accordance with ORS 227.175 when the application proposes a zone change;

vii.   Any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the City Council and whose boundaries include the property proposed for development;

viii.  For an appeal, the applicant, the appellant and all persons who provided testimony in the original decision;

ix.    For a land use district change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175; and

x.     For expedited annexations, all interested and necessary parties, as defined by the Metro Code, shall be notified by mail.

b.     The Planning Official or designee shall have an affidavit of notice be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall state the date that the notice was mailed to the persons who must receive notice.

c.     At least fourteen (14) business days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The newspaper’s affidavit of publication of the notice shall be made part of the administrative record.

2.   Posted Notice. In addition to any other notice, the applicant shall post the property subject to the application with at least one sign for every three hundred (300) feet of frontage. The sign shall be purchased from the City. Such sign shall remain continuously posted from at least fourteen (14) days prior to the end of the public written comment period. A notarized statement of posting shall be submitted to the Planning Official or designee prior to the public hearing.

3.   Content of Notice. Notice of appeal of a Type II administrative decision or notice of a Type III hearing to be mailed and published pursuant to subsection (D)(1) above shall contain the following information:

a.     The nature of the application and the proposed land use or uses that could be authorized for the property;

 

b.     The applicable criteria and standards from the development code(s) that apply to the application;

c.     The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property;

d.     The date, time, and location of the public hearing;

e.     A statement that the failure to raise an issue in person, or by letter at the hearing, or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that an appeal based on that issue cannot be filed with the State Land Use Board of Appeals;

f.      The name of a City representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information on the application may be obtained;

g.     A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or for the applicant, and the applicable criteria and standards can be reviewed at Happy Valley City Hall at no cost and that copies shall be provided at a reasonable cost;

h.     A statement that a copy of the City’s staff report and recommendation to the hearings body shall be available for review at no cost at least seven days before the hearing, and that a copy shall be provided on request at a reasonable cost;

i.      A general explanation of the requirements to submit testimony, and the procedure for conducting public hearings; and

j.      The following notice: “Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The City of City of Happy Valley Development Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser.”

E.  Conduct of the Public Hearing.

1.   At the commencement of the hearing, the review body shall state:

a.     The applicable approval criteria and standards that apply to the application or appeal;

b.     That testimony and evidence shall concern the approval criteria described in the staff report, or other criteria in the Comprehensive Plan or land use regulations that the person testifying believes to apply to the decision and that the applicant must raise any constitutional objections on the record (or they cannot be raised on appeal);

c.     That failure to raise an issue with sufficient detail to give the hearings body and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that no appeal may be made to the City Council or State Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue;

d.     Before the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any participant may ask for an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing. The hearings body shall grant the request by scheduling a date to finish the hearing (a “continuance”), or by leaving the record open for additional written evidence or testimony;

e.     The City shall allow the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons to submit final written arguments in support of the application, unless the applicant expressly waives this right. The applicant’s final submittal may not include any new evidence.

2.   If the review body grants a continuance, the hearing shall be continued to a date, time, and place at least seven days after the date of the prior hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at the subsequent hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the second hearing, any person may request, before the conclusion of the second hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days, so that they can submit additional written evidence or testimony in response to the new written evidence.

3.   If the review body leaves the record open for additional written evidence or testimony, the record shall be left open for at least seven days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the City in writing for an opportunity to respond to new evidence submitted during the period that the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the review body shall reopen the record.

a.     When the review body reopens the record to admit new evidence or testimony, any person may raise new issues that relate to that new evidence or testimony.

b.     An extension of the hearing or record granted pursuant to Subsection 16.61.040(E) is subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178 (“120-day rule”), unless the continuance or extension is requested or agreed to by the applicant.

c.     The record shall contain all testimony, evidence and argument that is submitted to the City and that the hearings body has not rejected.

d.     In making its decision, the hearings body may take notice of facts not in the hearing record (e.g., local, state, or Federal regulations; previous City decisions; case law). The review authority must announce its intention to take notice of such facts in its deliberations, and allow persons who previously participated in the hearing to request the hearing record be reopened, if necessary, to present evidence concerning the noticed facts.

4.   Participants in the appeal of a Type II administrative decision or participants in a Type III hearing are entitled to an impartial review and decision.

a.     At the beginning of the public hearing, a member of the review body shall disclose the substance of any ex parte contacts (as defined in Subsection 16.61.040(E)(9) below). The member shall state whether the contact has impaired the member’s impartiality or ability to vote on the matter and shall participate or abstain accordingly.

b.     A member of the review body shall not participate in any proceeding in which the member, or any of the following, has a direct or substantial financial interest: the member’s spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, partner, any business in which the member is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the hearing where the action is being taken.

c.     Disqualification of a member of the review body due to ex parte contacts, bias or a conflict of interest may be ordered by a majority of the members present and voting. The member who is the subject of the motion may not vote on the motion to disqualify.

d.     If, due to abstaining or disqualification, a quorum of the Planning Commission is not obtainable, the City Council shall be the review body. If all members of the City Council abstain or are disqualified, a quorum of those City Council members present who declare their reasons for abstention or disqualification shall be re-qualified to make a decision.

e.     Any member of the public may raise conflict of interest issues prior to or during the hearing and the member of the hearings body shall reply in accordance with this section.

5.   Ex Parte Communications.

a.     Members of the review body shall not:

i.      Communicate directly or indirectly with any applicant, appellant, other party to the proceedings, or representative of a party about any issue involved in a hearing without giving notice as provided in subsection C above;

ii.     Take official notice of any communication, report, or other materials outside the record prepared by the proponents or opponents in connection with the particular case, unless all participants are given the opportunity to respond.

b.     A decision or action of the review body shall not be invalid due to ex parte contacts or bias resulting from ex parte contacts, if the person receiving contact:

i.      Places in the record the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications concerning the decision or action; and

ii.     Makes a public announcement of the content of the communication and of all participants’ right to dispute the substance of the communication made. This announcement shall be made at the first hearing following the communication during which action shall be considered or taken on the subject of the communication.

c.     A communication between City staff and the review body is not considered an ex parte contact.

6.   Presenting and Receiving Evidence.

a.     The review body may set reasonable time limits for oral presentations and may limit or exclude cumulative, repetitious or irrelevant testimony or evidence;

b.     Oral testimony shall not be accepted after the close of the public hearing. Written testimony may be received after the close of the public hearing, only as provided in Subsection 16.61.040(E);

c.     Members of the review body may visit the property and the surrounding area, and may use information obtained during the site visit to support their decision, if the information relied upon is disclosed at the beginning of the hearing and an opportunity is provided to dispute the evidence.

F.  The Decision Process.

1.   Basis for Decision. Approval or denial of an appeal of a Type II administrative decision or of a Type III application shall be based on standards and criteria in this Development Code. The standards and criteria shall relate approval or denial of a discretionary development permit application to the development regulations and, when appropriate, to the Comprehensive Plan for the area in which the development would occur and to the development regulations and Comprehensive Plan for the City as a whole.

2.   Findings and Conclusions. Approval or denial shall be based upon the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision. The written decision shall explain the relevant criteria and standards, state the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and justify the decision according to the criteria, standards, and facts.

3.   Form of Decision. The review body shall issue a final written order containing the findings and conclusions stated in subsection (F)(2). The order shall either approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. The review body may also issue appropriate intermediate rulings when more than one permit or decision is required.

4.   Decision-Making Time Limits. The final order for a Type II administrative appeal or Type III application shall be filed with the Planning Official or designee within ten (10) business days after the close of the public record.

5.   Notice of Decision. Written notice of a Type II administrative appeal decision or a Type III application decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to all participants of record within ten (10) business days after the hearings body decision. Failure of a person to receive mailed notice shall not invalidate the decision provided a good faith attempt was made to mail the notice.

6.   Final Decision and Effective Date. The decision of the hearings body on any Type II appeal or any Type III application is final for purposes of appeal on the date it is mailed by the City. The decision is effective on the day after the appeal period expires. If an appeal is filed, the decision becomes effective on the day after the appeal is decided by the City Council.

G.  Appeal. A Type III decision may be appealed to the City Council as follows.

1.   Who May Appeal. The following people may appeal a Type III decision:

a.     The applicant or owner of the subject property;

b.     Any person who was entitled to written notice of the Type III decision;

c.     Staff or any other person who participated or appeared in the proceeding by either written or oral communication.

2.   Appeal Filing Procedure.

a.     Notice of Appeal. A person may appeal a Type III decision by filing a notice of appeal according to the following procedures;

b.     Time for Filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Planning Official or designee within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice of decision was mailed;

c.     Content of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain:

i.      An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision;

ii.     A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal;

iii.    A statement specifying the issues being raised on appeal;

iv.    If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period;

v.     The filing fee.

3.   Scope of Appeal. Appeal of Type III decisions shall not be heard de novo before the City Council. The appeal is limited to the record that was before the review body. The City Council shall not allow additional evidence, testimony or argument concerning any relevant standard, criterion, condition, or issue. In limited circumstances involving the need to correct information or include information inadvertently omitted from the record by the City, the record may be re-opened by a vote of the City Council. In such limited circumstances, the City Council shall determine the scope to which the record shall be reopened.

4.   Appeal Procedures. The notification and hearings procedures for Type III applications on appeal to the City Council shall be the same as for the initial hearing.

5.   Further Appeal of the City Council’s Decision. The decision of the City Council on an appeal is final and effective on the date it is signed on behalf of the City Council. The City Council’s decision may be appealed to the State Land Use Board of Appeals as provided by law.

(Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.045 Type III-DR procedure (quasi-judicial).
A.  Procedures. Except as noted below, Type III-DR applications shall follow the same procedures as Type III applications. For a Type III-DRB hearing, if sufficient members of the Design Review Board abstain or are disqualified such that the Board cannot achieve a quorum, the City Council shall be the hearing body. If sufficient members of the City Council abstain or are disqualified such that the Council cannot achieve a quorum, a quorum of those City Council members present who declare their reasons for abstention or disqualification shall make the decision. For a Type III-HO hearing, if the Hearings Officer has a conflict or otherwise cannot participate in the hearing, the hearing shall be conducted by an alternate Hearings Officer.

B.  Appeal. A Type III-DR quasi-judicial decision may be appealed to the City Council using the appeal procedures as for an appeal of a Type III decision. (Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.050 Type IV procedure (legislative).
A.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for all Type IV applications initiated by a party other than the City of Happy Valley. The requirements and procedures for a pre-application conference are described in Section 16.61.060(C).

B.  Application Requirements.

1.   Application Forms. Type IV applications shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Official or designee.

2.   Submittal Information. The application shall contain:

a.     The information requested on the application form;

b.     A map and/or plan addressing the appropriate criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision (as applicable);

c.     The required fee; and

d.     Three copies of a letter or narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant approval criteria and standards.

C.  Notice of Hearing.

1.   Required Hearings. A minimum of two hearings, one before the Planning Commission and one before the City Council, are required for all Type IV applications.

2.   Notification Requirements. Notice of public hearings for the request shall be given by the Planning Official or designee in the following manner:

a.     At least twenty (20) days, but not more than forty (40) days, before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to amend the Comprehensive Plan or any element thereof, or to adopt an ordinance that proposes to rezone property, a notice shall be prepared in conformance with ORS 227.186 and mailed to:

i.      The record owner of real property as shown on the County tax roll that will be rezoned in order to implement the ordinance (including owners of property subject to a Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be notified if a zone change would be required to implement the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment);

ii.     Any affected governmental agency;

iii.    The owner of real property as shown on the County tax roll within six hundred (600) feet of the area to be rezoned who submits a written request for notice;

iv.    For a zone change affecting a manufactured home or mobilehome park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175;

v.     The owner of an airport shall be notified of a proposed zone change in accordance with ORS 227.175.

b.     At least ten (10) days before the scheduled Planning Commission public hearing date, and fourteen (14) days before the City Council hearing date, public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.

c.     The Planning Official or designee shall:

i.      For each mailing of notice, file an affidavit of mailing in the record as provided by subsection (C)(1)(a) of this section; and

ii.     For each published notice, file in the record the affidavit of publication in a newspaper that is required in subsection (C)(1)(b) of this section.

d.     The Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) shall be notified in writing of proposed Comprehensive Plan and Development Code amendments at least thirty-five (35) days before the first public hearing at which public testimony or new evidence will be received. The notice to DLCD shall include a DLCD Certificate of Mailing.

e.     Notifications for annexation shall follow the provisions of this chapter.

3.   Content of Notices. The mailed and published notices shall include the following information:

a.     The number and title of the file containing the application, and the address and telephone number of the Planning Official or designee’s office where additional information about the application can be obtained;

b.     The proposed site location;

c.     A description of the proposed site and the proposal in enough detail for people to determine what change is proposed, and the place where all relevant materials and information may be obtained or reviewed;

 

d.     The time(s), place(s), and date(s) of the public hearing(s); a statement that public oral or written testimony is invited; and a statement that the hearing will be held under this title and rules of procedure adopted by the Council and available at City Hall; and

 

e.     Each mailed notice required by Section 16.61.050(C) shall contain the following statement: “Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The City of Happy Valley Land Development Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser.”

4.   Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate the action, providing:

a.     Personal notice is deemed given where the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service;

b.     Published notice is deemed given on the date it is published.

D.  Hearing Process and Procedure.

1.   Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the City Council:

a.     The presiding officer of the Planning Commission and of the City Council shall have the authority to:

i.      Regulate the course, sequence, and decorum of the hearing;

ii.     Direct procedural requirements or similar matters; and

iii.    Impose reasonable time limits for oral presentations.

b.     No person shall address the Commission or the Council without:

i.      Receiving recognition from the presiding officer; and

ii.     Stating their full name and address.

c.     Disruptive conduct such as applause, cheering, or display of signs shall be cause for expulsion of a person or persons from the hearing, termination or continuation of the hearing, or other appropriate action determined by the presiding officer.

2.   Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedures adopted by the Council, the presiding officer of the Planning Commission, Design Review Board and of the Council shall conduct the hearing as follows:

a.     The presiding officer shall begin the hearing with a statement of the nature of the matter before the body, a general summary of the procedures, a summary of the standards for decision-making, and whether the decision which will be made is a recommendation to the City Council or the final decision of the Council;

b.     The Planning Official or designee’s report and other applicable staff reports shall be presented;

c.     The public shall be invited to testify;

d.     The public hearing may be continued to allow additional testimony or it may be closed; and

e.     The body’s deliberation may include questions to the staff, comments from the staff, and inquiries directed to any person present.

E.  Continuation of the Public Hearing. The Planning Commission or the City Council may continue any hearing, and no additional notice of hearing shall be required if the matter is continued to a specified place, date, and time.

F.  Decision-Making Criteria. The recommendation by the Planning Commission and the decision by the City Council shall be based on the following factors:

1.   Approval of the request is consistent with the Statewide planning goals;

2.   Approval of the request is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and any pertinent ancillary documents or plans adopted by the City; and

3.   The property and affected area is presently provided with adequate public facilities, services and transportation networks to support the use, or such facilities, services and transportation networks are planned to be provided concurrently with the development of the property.

G.  Approval Process and Authority.

1.   The Planning Commission shall:

a.     After notice and a public hearing, vote on and prepare a recommendation to the City Council to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative; and

b.     Within fourteen (14) business days of determining a recommendation, the presiding officer shall sign the written recommendation, and it shall be filed with the Planning Official or designee.

2.   Any member of the Planning Commission who votes in opposition to the Planning Commission’s majority recommendation may file a written statement of opposition with the Planning Official or designee before the Council public hearing on the proposal. The Planning Official or designee shall send a copy to each Council member and place a copy in the record;

3.   If the Planning Commission fails to adopt a recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative proposal within sixty (60) days of its first public hearing on the proposed change, the Planning Official or designee shall:

a.     Report the failure together with the proposed change to the City Council; and

b.     Provide notice and put the matter on the City Council’s agenda for the City Council to hold a public hearing make a decision. No further action shall be taken by the Commission.

4.   The City Council shall:

a.     Approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny, or adopt an alternative to an application for legislative change, or remand the application to the Planning Commission for rehearing and reconsideration on all or part of the application;

b.     Consider the recommendation of the Planning Commission; however, the City Council is not bound by the Commission’s recommendation; and

c.     Act by ordinance, which shall be signed by the Mayor after the Council’s adoption of the ordinance.

H.  Vote Required for a Legislative Change.

1.   A vote by a majority of the qualified voting members of the Planning Commission present is required for a recommendation for approval, approval with modifications, approval with conditions, denial or adoption of an alternative.

2.   A vote by a majority of the qualified members of the City Council present is required to decide any motion made on the proposal.

I.   Notice of Decision. Notice of a Type IV decision shall be mailed to the applicant, all participants of record, and the Department of Land Conservation and Development, within five business days after the City Council decision is filed with the Planning Official or designee. The City shall also provide notice to all persons as required by other applicable laws.

J.   Final Decision and Effective Date. A Type IV decision, if approved, shall take effect and shall become final as specified in the enacting ordinance, or if not approved, upon mailing of the notice of decision to the applicant.

K.  Record of the Public Hearing.

1.   A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by stenographic, mechanical, or electronic means. It is not necessary to transcribe an electronic record. The minutes and other evidence presented as a part of the hearing shall be part of the record.

2.   All exhibits received and displayed shall be marked to provide identification and shall be part of the record.

3.   The official record shall include:

a.     All materials considered by the hearings body;

b.     All materials submitted by the Planning Official or designee to the hearings body regarding the application;

c.     The verbatim record made by the stenographic, mechanical, or electronic means; the minutes of the hearing; and other documents considered;

d.     The final ordinance;

e.     All correspondence; and

f.      A copy of the notices that were given as required by this chapter.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.060 General provisions—120-day rule; time computation; pre-application conferences; acceptance and review; planning official’s duties, amended applications; re-submittal; reconsiderations.
A.  120-day Rule. The City shall take final action on Type I—III applications, including resolution of all appeals, within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the application is deemed complete, unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. Any exceptions to this rule shall conform to the provisions of ORS 227.178.

B.  Time Computation. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday or legal holiday, including Sunday, in which event, the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday or legal holiday.

C.  Pre-application Conference.

1.   Participants. When a pre-application conference is required, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Official or his/her designee(s) and other parties as appropriate.

2.   Submittal Requirements. At the time of the pre-application conference, the developer applicant shall submit sketches, drawings, plans and descriptions as may be necessary to convey the following information to staff. This information shall be presented informally and shall not be used for the purposes of making any decisions or obtaining any commitment from the City, or the applicant.

a.     Proposed land use and densities;

b.     Building types;

c.     Circulation pattern;

d.     Open space and recreation facilities;

e.     Existing features, both natural and manmade;

f.      Available services and facilities, including sanitary and storm sewers, water, natural gas, mass transit, schools, police protection, fire protection and other pertinent and appropriate services and facilities;

g.     Land dedication or fees in lieu of dedication.

3.   Information Provided. Based on the information provided by the applicant, the Planning Official or designee at the pre-application conference shall:

a.     Reasonably identify the Comprehensive Plan/Zoning Map designations/districts applicable to the proposal;

b.     Cite the ordinance provisions, including substantive and procedural requirements applicable to the proposal;

c.     Provide available technical data and assistance that will aid the applicant;

d.     Identify other governmental policies and regulations that relate to the application; and

e.     Reasonably identify other opportunities or constraints concerning the application.

4.   Disclaimer. Failure of the Planning Official or designee to provide any of the information required by this subsection C shall not constitute a waiver of any of the standards, criteria or requirements for the application.

5.   Changes in the Law. Due to possible changes in Federal, State, regional, and local law, the applicant is responsible for ensuring that the application complies with all applicable laws on the day the application is deemed complete.

D.  Acceptance and Review of Applications.

1.   Initiation of Applications.

a.     Applications for approval under this chapter may be initiated by:

i.      Order of City Council;

ii.     Resolution of the Planning Commission;

iii.    The Planning Official or designee;

iv.    A record owner of property (person(s) whose name is on the most recently recorded deed), or contract purchaser with written permission from the record owner.

b.     Any person authorized to submit an application for approval may be represented by an agent authorized in writing to make the application on their behalf.

2.   Consolidation of Proceedings. When an applicant applies for more than one type of land use or development permit (e.g., Type II and III) for the same one or more parcels of land, the proceedings may be consolidated for review and decision at the discretion of the City.

a.     For Type I—III applications, if more than one approval authority would be required to decide the applications if submitted separately, a consolidated decision shall be made by the approval authority with jurisdiction over one of the applications in the following order: the City Council, the Planning Commission, Hearings Officer or the Planning Official or designee. When proceedings are consolidated:

i.      The notice shall identify each application to be decided;

ii.     An application that is dependent on approval of a higher ranking application shall follow the higher-ranking decisions. For example, a Comprehensive Plan map amendment/zone change must proceed a subdivision or PUD approval; and

iii.    Combined findings and decisions may be made on each application.

b.     Type II-DR appeals and Type III applications shall be heard by the Planning Commission, Hearings Officer or Design Review Board (as applicable); however, when an applicant applies for more than one type of land use or development permit (e.g., Type III and III-DR) for the same one or more parcels of land, the proceedings for review and decision shall be processed consecutively, with the non-design review applications occurring first. For example, a Type III conditional use permit before the Hearings Officer shall precede a Type III-DR development application.

3.   Check for acceptance and completeness. In reviewing an application for completeness, the following procedure shall be used:

a.     Acceptance. When an application is received by the City, the Planning Official or designee shall immediately determine whether the following essential items are present. If the following items are not present, the application shall not be accepted and shall be immediately returned to the applicant:

i.      The required form;

ii.     The required fee;

iii.    The signature of the applicant on the required form and signed written authorization of the property owner of record if the applicant is not the owner.

b.     Completeness.

i.      Review and Notification. After the application is accepted, the Planning Official or designee shall review the application for completeness. If the application is incomplete, the Planning Official or designee shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly what information is missing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application and allow the applicant one hundred eighty (180) days from first submittal, to submit the missing information, or to submit a refusal statement;

ii.     Application Deemed Complete for Review. In accordance with the application submittal requirements of this chapter, the application shall be deemed complete upon the receipt by the Planning Official or designee of all required information. The applicant shall have the option of withdrawing the application, or refusing to submit information requested by the Planning Official or designee in Section 16.61.060(D)(3)(b)(1), above. For the refusal to be valid, the refusal shall be made in writing and received by the Planning Official or designee no later than fourteen (14) days after the date on the Planning Official or designee’s letter of incompleteness. If the applicant refuses in writing to submit the missing information, the application shall be deemed complete on the 31st day after the Planning Official or designee first accepted the application.

iii.    Standards and Criteria that Apply to the Application. Approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and criteria that were applicable at the time it was first accepted.

iv.    Coordinated Review. The City shall also submit the application for review and comment to the City Engineer, road authority, and other applicable County, State, and Federal review agencies.

4.   Changes or Additions to the Application During the Review Period. Once an application is deemed complete:

a.     All documents and other evidence relied upon by the applicant shall be submitted to the Planning Official or designee at least seven days before the notice of action or hearing is mailed, if possible. Documents or other evidence submitted after that date shall be received by Planning Official or designee, and transmitted to the hearings body, but may be too late to include with the staff report and evaluation.

b.     When documents or other evidence are submitted by the applicant during the review period but after the application is deemed complete, the assigned review person or body shall determine whether or not the new documents or other evidence submitted by the applicant significantly change the application.

c.     If the assigned reviewer determines that the new documents or other evidence significantly change the application, the reviewer shall include a written determination that a significant change in the application has occurred as part of the decision. In the alternate, the reviewer may inform the applicant either in writing, or orally at a public hearing, that such changes may constitute a significant change (see “d”, below), and allow the applicant to withdraw the new materials submitted, in order to avoid a determination of significant change.

d.     If the applicant’s new materials are determined to constitute a significant change in an application that was previously deemed complete, the City shall take one of the following actions, at the choice of the applicant:

i.      Continue to process the existing application and allow the applicant to submit a new second application with the proposed significant changes. Both the old and the new applications will proceed, but each will be deemed complete on different dates and may therefore be subject to different criteria and standards and different decision dates;

ii.     Suspend the existing application and allow the applicant to submit a new application with the proposed significant changes. Before the existing application can be suspended, the applicant must consent in writing to waive the 120-day rule (Section 16.61.060(A) above) on the existing application. If the applicant does not consent, the City shall not select this option;

iii.    Reject the new documents or other evidence that has been determined to constitute a significant change, and continue to process the existing application without considering the materials that would constitute a significant change. The City will complete its decision‑making process without considering the new evidence.

e.     If a new application is submitted by the applicant, that application shall be subject to a separate check for acceptance and completeness and will be subject to the standards and criteria in effect at the time the new application is accepted.

E.  Planning Official’s Duties. The Planning Official or designee shall:

1.   Prepare application forms based on the criteria and standards in applicable state law, the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and implementing ordinance provisions;

2.   Accept all development applications that comply with Section 16.61.060;

3.   Prepare a staff report that summarizes the application(s) and applicable decision criteria, and provides findings of conformance and/or nonconformance with the criteria. The staff report may also provide a recommended decision of: approval, denial, or approval with specific conditions that ensure conformance with the approval criteria;

4.   Prepare a notice of the proposed decision:

a.     In the case of an application subject to a Type I—III review process, the Planning Official or designee shall make the staff report and/or decision and all case-file materials available at the time that the notice of the decision is issued,

b.     In the case of an application subject to a public hearing, the Planning Official or designee shall make the staff report available to the public at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing date, and make the case-file materials available when notice of the hearing is mailed, as provided by this title;

5.   Administer the hearings process;

6.   File notice of the final decision in the City’s records and mail a copy of the notice of the final decision to the applicant, all persons who provided comments or testimony, persons who requested copies of the notice; and any other persons entitled to notice by law;

7.   Maintain and preserve the file for each application for the time period required by law. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice given; the affidavits of notice, the application and all supporting information; the staff report; the final decision including the findings, conclusions and conditions, if any; all correspondence; minutes of any meeting at which the application was considered; and any other exhibit, information or documentation which was considered by the decision-maker(s) on the application; and

8.   Administer the appeals and review process.

F.  Amended Decision Process.

1.   The purpose of an amended decision process is to allow the Planning Official or designee to correct typographical errors, rectify inadvertent omissions and/or make other minor changes that do not materially alter the decision.

2.   The Planning Official or designee may issue an amended decision after the notice of final decision has been issued but before the appeal period has expired. If such a decision is amended, the decision shall be issued within fourteen (14) business days after the original decision would have become final, but in no event beyond the one hundred twenty (120) day period required by state law. A new ten (10) day appeal period shall begin on the day the amended decision is issued.

3.   Notice of an amended decision shall be given using the same mailing and distribution list as for the original decision notice.

4.   Modifications to approved plans or conditions of approval requested by the applicant shall follow the procedures in Chapter 16.66. All other changes to decisions that are not modifications under Chapter 16.66 follow the appeal process.

G.  Re-submittal of Application Following Denial. An application that has been denied, or an application that was denied and on appeal or review has not been reversed by a higher authority, including the Land Use Board of Appeals, the Land Conservation and Development Commission or the courts, may not be resubmitted as the same or a substantially similar proposal for the same land for a period of at least twelve (12) months from the date the final City action is made denying the application, unless there is substantial change in the facts or a change in City policy that would change the outcome, as determined by the Planning Official or designee.

H.  Appeal Process. An appeal shall be to a de novo hearing using the Type III procedure described in Section 16.61.040. The appeal shall not be limited to the application materials, evidence or specific issues raised in the proceeding below. The Hearings Officer, Planning Commission or City Council may allow additional evidence, testimony, or argument concerning any standard, criterion, condition, or issue relevant to the original application.

I.   Reconsideration of Permit Approvals.

1.   Purpose. The ability to reconsider publicly a land use or limited land use approval provides an opportunity to determine if the use or development is in compliance with this chapter. It also allows for clarification of prior land use approvals. As part of this reconsideration, the ability to add new conditions or revoke the approval provides a strong enforcement mechanism and/or an opportunity to improve the terms of the development.

2.   Situations When Permit Approvals May Be Reconsidered. All quasi-judicial land use and limited land use approvals and master plans, except plan amendments and zone changes, and those uses that become conditional uses or nonconforming uses due to a change of zoning regulations, mapping or annexation, may be reconsidered upon a request by the City Manager to the City Council. A decision may be reconsidered by the City Council if there is evidence of any of the following:

a.     One or more conditions of the approval have not been implemented or have been violated;

b.     The activities of the use, or the use itself, are substantially different from what was approved;

c.     The use is subject to the conditional use or nonconforming use regulations, has not been subject to a conditional use or nonconforming use review, and has substantially changed its activities. or substantially increased the intensity of its operations since it became a conditional use or a nonconforming use;

d.     When the City and the applicant agree that the approval terms and/or conditions can be improved; and

e.     Reconsideration will not cause the City to violate the deadline for a final local decision (i.e., the “120-day” deadline), including any extensions requested by the applicant.

3.   Initiating the Reconsideration. The City Manager and designee may initiate a reconsideration if there is substantial evidence that one of the situations described applies to the use or development. The evidence relied on shall be made part of the record. The reconsideration may be initiated any time after thirty (30) days have passed from the first notice of violation pursuant to subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) in the preceding paragraph.

4.   Procedure for Reconsideration by Review Authority.

a.     After initiation, the reconsideration is processed using the public hearings procedure. An application does not have to be submitted, a preapplication conference is not required, and a fee shall not be charged.

b.     The review authority shall be the City Council.

c.     Notice.

i.      The property owner, applicant or operator of the site shall be notified that the reconsideration process has been initiated. This notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled hearing. Written comments from the property owner, applicant, or operator shall be received fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing date to be included in the staff report.

ii.     Additional Public Notice. In addition to people who are mailed notice pursuant to the public hearing procedure requirements, people who have complained or otherwise provided comment or input in writing about the use or development shall also be mailed notice of the hearing.

5.   Possible Actions at the Reconsideration Hearing. Depending on the situation, the review authority may take any of the actions described below. The review authority may not approve the new use or one more intense than originally approved unless the possibility of this change has been stated in the public notice:

a.     Uses or development which are alleged to have not fulfilled conditions or are alleged to be different from what was approved or which violate conditions are subject to the following actions:

i.      The review authority may find that the use or development is complying with the conditions of the approval. In this case, the use or development is allowed to continue.

ii.     The review authority may find that the use or development does not fully comply with the conditions of approval, but that the violations are not substantial enough to warrant revocation, and that the use can comply with the original approval criteria if the conditions are met. In this case, the review authority may modify the existing conditions, add new conditions to ensure compliance with the approval criteria, and refer the case to the City Manager for enforcement of the existing conditions.

iii.    The review authority may revoke the approval if it finds that there are substantial violations of conditions or failure to implement conditions of prior land use decisions, such that the original approval criteria for the use or development are not being met.

b.     Where the City Manager and the applicant convince the review authority that the development terms can be improved and the review authority so finds, the review authority may modify the terms of development approval.

J.   Reconsideration of Conditional and Nonconforming Uses. Conditional uses and nonconforming uses that have not been subject to a land use review by the City are subject to the following actions:

1.   The review authority may find that the use and its activities, including its intensity, are consistent with what was on the site at the time it became a conditional or nonconforming use. In this case, the use may continue.

2.   The review authority may find that the use and its activities are substantially different from what was on the site at the time it became a conditional use or nonconforming use and that the differences do not comply with the current approval criteria for the site. In this case, the review authority may apply conditions or restrictions or require an application for a development permit to ensure that the differences comply with the approval criteria.

K.  Enforcement of Revocation. In the event that the land use or limited land use approval is revoked, the use or development becomes illegal. The use or development shall be terminated within thirty (30) days of the date the revocation final order is signed by the City Council, unless the decision provides otherwise. Revocation actions are appealable pursuant to land use decision appeals. The filing of an appeal shall stay the revocation action but not any other action taken by the City.

L.  Use of New Regulations or Mapping. Applications shall not be accepted for building permits or land use reviews based on plan amendments, zone changes or land use regulations that have been approved but are not yet effective. However, preapplication conferences may be requested and held.

M. Prior Conditions of Land Use Approvals.

1.   Incorporating Prior Conditions of Land Use Actions. Over time, there are instances when uses or development previously approved with conditions are subject to new zoning regulations. This may result from a change of the content of zoning regulations or from legislative zone changes including annexation rezonings. This subsection addresses situations where a use or development was approved with conditions as a part of a land use or limited land use review under zoning regulations that no longer apply to the site. The regulations stated below apply to all prior conditions of approval unless the conditions of approval or the ordinance adopting the conditions specifically refer to the situations outlined below and provide for the continuance of the conditions. In that instance, the conditions of approval will continue to apply.

2.   Zone Changes. If a site is subject to conditions as the result of a zone change, the conditions continue to apply if the site is rezoned to a comparable zone as part of an annexation rezoning or as part of a legislative remapping.

3.   Conditional Uses.

a.     An Allowed Conditional Use. If a use was an approved conditional use under the prior regulations, and is a conditional use under the new regulations pertaining to the site, any conditions of approval shall continue to apply.

 

b.     Use Allowed Outright. If the use is a permitted use, the conditions of approval shall continue to apply.

c.     Use No Longer Allowed. If the use was a conditional use without an expiration date and is no longer allowed, it becomes a nonconforming use under the new regulations, and shall continue to meet the conditions, as well as the nonconforming use regulations.

4.   Variances. If the variance was to a standard or regulation which is now allowed, and the development on the site conforms with the current regulations, then the prior variance conditions of approval no longer apply.

5.   Other Land Use Actions. If the use or development was approved with conditions under a review which is no longer in effect on the site, the conditions continue to apply.

(Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.070 Special procedures.
A.  Expedited Land Divisions. An expedited land division (“ELD”) shall be defined and may be used as provided under ORS 197.360 through 197.380.

1.   Selection. An applicant who wishes to use an ELD procedure for a partition, subdivision or planned development instead of the regular procedure type assigned to it, must request the use of the ELD in writing at the time the application is filed, or forfeit the right to use it.

2.   Review Procedure. All applications for expedited land divisions shall comply with ORS 197.360 through 197.380 and the Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan. ORS 197.360 through ORS 197.380 details the criteria, application and notice requirements, and action and appeal procedures for expedited land divisions.

3.   Appeal Procedure. An appeal of an ELD shall follow the procedures in ORS 197.375. Where the City has not otherwise appointed a hearings officer (referee) for such appeals, and the City Attorney is a Contractor (not a City employee), the City Attorney shall serve as the referee for ELD appeals.

B.  [Reserved for other special procedures, as may be adopted]. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.080 Neighborhood meetings.
Applicants filing Type II or Type III applications are encouraged to meet with adjacent property owners and neighborhood representatives prior to submitting their application to the City in order to solicit input and exchange information about the proposed development. Applicants are encouraged to hold a neighborhood meeting with a recognized neighborhood or community organization. If no organization exists, then the applicant may hold a meeting with adjacent property owners who will receive public notice (a minimum three hundred (300) foot radius from subject property). (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.61.090 Traffic impact studies.
The purpose of this section of the code is to assist in determining which road authorities participate in land use decisions, and to implement Section 660-012-0045(2)(e) of the State Transportation Planning Rule that requires the City to adopt a process to apply conditions to development proposals in order to minimize impacts and protect transportation facilities. This chapter establishes the standards for when a proposal must be reviewed for potential traffic impacts; when a traffic impact study must be submitted with a development application in order to determine whether conditions are needed to minimize impacts to and protect transportation facilities; what must be in a traffic impact study; and who is qualified to prepare the study.

A.  When a Traffic Impact Study is Required. The City or other road authority with jurisdiction may require a traffic impact study (TIS) as part of an application for development, a change in use, or a change in access. A TIS shall be required when a land use application involves one or more of the following actions:

1.   A change in zoning or a plan amendment designation;

2.   Any proposed development or land use action that a road authority states may have operational or safety concerns along its facility(ies);

3.   An increase in site traffic volume generation. Increase in site traffic volume generation shall be subject to the City’s transportation impact study guidelines;

4.   An increase in peak hour volume of a particular movement to and from the State highway by twenty (20) percent or more;

5.   An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding the twenty thousand (20,000) pound gross vehicle weights by ten (10) vehicles or more per day;

6.   The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering or leaving the property are restricted, or such vehicles queue or hesitate on the State highway, creating a safety hazard; and,

7.   A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems, such as back up onto a street or greater potential for traffic accidents.

B.  Traffic Impact Study Preparation. A traffic impact study shall be prepared by a professional engineer in accordance with the requirements of the road authority. If the road authority is the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), consult ODOT’s regional development review planner and OAR 734-051-180. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.62 LAND USE REVIEW AND DESIGN REVIEW
16.62.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:

A.  Provide rules, regulations and standards for efficient and effective administration of land use and site development review;

B.  Implement the development patterns described in the City’s Land Development Code and Comprehensive Plan;

C.  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare;

D.  Provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewage, fire protection, pollution control, surface water management, and protection against natural hazards;

E.  Encourage the conservation of energy resources; and

F.  Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, mixed uses, transportation options, and detailed, human-scaled design. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.62.020 Review types and applicability.
A.  Review Types.

1.   Type I land use review/minor design review is conducted by the Planning Official or designee without a public hearing. See Chapter 16.61 for review procedure. It applies to changes in land use and developments that do not require a conditional use permit or Type II/Type III minor/major site design review approval. Type I land use review/minor design review is designed to ensure compliance with clear and objective land use and development standards of the land use district, such as lot area, building setbacks and orientation, lot coverage, maximum building height, design standards and other objective provisions of Article 16.2. The Type I land use review/minor design review is accommodated by the Planning Official or designee’s review of building permit and site plan materials.

2.   As specified in Table 16.62.020-1, minor design review is conducted by either the Planning Official or designee as either a Type I or a Type II decision or as a Type III decision by the Hearings Officer in a public hearing (Type III-HO). Architectural review comments are provided by a contracted, licensed, professional architect. See Chapter 16.61 for review procedure. A Type III-HO review in particular is intended for moderately sized, more complex developments that require more detailed review of the proposed design and the exercise of both objective and subjective decision making in the design review process. When a land use application is received, the Planning Official shall determine the appropriate design review process.

3.   Major design review is conducted by the Design Review Board (Type III-DRB) at a public hearing. Major design review is intended for larger, significantly more complex developments that require more detailed review of the proposed design and the exercise of both objective and subjective decision making in the design review process as specified in Table 16.62.020-1.

B.  Applicability. Type I land use review/minor design review or Type II minor/major design review is required for all new development and modification to an existing development as described in Table 16.62.020-1 below. Land uses and developments that exceed the thresholds for Type I land use review/minor design review require either Type II minor or Type III minor/major design review. The Planning Official shall determine the required review procedure at the time the application is received.

 

Table 16.62.020-1 Land Use and Minor and Major Design Review

Review by the Planning Official or designee is demarked with “PO”; review by the Hearings Officer with “HO”; and review by the Design Review Board with “DRB.”

 

Proposed Activity

Type I Land Use Review/ Minor Design Review

Type II Minor Design Review

Type III Minor/Major Design Review

Change in Occupancy or Use

 

 

 

Change in occupancy from one type of land use to a similar land use

PO

 

 

A change in use of a structure from residential to commercial or industrial

 

PO

HO

New Construction

 

 

 

Single-family detached dwelling (including manufactured home on its own lot)

PO

 

 

A single duplex, or up to two single-family attached (town home) units not requiring a land division, and accessory parking on the same lot

PO

 

 

Residential developments made up of a total of 30 attached dwelling units or less

 

PO

 

Residential developments made up of a total of 31 to 60 attached dwelling units

 

 

HO

Residential developments made up of 61 attached dwelling units or more

 

 

DRB

Nonresidential development up to 5,000 square feet (structures only) in size

 

PO

 

Nonresidential development between 5,001 and 14,999 square feet (structures only) in size

 

 

HO

Nonresidential development greater than 15,000 square feet (structures only) in size

 

 

DRB

Nonresidential and Multifamily Additions and Remodeling

 

 

 

Nonresidential or multifamily building additions or substantial exterior remodeling up to 20 percent of existing gross floor area or building height, except that the following shall require minor design review:

PO

 

 

Enlarging or extending a nonconforming use

Increases the building footprint or height

 

 

 

Modifies more than 25 percent of the façade or, if the property abuts property zoned for residential use, modifies any portion of the façade visible from the residentially zoned property

Expansion or substantial exterior remodeling of existing nonresidential or multifamily development greater than 20 percent of the building’s gross floor area or existing building height

 

PO

HO

A tenant improvement including re-painting of more than 50 percent of the total façade

PO

 

 

Other Activities

 

 

 

Minor modifications to development approvals as defined by Chapter 16.66

 

PO

 

Any proposed development that has a valid conditional use permit. Major modifications to a development with a conditional use permit shall require review and approval in accordance with Chapter 16.64, Conditional Use Permits

PO

 

 

Temporary uses requiring a permit under Chapter 16.69

PO

 

 

Mobile food unit sites (see Section 16.69.030 for thresholds)

PO

PO

HO/DRB

Accessory structures and accessory parking

PO

 

 

Development and land uses that are part of a previously approved design review or conditional use permit application

PO

 

 

Public improvements required by a condition of approval (e.g., transportation facilities and improvements, parks, trails, and similar improvements, as determined by the Planning Official)

PO

 

 

Dredging, filling, grading, paving, construction of retaining walls over 12 feet in height, excavation or drilling operations located within the City that significantly impact an existing or potential design review application as determined by the Planning Official

 

PO

 

Dredging, filling, grading, paving, construction of retaining walls over 4 feet in height, excavation or drilling operations located within the City that minimally impact an existing or potential design review application as determined by the Planning Official

PO

 

 

 

C.  Exemptions.

1.   Regular maintenance, repair and replacement of materials (e.g., roof, siding, awnings, etc.), parking resurfacing and similar maintenance and repair shall be exempt from review.

2.   A building expansion that is solely designed and constructed to:

a.     Provide accessibility for the disabled;

b.     Provide for energy conservation (e.g., addition of an entry vestibule);

c.     Provide for screened recycling or trash storage; or

d.     Relocate or screen visible exterior mechanical equipment so that such equipment is no longer visible.

(Ord. 552 § 1, 2020; Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.62.030 Design review.
A.  Design Review Board—Appointment, Term Limits and Membership. The City Council shall appoint a Design Review Board to serve as expert professional advisors to aid in the review of certain development applications as provided in Chapter 2.16 (Volunteer Committees) of the Happy Valley Municipal Code.

B.  Time Limits. Design review approval expires after two years unless substantial construction on the site has begun, as determined by the City. The Planning Official or designee may extend an approval for an additional period not to exceed one year based on the following:

1.   No changes are made to the original site design review plan;

2.   The applicant demonstrates the ability and intent to initiate construction on the site within the one-year extension period; and

3.   The applicant demonstrates that failure to obtain building permits and substantially begin construction within the two-year approval period was beyond the applicant’s control. An application for an extension shall be filed with the applicable fee prior to the expiration of the approval.

C.  Design Review Application Requirements. In order to be deemed complete, a design review application shall contain all of the following plans and elements, unless specifically waived by the Planning Official or designee:

1.   Submittal requirements for minor and major design review:

a.     Existing conditions plan;

b.     Site plan;

c.     Landscape plan;

d.     Grading plan;

e.     Color architectural elevations;

f.      Site photographs;

g.     Building materials exhibit;

h.     Lighting plan;

i.      Signage plan (if available);

j.      Refuse/recycling facility elevations;

k.     Narrative;

l.      Additional requirements as determined by the Planning Official.

D.  Design Review Plans—Information Requirements. Design review plans shall include the following:

 

1.   Electronic copies of all documents formatted to be able to be printed at “full size” (twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches) and “one-half size” (eleven (11) by seventeen (17) inches) and maintain a standard engineering or architectural scale at printed size. Three copies of full-size plans printed to a standard engineering or architectural scale. Larger-sized copies are allowed at the discretion of the City;

2.   Twenty (20) copies of one-half size plans printed to a standard engineering or architectural scale for utilization in soliciting comments by City staff and relevant service providers, as well as the number of plan sets corresponding to the number of mailed notice recipients within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the greater subject site;

3.   Drawings shall be at a scale sufficiently large enough to enable all features of the design to be clearly discerned;

4.   All plans should have a north arrow, title, scale and date of plan.

E.  Existing Conditions Plan. This element of design review shall indicate the following site characteristics:

1.   Assessor’s tax map and tax lot number;

2.   Boundary dimensions and area of the site;

 

3.   Location of all existing structures, including their distances from the property line;

4.   The location and names of all existing streets within or on the boundary of the development;

5.   Location and species of trees greater than six inches in diameter when measured four and one-half feet above the natural grade and an indication of which trees are to be removed;

6.   On sites that contain slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent, potential geologic hazards or unique natural features including environmental zones or overlays that may affect the proposed development, along with contours mapped at five-foot intervals;

7.   Natural drainageways and other significant natural features such as wetlands, riparian corridors, and protected water features;

8.   All buildings, roads, retaining walls, curb cuts, and other manmade features;

9.   Topographical survey to include structures and natural features (wetlands, riparian corridors and their buffers) on adjoining property within two hundred (200) feet of the site; and

10. A survey of the subject property by a licensed land surveyor clearly delineating property boundaries shall be provided and shall be accurate as to current state of property.

F.  Site Plan. This element of the design review plan shall indicate the following:

1.   Area of the site covered by the structures described in this subsection and their percentage of the site;

2.   All external dimensions of proposed buildings and structures;

3.   Parking and circulation areas including their dimensions;

4.   Service areas for such uses as the loading and delivery of goods;

5.   Locations, purpose, and dimensions of easements;

6.   Pedestrian circulation;

7.   The location of mechanical equipment, garbage disposal areas, utility appurtenance, and similar structures;

8.   Exterior lighting, including the type and intensity, are to be illustrated;

9.   Provisions for handicapped persons;

10. Other site elements, which will assist in the evaluation of site development;

11. The location and names of all existing streets within or on the boundary.

a.     A block on the plans stating the following:

i.      For commercial and nonresidential development:

(A)   The square footage contained in the area proposed to be developed;

(B)   The percentage of the lot covered by:

(1)    Structures,

(2)    Parking areas,

(3)    Recreation areas,

(4)    Landscaping,

(5)    Other impervious surface areas needed to measure lot coverage.

ii.     For residential development:

(A)   The total square footage in the development;

(B)   The number of dwelling units in the development (include the units by the number of bedrooms in each unit, e.g., ten (10) one-bed-room, twenty-five (25) two-bedrooms, etc.);

(C)   The percentage of the lot covered by:

(1)    Structures,

(2)    Parking areas,

(3)    Recreation areas,

(4)    Landscaping,

(5)    Other impervious surface areas needed to measure lot coverage.

G.  Landscape Plan. This element of the design review plan should indicate the following:

1.   Landscape plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect;

2.   Locations of buildings and structures, including pathways, driveways and parking areas;

3.   Location of areas to be landscaped;

4.   Private and shared outdoor recreation areas;

5.   List of plant materials, including genus, species, common name, sizing, quantity and spacing;

6.   Pertinent landscape features including walls, retaining walls, berms, fences and fountains;

7.   A note on the plan indicating that an irrigation system will be installed to maintain the landscape materials and the method of irrigation;

8.   The size, species, and locations of plant materials to be retained or placed on the site;

9.   The locations and design details of walkways, plazas, courtyards, and similar seating areas including related street furniture and permanent outdoor equipment including sculpture;

10. The location and design details of proposed fencing, retaining walls, and trash collection areas; and

11. A proposed plan for the maintenance of the landscape plan including the replacement of plants as may be needed to preserve the visual integrity of the site.

H.  Grading Plan. This element of design review shall indicate the following: grading and drainage plans including spot elevations and contours at close enough intervals to easily convey the slope of the site.

I.   Architectural Elevations. This element of the design review plan shall indicate the following: color exterior elevations, showing finish materials, windows, doors, light fixtures, stairways, balconies, decks, and architectural details. These elevations shall be provided for every exterior wall surface including those that are completely or partially concealed from view by overlapping portions of the structure. Existing and finished grades at the center of all walls shall be shown with elevation of floors indicated and a dimension showing compliance with height limitations.

J.   Site Photographs. This element of the design review plan shall indicate the following:

1.   Photographs depicting the site and its relationship to adjoining sites;

2.   Current aerial photos accurately depicting existing conditions.

K.  Building Materials Exhibit. This element of the design review plan shall include a written description and photographic representation of the following: the color and texture of finish materials and color ranges of siding and other façade treatment, roofing, windows and trim.

L.  Lighting Plan. This element of the design review plan shall indicate the following:

1.   Illustrate the type of exterior wall light fixtures including the lamp types with manufacturer’s specification sheet and the levels of illumination that they provide;

2.   Location and type of street and parking lot light fixtures including the lamp types along with manufacturers specification sheet and the levels of illumination that they provide;

3.   A comprehensive graphic plan showing the location, size, material, and method of illumination of all monument signs. Individual signs shall go through the sign permit process outlined in Chapter 16.45 of this title; and

4.   The location, type, and intensity and manufacturer’s specification sheet of light proposed to illuminate outdoor areas.

M. Additional Requirements.

1.   The City may require the following in addition to the materials cited in Chapter 16.66. This determination will be made as part of the pre-application conference process.

2.   Additional information that may be required includes, but is not limited to:

a.     Traffic impact analysis, completed pursuant to Section 16.61.090;

b.     Architectural models;

c.     Natural resource assessment, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 16.34;

3.   Other information as requested by the Planning Official or designee.

N.  Narrative. A design review narrative shall be provided that addresses each of the applicable standards and criteria in Section 16.62.030(O) and the following Sections 16.50.080, Construction plan approval—Bonding and assurances and 16.62.030, Design Review.

O.  General Design Review Criteria.

1.   Applicability. The following criteria apply to design review projects except for single-family detached and duplex residential development.

2.   Relationship to Other Standards. The criteria of this section apply in addition to other standards of this title. Where requirements conflict with standards in other sections of this title, the standards of this section shall govern; except that Happy Valley Style Design Review standards in Chapter 16.46 shall supersede, and where applicable, the multifamily standards in Section 16.44.010 shall supersede.

3.   Criteria.

a.     The proposed development preserves significant natural features such as natural drainageways, wetlands, and trees outside the construction area as defined in Section 16.42.050, to the maximum extent feasible, and conforms to the provisions of Sections 16.35.050 and 16.35.020.

b.     Phased projects shall be designed to the greatest degree possible so that each phase, in and of itself, is complete in its functional, traffic, parking, visual, drainage and landscaping aspects.

c.     Where appropriate, the design includes a parking and circulation system that includes a pedestrian and vehicular orientation including separate service area(s) for delivery of goods.

d.     The location, size, shape, height and spatial and visual arrangement of the uses and structures are compatible, with the consideration given to increased setbacks, building heights, shared parking, common driveways and other similar considerations.

e.     That there is desirable, efficient and functional interrelationship among buildings, building entrances, existing and proposed transit stops, transit facilities and routes, parking, loading area, circulation, open spaces, landscaping and related activities and uses on the site.

f.      Utilize landscaping in parking areas to direct and control vehicular movement patterns, screen headlights from adjacent properties and streets, and lessen the visual dominance of pavement coverage.

g.     The proposed development meets all other applicable provisions of this Land Development Code.

h.     The proposed development can be adequately served by Level 1 services.

i.      Provide safe pathways for pedestrians to move from parking areas to building entrances.

j.      All building exterior improvements approved through the design review process shall be continually maintained including necessary painting and repair so as to remain substantially similar to the original approval through the design review process.

k.     A landscape plan shall be approved consistent with design standards in Chapter 16.42 in a manner that will assure the maintenance and visual integrity of the site.

l.      All plans shall comply with the purpose statement in Section 16.62.010.

(Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.62.040 Development in accordance with permit approval—Modifications—Permit expiration.
Development shall not commence until the applicant has received all of the appropriate land use and development approvals, including construction plan approval and any applicable bonding or posting of securities. Construction of public improvements shall not commence until the City has approved all required public improvement plans (e.g., utilities, streets, public land dedication, etc.). The City may require the applicant to enter into a development agreement (e.g., for phased developments and developments with required off-site public improvements), and may require bonding or other assurances for improvements in accordance with Section 16.50.080 Construction Plan Approval, Bonding and Assurances. Land Use Review and Design Review approval is subject to all of the following standards and limitations.

A.  Modifications to Approved Plans and Developments. Minor modification of an approved plan or existing development, as defined in Chapter 16.66, shall be processed as a Type I procedure. A major modification, as defined in Chapter 16.66, shall be processed as a Type III-HO or Type III-DRB procedure and requires design review by the review body that issued the original decision.

B.  Approval Period. A decision to approve a minor or major modification expires two years from the date of approval if:

1.   A public improvement plan or building permit application for the project has not been submitted within two years of approval; or

2.   Construction on the site is in violation of the approved plan.

C.  Phased Development. Phasing of development may be approved with the design review application, subject to the following standards and procedures:

1.   A phasing plan shall be submitted with a design review and/or subdivision application.

2.   A decision to approve the application shall include a phasing schedule for developing the site in phases, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than seven years from the date of approval without reapplying for design review.

3.   An application for phased development must satisfy all of the following criteria:

a.     The public facilities required to serve each phase are constructed in conjunction with or prior to the phase;

b.     The development and occupancy of any phase that is dependent on the use of temporary public facilities requires approval by the City Engineer, Building Official and any applicable service provider. Temporary facilities shall be approved only upon City receipt of bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required public improvements in accordance with Section 16.50.080. A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed to the applicable City or district standard as determined by the City Engineer;

c.     The phased development shall not result in requiring the City or other property owners to construct public facilities that were required as part of the approved development proposal; and

d.     An application for phasing may be approved after design review or subdivision approval as a modification to the approved plan, in accordance with the procedures for a minor modification (Chapter 16.66). As determined by the Planning Official, if significant impacts will occur due to the proposed phasing, the application may be processed as a major modification.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.63 LAND DIVISIONS AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
16.63.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:

A.  Provide rules, regulations and standards governing the approval of subdivisions, partitions and lot line adjustments, as defined below and in Chapter 16.12:

1.   Subdivisions are the creation of four or more lots from one parent lot, parcel or tract, within one calendar year,

2.   Partitions are the creation of three or fewer lots within one calendar year,

3.   Lot line adjustments are modifications to lot lines or parcel boundaries that do not result in the creation of new lots (includes consolidation of lots);

B.  Carry out the City’s development pattern, as envisioned by the City’s Comprehensive Plan; this title and adopted master plans;

C.  Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, and transportation options;

D.  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare through orderly and efficient urbanization;

E.  Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewage, fire protection, pollution control, surface water management, and protection against natural hazards; and

F.  Encourage the conservation of energy resources. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.020 General requirements.
A.  Subdivision and Partition Approval Through Two-step Process. Applications for subdivision or partition approval shall be processed by means of a preliminary plat evaluation and a final plat evaluation, according to the following two steps:

1.   The preliminary plat must be approved before the final plat can be submitted for approval consideration; and

2.   The final plat must include all conditions of approval of the preliminary plat.

B.  The following conditions, regulations and restrictions shall apply to all methods of development:

1.   No person shall dispose of, transfer, sell or agree, offer or negotiate to sell any lot in any subdivision until the final plat of the subdivision has been acknowledged and recorded with the Clackamas County Clerk’s office.

2.   No person shall dispose of, transfer, sell or agree, offer or negotiate to sell any lot in any subdivision by reference to or exhibition or other use of a plat of such subdivision before the final plat for such subdivision has been so recorded.

3.   A person may offer or negotiate to sell any parcel in a partition prior to approval of the tentative plan for the partition, but no person may dispose of, transfer, sell, or agree to sell any parcel in a partition prior to such approval.

4.   All planned unit developments (PUDs), subdivisions, master plans and partitions which are developed pursuant to this Development Code must also be in conformance with the Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan and this title.

5.   Building permits that are requested for lots which are not in conformance to this title shall not be issued unless the lot is a pre-existing lot of record prior to the enactment of this title.

6.   All subdivisions, master plans and partitions using subsurface sewerage disposal methods shall be developed pursuant to the appropriate State, County and City regulations.

7.   Any parcel or tract to be developed using the facilities of a community sewerage agency shall be developed pursuant to the appropriate City and agency regulations.

C.  Compliance With ORS Chapter 92. All subdivision and partition proposals shall conform to state regulations in Oregon Revised Statute (ORS) Chapter 92, Subdivisions and Partitions.

D.  Future Re-division Plan. When subdividing or partitioning tracts into large lots (i.e., greater than two times or two hundred (200) percent the minimum lot size allowed by the underlying land use district), the City shall require that the lots be of such size, shape, and orientation as to facilitate future re-division in accordance with the requirements of the land use district and this Code. A re-division plan shall be submitted for large lots identifying:

1.   Potential future lot division(s), consistent with the density and lot size standards of Article 16.2;

2.   Potential street right-of-way alignments to serve future development of the property and connect to adjacent properties, including existing or planned rights-of-way;

3.   A disclaimer that the plan is a conceptual plan intended to show potential future development. It shall not be binding on the City or property owners, except as may be required through conditions of land division approval. For example, dedication and improvement of rights-of-way within the future plan area may be required to provide needed secondary access and circulation.

E.  Lot Size Averaging. Single-family residential lot size may be averaged to allow lots less than the minimum lot size in residential districts, as provided by Section 16.63.030, Flexible Lot Size, or through approval of a master planned development under Chapter 16.65.

F.  Density Calculations. Density calculation is the means by which density for any lot or parcel is determined and the lot or parcel ultimately developed in a more efficient and land conscious manner. This portion of the Land Development Code provides the method for calculating the overall density for any site that may contain both constrained land, partially constrained land and unconstrained land. The minimum and maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a site is limited by both the number of units allowed by the applicable zoning district(s) and the amount of buildable land. The need to provide infrastructure and the presence of easements for major utilities corridor also impacts the number of units permitted on a site. The shared outdoor recreation areas requirements of Section 16.42.080 shall not affect the density calculations.

As outlined in Table 16.63.020-1, Density Calculations, Steps 1 through 4 establish the maximum number of potential dwelling units allowed on a site given the zoning districts and/or overlay districts. However, if site constraints are present, there may not be enough buildable land (capacity) for all of the potential dwelling units to be constructed on site. Steps 5 through 8 establish capacity in terms of the number of dwelling units that can physically be built on a site given site constraints and available buildable land. If, as a result of constrained land or partially constrained land, the total number of dwelling units generated is more than the capacity of the site, the site may qualify for density transfer pursuant to subsection (F)(2).

1.   For the purposes of calculating density, land shall be categorized as follows:

a.     Constrained land, which includes any land designated as:

i.      Conservation slope areas (slopes twenty-five (25) percent and greater) as defined in Chapter 16.32.

ii.     Potentially hazardous analysis areas (lands within twenty-five (25) feet of the top or toe of slopes of conservation slope areas) as defined in Chapter 16.32 that are identified by a certified geotechnical engineer.

iii.    DOGAMI potentially rapidly moving landslide hazard areas, as defined in Chapter 16.32.

iv.    Water quality resource areas, as defined in Section 16.34.060.

b.     Partially constrained land, which includes any land designated as follows:

i.      High and moderate value habitat conservation areas, as defined in Section 16.34.020(D)(2).

ii.     Transition slope area as defined in Chapter 16.32.

c.     Unconstrained Land, which includes any land not designated as constrained land or partially constrained land.

 

Table 16.63.020-1 Maximum Potential Number of Dwelling Units based on Zoning

 

 

Step 1: Calculate land area by category.

For the total gross area of the parcel identify the square footage of land in each of the following categories:

1a = gross area of the parcel

1b = unconstrained land within each zoning district (1a – (1c + 1d))

1c = constrained land

1d = partially constrained land (1e + 1f + 1g)

1e = transition slope area (TSA)

1f = high value habitat conservation area (high HCA)

1g = moderate value habitat conservation area (moderate HCA)

Step 2: Establish number of potential residential units from constrained and partially constrained land (if any).

Density for constrained land and partially constrained land is calculated at 2 dwelling units per acre.

2a = ((1c + 1d) / 43,560) x 2

Step 3: Establish number of potential residential units from unconstrained land.

a. For each zoning district identify land needed for infrastructure:

3a = the square footage of land needed for infrastructure

20% of the acreage for public-rights-of-way, or remove right-of-way square footage from actual layout;* plus

Any land required for stormwater treatment and detention facilities that will be placed in a separate tract.

*NOTE: In the case of a partition, where the City is requiring the dedication of right-of-way along an existing roadway, the dedicated right-of-way shall not be included in the calculation for the purposes of calculating density and satisfying minimum lot size.

b. Subtract land needed for infrastructure from unconstrained land to establish net acres.

3b = 1b – 3a

c. Density within the land use districts may be expressed as either a minimum lot size or as a maximum number of units per net acre. Therefore, the potential number of dwelling units can be calculated in one of two ways depending on the structure of the base zone. For each zoning district, calculate the appropriate number of units.

3c = (3b / 43,560) / base zone density

or

3b / base zone minimum lot size

Step 4: Establish number of potential residential units.

The total potential dwelling units that can be generated by a parcel includes the number of units produced by the constrained and partially constrained land (2a) and the unconstrained land (3c). Any existing dwelling units within the parcel shall be subtracted from the total to determine the number of additional allowable units.

4a = 2 + 3c

NOTE: Unit percentages above the midway mark between two numbers (for example, 6.6 units) are rounded up to the next unit number (i.e., seven units). Unit percentages below the midway mark (i.e., 6.4 units) are rounded down to the next unit number (i.e., six units).

 

Step 5: Identify the capacity of unconstrained land.

For each zoning district:

a. Identify any land that is within the easement of a major utility corridor, but which is otherwise unconstrained or partially unconstrained

5a = the square footage of land within major utility corridors

b. Subtract land within major utility corridors from net acres (3b).

5b =       3b – 5a

c. Density within the land use districts may be expressed as either a minimum lot size or as a maximum number of units per acre.

5c = (5b / 43,560) x base zone density

Therefore, the potential number of dwelling units can be calculated in one of two ways depending on the structure of the base zone. For each zoning district, calculate the appropriate number of units.

or

5b / base zone minimum lot size

d. With the use of density transfers pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F)(2), the maximum capacity of the buildable portion of unconstrained land is 175% of the density permitted by the underlying zoning district.

5d = 5c x 175%

Step 6: Identify the capacity of transition slope area (TSA).

For all land designated as TSA, use the methodology below to determine how much is buildable and how many dwelling units could be accommodated within the buildable area.

 

a. Determine the percentage of constrained and partially constrained land on the site.

6a% = (1c + 1d)/1a) x 100

b. Determine the percentage of TSA that is buildable based on the sliding scale below.

6b% = % of TSA that is buildable based on the sliding scale

% of the parcel that is constrained or partially constrained (5a)

% of TSA that is buildable

0 to 19.99%,

30%

20 to 49.99%

40%

≥ 50%

50%

c. Determine the square footage of TSA (1e) that is buildable.

6c = 1e x 6b

d. The capacity of the buildable portion of TSAs is 2.0 dwelling units per acre.

6d = (6c/43,560) x 2.0

e. With the use of density transfers pursuant to Section 16.63.020.F.2, the maximum capacity of the buildable portion of TSAs can be increased to 3.5 dwelling units per acre.

6e = (6c/43,560) x 3.5

NOTE: 3.5 du/ac equals 175% of the base density of 2 du/ac.

Step 7: Identify the capacity of habitat conservation areas (HCA).

For all land designated as high or moderate HCA, use the methodology below to determine how much is buildable and how many dwelling units could be accommodated within the buildable area.

 

Determine the square footage of high HCA (1f) and moderate HCA (1g) that is buildable:

a. High HCA = 10% buildable;

7a = 1f x 10%

b. Moderate HCA = 15% buildable.

7b = 1g x 15%

c. The capacity of the buildable portion of HCAs is 2.0 dwelling units per acre.

7c = ((7a + 7b)/43,560) x 2.0

d. With the use of density transfers pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F)(2), the maximum capacity of the buildable portion of high and moderate HCAs can be increased to 3.5 dwelling units per acre.

7d = ((7a + 7b)/43,560) x 3.5

NOTE: 3.5 du/ac equals 175% of the base density of 2 du/ac.

Step 8: Identify total capacity and potential for density transfer.

Total number of dwelling units generated by the zoning on the site

4a

The capacity of the parcel without consideration of any potential density transfer is the sum of the capacity in dwelling units from the buildable portions of unconstrained (5c), TSA (6d) and HCA (7c) lands

8a = 5c + 6d + 7c

The capacity of the parcel including all potential density transfers is the sum of the capacity in dwelling units from the buildable portions of unconstrained (5d), TSA (6e) and HCA (7d) lands. This represents the total number of units that can be built on the site if density transfers are available pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F)(2)

8b = 5d + 6e + 7d

Minimum density represents the minimum number of dwelling units required to be built on a parcel of land. It is based on 80% of the capacity of the buildable unconstrained land (5c). There is no minimum density requirement for constrained or partially constrained lands

8c = 5c x 80%

Number of dwelling units that can be transferred TO the site (if qualified)

8d = 8b – 8a

Number of dwelling units that can be transferred FROM the site (if qualified)

8e = 4a – 8c

Number of dwelling units that can be transferred FROM the site after full use of density transfer within the site

8f = 4a - 8b

Step 9: Calculate the net developable area, for purposes of FAR and open space calculations.

9a = 3b – 1c

 

2.   Density and Open Space Transfer Limitation. Density and open space transfers may occur through the following processes:

a.     Through the PUD process, development may be clustered on-site in order to avoid constrained or partially constrained land. In addition, density transfer may occur between separate parcels when one parcel contains constrained or partially constrained land, provided the following provisions have been fulfilled:

i.      The parcels are under common ownership and are contiguous; or

ii.     The parcels are not under common ownership and are contiguous, but a written agreement to transfer has been executed, notarized, recorded and provided to the City; and

iii.    The scope of the proposed development project includes all affected properties.

iv.    All density calculation actions shall be made part of the property deed for which the action occurred and will be recorded on behalf of the City to insure public notification of the transfer of development rights, and shall be calculated per the provisions for density transfer found within this title; and

v.     The resulting development on the parcel or portion of the parcel receiving the transfer may not exceed one hundred seventy-five (175) percent of the maximum density allowed within the underlying zoning district(s) for that buildable area. Due to the need for differentiation in lot sizes necessary to accommodate said density transfer (potentially falling below the minimum lot size found within the underlying development district(s)), a land use application proposing subdivision of land involving a proposed or recorded density or open space transfer shall be processed under the provisions for Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) pursuant to Section 16.63.140.

b.     In scenarios not involving a comprehensive plan map amendment/zone change; master plan or PUD application(s), transfer of residential density or general open space requirements associated with the existing Comprehensive Plan Map designation/zoning district from commonly owned residential lands (from one lot of record or parcel to another) via a proposed purchase and sale agreement, lot line adjustment, deed restriction or other transfer mechanism is permitted, provided the following provisions have been fulfilled:

i.      The parcels are under common ownership; or

ii.     The parcels are not under common ownership and are contiguous, but a written agreement to transfer has been executed, notarized, recorded and provided to the City; and

iii.    The scope of the proposed purchase and sale agreement, lot line adjustment, deed restriction or other transfer mechanism includes all affected properties; and

iv.    A proposed open space transfer does not include area designated as a significant natural resource as defined within Chapter 16.34; and

v.     A proposed open space transfer does not reduce the total open space requirement for the transferring property or properties to less than five percent of the greater subject contiguous area; and

vi.    The scope of the proposed purchase and sale agreement, lot line adjustment, deed restriction or other transfer mechanism includes a recorded covenant against the receiving property in favor of the sending property providing that any person with an ownership interest in the sending property shall be entitled to use any open space in the receiving property. The covenant shall name the City of Happy Valley as a beneficiary for purposes of enforcing said covenant; and

vii.   Without regard to the proposed transfer mechanism, the proposed density or open space transfer shall be processed at least through a Type II procedure (administrative) per the requirements of Section 16.61.030.

G.  Temporary Sales Office. A temporary sales office in conjunction with a subdivision may be approved as set forth in Section 16.69.010, Temporary use permits.

H.  Minimize Flood Damage. All subdivisions and partitions shall be designed based on the need to minimize the risk of flood damage. No new building lots shall be created entirely within a floodway. All new lots shall be buildable without requiring development within the floodway and, where possible, allow building outside of the flood fringe. Development in a 100-year floodplain shall comply with the National Flood Insurance Program and State Building Code requirements, including elevating structures above the base flood elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining floodplain development permit from the NFIP and local jurisdiction.

I.   Determination of Base Flood Elevation. Where a development site consists of five or more acres or fifty (50) or more lots, and is located in or near areas prone to inundation for which the base flood elevation has not been mapped, the applicant shall have the base flood elevation it shall be prepared by a qualified professional as part of the land division application.

J.   Need for Adequate Utilities. All lots created through land division shall have adequate public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems. These systems shall be located and constructed to prevent or minimize flood damage, and to avoid impairment of the system and contamination from them during flooding.

K.  Need for Adequate Drainage. All subdivision and partition proposals shall have adequate surface water drainage facilities that reduce exposure to flood damage and improve water quality. Water quality or quantity control improvements may be required.

L.  Floodplain, Park, and Open Space Dedications. Where land filling and/or development is allowed within or adjacent to regulatory floodplain and the Comprehensive Plan designates the subject floodplain for park, open space, or trail use, the City may require the dedication of sufficient open land area for a greenway and/or trail adjoining or within the floodplain for transportation, storm drainage/water quality, or park purposes in the public interest. When practicable, this area shall include portions at a suitable elevation for the construction of a multi-use pathway in accordance with the City’s adopted trails plan or pedestrian and bikeway plans, as applicable. The City shall evaluate individual development proposals and determine whether the dedication of land is justified based on the development’s impact to the park and/or trail system, or stormwater management requirements, consistent with Sections 16.50.030 and 16.50.060, and assist in obtaining any floodplain permit that may be required.

M. Lands Subject to Hazardous Conditions. Any land area within the City which has been determined to be unbuildable pursuant to the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Development Code shall be developed for building purposes only when adequate methods for mitigating the hazards are submitted, reviewed and approved by all appropriate agencies. The appropriate agencies, including the City Engineer, shall use as their review and approval criteria the pertinent sections of the applicable codes, ordinances, laws, statutes, administrative policies and rules, and other applicable documents. Land areas determined not to be buildable may be utilized to help complete or fulfill a requirement for the provision of open space, if a maintenance agreement is provided by the property owner and approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.030 Flexible lot size—Flag lots—Lots accessed by mid-block lanes.
A.  Flexible Lot Size. To allow creativity and flexibility in subdivision design and to address physical constraints, such as topography, existing development, significant trees and other natural and built features, the approval body may grant a ten (10) percent modification to the lot area and/or lot dimension (width/depth) standards in Chapter 16.22, provided that: the overall density of the subdivision does not exceed the allowable density of the district; the minimum lot size for single-family detached lots is not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet within eighty (80) percent of the net developable area of the subject development (and within the twenty (20) percent remainder area, lot sizes may decrease by a maximum of ten (10) percent); and the approval body finds that granting the modification allows for a greater variety of housing types or it improves development compatibility with natural features or adjacent land uses. In addition, the approval body may require that standard size lots be placed at the perimeter of the development where the abutting lots are standard size or larger; except that this provision shall not apply where the abutting lots are larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

B.  Mid-block Lanes. Lots may be developed without frontage onto a public street when lot access is provided by mid-block lanes, as shown below. Mid-block lanes or shared driveways, as illustrated in Figure 16.63.030-1, may be required when practicable to provide connectivity between infill developments. Mid-block lanes with access easements for adjoining properties may be allowed as an alternative to requiring through streets where block lengths do not necessitate a through street. The lanes shall meet the standards for alleys, pursuant to Chapter 16.41, Section 16.50.030, and the specific standards in the Happy Valley Transportation Plan, and the standards under subsections C through F.

 

Figure 16.63.030-1 Mid-block Infill



 

C.  Flag Lots. Flag lots may be created only when a through street or mid-block lanes cannot be extended to serve abutting uses or future development. A flag lot driveway (“flag pole”) may serve no more than two dwelling units, including accessory dwellings and dwellings on individual lots, unless Uniform Fire Code (UFC) standards are met for more units. When UFC standards are met, the maximum number of dwellings shall be four. A drive serving more than one lot shall have a reciprocal access and maintenance easement recorded for all lots. No fence, structure or other obstacle shall be placed within the drive area. The Fire Marshal may require an emergency turnaround. Fire sprinklers may also be required for buildings that cannot be fully served by fire hydrants (i.e., due to distance from hydrant or insufficient fire flow). The required minimum lot area is the same as that required by the development district in which the lot is located. When calculating lot area, only the flag portion of the lot is counted, not the flag pole.

 

D.  Driveway and Lane Width. The minimum paved width of all shared drives and lanes shall be twelve (12) feet within a twenty (20) foot easement, and may serve up to two dwelling units, or as required by the Uniform Fire Code.

E.  Easement and Improvement of Drive Lane. The developer or property owner shall record a twenty (20) foot easement benefiting all properties that are to receive vehicle access. All drive lanes shall be improved with an all weather surface approved by the City. Recording of easements or separate tracts, as applicable, shall be so indicated on the face of the subdivision or partition plat.

F.  Maximum Drive Lane Length. The maximum drive lane length is subject to requirements of Clackamas Fire District No. 1.

G.  Future Street Plans. Building placement and alignment of shared drives shall be designed so that future street connections can be made as surrounding properties develop (i.e., as shown in the Figure 16.63.030-1). (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.040 Preliminary plat approval process.
A.  Review of Preliminary Plat. Review of a preliminary plat that creates two or three parcels (partition) or four to nine lots (subdivision) shall be processed using a Type II procedure under Section 16.61.030. A preliminary plat that creates ten (10) or more lots (subdivision) shall be processed using a Type III procedure under Section 16.61.040. All preliminary plats shall be reviewed using the approval criteria described in Section 16.63.060. A preliminary subdivision application may be reviewed concurrently with an application for a master planned development under Chapter 16.65.

B.  Review of Final Plat. Review of a final plat for a subdivision or partition shall be processed using the approval criteria in Section 16.63.080 and do not require a Land Use Review pursuant to ORS 197.015.

C.  Preliminary Plat Approval Period. Preliminary plat approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of approval. The preliminary plat shall lapse if a final plat has not been submitted within the two-year period.

D.  Modifications and Extensions. The applicant may request changes to the approved preliminary plat or conditions of approval following the procedures and criteria provided in Chapter 16.66, Modifications. The Planning Official shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant three consecutive written extensions of the approval period not to exceed one year each; provided that the applicant demonstrates that:

1.   Any changes to the preliminary plat follow the procedures in Chapter 16.66;

2.   The applicant has submitted written intent to file a final plat within the one-year extension period;

3.   An extension of time will not delay or prevent the extension of infrastructure or easements necessary for abutting or connected developments, and will not delay or prevent the lawful development of abutting properties; and

4.   The extension request is made prior to the expiration of the original approved plan.

E.  Phased Development.

1.   The City may approve a time schedule for developing a subdivision in phases, but in no case shall the actual construction time period (i.e., for required public improvements, utilities, streets) for any partition or subdivision phase be more than seven years without reapplying for preliminary plat approval.

 

2.   The criteria for approving a phased land division proposal are:

a.     Public facilities shall be constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

b.     The development and occupancy of any phase dependent on the use of temporary public facilities shall require approval by the City Engineer, Building Official and any applicable service provider. Temporary facilities shall be approved only upon City receipt of bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required permanent public improvements, in accordance with Section 16.50.080. A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed to the applicable City or district standard;

c.     The phased development shall not result in requiring the City or a third party (e.g., owners of lots) to construct public facilities that were required as part of the approved development proposal; and

d.     The proposed time schedule for phased development approval shall be reviewed concurrently with the preliminary plat application, and the decision may be appealed in the same manner as the preliminary plat.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.050 Preliminary plat submission requirements.
A.  General Submission Requirements.

1.   Partitions.

a.     Document Requirements. For all partitions (three or fewer parcels), the application shall contain all of the information required for a Type II procedure under Section 16.61.030. In addition, electronic copies of all documents formatted to be able to be printed at “full size” (twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches) and “one-half size” (eleven (11) by seventeen (17) inches) and maintain a standard engineering scale at printed size. Three copies of full-size plans and twenty (20) copies of one-half size plans printed to a standard engineering scale for utilization in soliciting comments by City staff and relevant service providers, as well as the number of plan sets corresponding to the number of mailed notice recipients within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the greater subject site.

b.     Neighborhood Circulation Plan. All partition proposals shall include neighborhood circulation plans that conceptualize future street plans and lot patterns to undeveloped parcels within five hundred (500) feet of the subject site. Circulation plans shall address future vehicular/bicycle/pedestrian transportation systems including bike lanes, sidewalks, bicycle/pedestrian paths, and destination points. A circulation plan is conceptual in that its adoption does not establish a precise alignment. An applicant for a partition is required to submit a circulation plan unless the applicant demonstrates to the Planning Official (or designee) one of the following:

i.      An existing street or proposed new street need not continue beyond the land to be divided in order to complete or extend an appropriate street system or to provide access to adjacent parcels within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed development; or

 

ii.     The proposed street layout is consistent with a street pattern adopted as part of the City’s transportation system plan, or a previously adopted circulation plan.

2.   Subdivisions—Document Requirements. For all subdivisions (four or more lots), the application shall contain all of the information required for a Type II procedure under Section 16.61.030. In addition, electronic copies of all documents formatted to be able to be printed at “full size” (twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches) and “one-half size” (eleven (11) by seventeen (17) inches) and maintain a standard engineering scale at printed size. Three copies of full-size plans and twenty (20) copies of one-half size plans printed to a standard engineering scale for utilization in soliciting comments by City staff and relevant service providers, as well as the number of plan sets corresponding to the number of mailed notice recipients within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the greater subject site. The total information packet shall include the information in subsections a through h, below:

a.     Public Facilities and Services Impact Study. The impact study shall quantify and assess the effect of the development on public facilities and services. The City shall advise as to the scope of the study during the required pre-application conference (Section 16.61.060(C)). The study shall address, at a minimum, the transportation system, including pedestrian ways and bikeways, the drainage system, the parks system, the water system, and the sewer system. For each public facility system and type of impact, the study shall propose improvements necessary to meet City standards and to minimize the impact of the development on the public at large, public facilities systems, and affected private property users and shall include a discussion of the system’s capacity to serve the additional development, and of the need for annexation into any service district;

b.     Traffic Impact Study. Traffic impact studies shall conform to the standards and procedures in Section 16.61.090.

c.     Stormwater and Drainage Plans. Hydrologic consideration shall include the effect upon the watershed in which the project is located, the effect upon the immediate area’s stormwater drainage pattern of flow, the impact of the proposed development upon downstream area, and the effect upon the groundwater supply.

d.     Geotechnical Analysis. Geotechnical considerations shall include the erosion potential, stability, bearing qualities of the soil, and geologic formations; soil permeability and infiltration rates; and the soil quality for the proposed use.

e.     Wetland and Riparian Corridor Analysis. Vegetation and wildlife considerations shall include: wildlife habitat, wetland areas, rare or endangered animal or plant species, unique vegetation communities, areas subject to low revegetation, trees over six inches in diameter at four feet height, other significant vegetation, and areas of educational potential. The impact of the proposed development on the above considerations both on the site and on adjacent properties shall be assessed, and proposed measures for mitigating any adverse impacts shall be described.

f.      Neighborhood Circulation Plan. All subdivision and PUD proposals shall include neighborhood circulation plans that conceptualize future street plans and lot patterns to undeveloped parcels within five hundred (500) feet of the subject site. Circulation plans address future vehicular/bicycle/pedestrian transportation systems including bike lanes, sidewalks, bicycle/pedestrian paths, and destination points. A circulation plan is conceptual in that its adoption does not establish a precise alignment. An applicant for a subdivision or PUD is required to submit a circulation plan unless the applicant demonstrates to the Planning Official (or designee) one of the following:

i.      An existing street or proposed new street need not continue beyond the land to be divided in order to complete or extend an appropriate street system or to provide access to adjacent parcels within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed development; or

ii.     The proposed street layout is consistent with a street pattern adopted as part of the City’s transportation system plan, or a previously adopted circulation plan.

g.     The developer shall submit a narrative which includes a description of how the project complies with the City Comprehensive Plan and land development ordinances and with all of the preliminary plat conditions of approval set by the City Planning Commission.

h.     Bylaw Requirements. If a homeowners association is required, two copies of the preliminary draft, their contracts and/or bylaws, shall be submitted with the preliminary subdivision plat or planned unit development plan.

B.  Preliminary Plat Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection A above, the preliminary plat application shall consist of drawings and supplementary written material (i.e., on forms and/or in a written narrative) adequate to provide the following information:

1.   General Information.

a.     Name of subdivision (not required for partitions). This name must not duplicate the name of another subdivision in Clackamas County (please check with County Surveyor);

b.     Date, north arrow, and scale of drawing;

c.     Location of the development sufficient to define its location in the City, boundaries, and a legal description of the site;

d.     A title block including the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners of the subject property and, as applicable, the designer, and engineer and surveyor if any, and the date of the survey if submitted; and

e.     Identification of the drawing as a “preliminary plat.”

2.   Site Analysis.

a.     Streets. Location, name, present width of all streets, alleys and rights-of-way on and abutting the site;

b.     Easements. Width, location and purpose of all existing easements of record on and abutting the site;

c.     Utilities. Location and identity of all utilities on and abutting the site. If water mains and sewers are not on or abutting the site, indicate the direction and distance to the nearest one and show how utilities will be brought to standards;

d.     Topographic survey data shown by contour lines at five-foot vertical intervals for ground slopes fifteen (15) percent and greater, and at two-foot intervals for ground slopes of less than fifteen (15) percent or as required by the City. Survey data must be provided for the subject property and the surrounding area up to a distance of two hundred (200) feet from the property lines. Survey data shall be related to some established benchmark or other datum approved by the County Surveyor. This requirement may be waived for partitions when grades, on average, are less than six percent;

e.     The location and elevation of the closest benchmark(s) within or adjacent to the site (i.e., for surveying purposes);

f.      Potential natural hazard areas, including any floodplains, areas subject to high water table, landslide areas, and areas having a high erosion potential;

g.     Natural resource areas, including wetland areas, streams, wildlife habitat, and other areas identified by the City or natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection. (See also Article 16.3 and relevant portions of the Comprehensive Plan.);

h.     Site features, including existing structures, pavement, large rock outcroppings, areas having unique views, and drainageways, canals and ditches;

i.      Designated historic and cultural resources on the site and adjacent parcels or lots;

j.      The location, size and species of trees having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade in conformance with Chapter 16.42;

k.     North arrow and scale;

l.      Name and address of project designer, if applicable; and

m.    Other information, as deemed appropriate by the Planning Official. The City may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features and code requirements.

3.   Proposed Improvements.

a.     Public and Private Streets, Tracts, Driveways, Open Space and park Land; Location, Names, Right-of-Way Dimensions, Approximate Radius of Street Curves; and Approximate Finished Street Centerline Grades. All streets and tracts that are being held for private use and all reservations and restrictions relating to such private tracts shall be identified;

b.     Easements. Location, width and purpose of all proposed easements;

c.     Lots and Private Tracts (e.g., Private Open Space, Common Area, or Street). Approximate dimensions, area calculation (e.g., in square feet), and identification numbers for all proposed lots and tracts;

d.     Proposed uses of the property, including all areas proposed to be dedicated to the public or reserved as open space for the purpose of surface water management, recreation, or other use; potential location of future buildings;

e.     Proposed improvements, as required by Article 16.4 (Community Design Standards), and timing of improvements (e.g., in the case of streets, sidewalks, street trees, utilities, etc.);

f.      Preliminary location of development showing those future buildings can meet siting and dimensional standards of the district;

g.     The proposed source of domestic water;

h.     The proposed method of sewage disposal;

i.      Proposed method of surface water drainage and treatment if required;

j.      The approximate location and identity of other utilities, including the locations of street lighting fixtures;

k.     Proposed railroad crossing or modifications to an existing crossing, if any, and evidence of contact with the affected railroad and the Oregon Department of Transportation Rail Division regarding proposed railroad crossing(s);

l.      Changes to navigable streams, or other watercourses. Status of public access to these areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat, as applicable;

m.    Identification of the base flood elevation for development of more than two lots or one-half acre, whichever is less. Written evidence of initiation of a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodplain map amendment shall be required when development is proposed to modify a designated 100-year floodplain. FEMA approval of the amendment shall be a condition of City land use approval;

n.     Evidence of contact with/from the road authority for any development requiring access to its facility(ies); and

o.     Evidence of written notice to the applicable natural resource regulatory agency(ies) for any development within or adjacent to jurisdictional wetlands and other sensitive lands (see Article 16.3).

p.     Upon the discretion of the Planning Official or designee, the applicant may be required to provide a building footprint analysis, demonstrating that proposed lots may accommodate a typical building footprint common to the Happy Valley area, that conforms with the underlying lot setbacks.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.060 Approval criteria—Preliminary plat.
A.  General Approval Criteria. The City may approve, approve with conditions or deny a preliminary plat based on the following approval criteria:

1.   The proposed preliminary plat complies with the applicable Development Code sections and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. At a minimum, the provisions of this article, and the applicable chapters and sections of Article 16.2 (Land Use Districts), Article 16.3 (Specific Area Plan Districts and Overlay Zones), and Article 16.4 (Community Design Standards) shall apply. Where a variance is necessary to receive preliminary plat approval, the application shall also comply with the relevant sections of Article 16.7;

2.   The proposed plat name is not already recorded for another subdivision, and satisfies the provisions of ORS Chapter 92;

3.   The proposed streets, roads, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, pathways, utilities, and surface water management facilities are laid out so as to conform or transition to the plats of subdivisions and maps of major partitions already approved for adjoining property as to width, general direction and in all other respects. All proposed public improvements and dedications are identified on the preliminary plat;

4.   All proposed private common areas and improvements (e.g., homeowner association property) are identified on the preliminary plat;

 

5.   Evidence that any required State and Federal permits have been obtained, or shall be obtained before approval of the final plat;

6.   Evidence that improvements or conditions required by the City, road authority, Clackamas County, special districts, utilities, and/or other service providers, as applicable to the project, have been or can be met; and

 

7.   If any part of the site is located within a specific area plan district, overlay zone, or previously approved master planned development, it shall conform to the applicable regulations and/or conditions.

B.  Layout and Design of Streets, Blocks and Lots. All proposed blocks, lots and parcels conform to the specific requirements below:

1.   All lots shall comply with the lot area, setback, and dimensional requirements of the applicable land use district (Article 16.2) and Section 16.50.030, Transportation standards, with the exception of lots created specifically for the purposes of fee acquisition in conjunction with either public or private utility projects, which may be any size.

2.   Setbacks shall be as required by the applicable land use district (Article 16.2).

3.   Each lot shall conform to the standards of Chapter 16.41, Access and Circulation.

4.   Landscape or other screening may be required to maintain privacy for abutting uses. See Article 16.2, Land Use Districts, and Chapter 16.42, Landscaping.

5.   In conformance with the Uniform Fire Code, a twenty (20) foot width fire apparatus access drive shall be provided to serve all portions of a building that are located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public right-of-way, private street or approved access drive. See Chapter 16.41, Access and Circulation.

6.   Where a common drive is to be provided to serve more than one lot, a reciprocal easement which will ensure access and maintenance rights shall be recorded with the approved subdivision or partition plat.

7.   All applicable engineering design standards for streets, utilities, surface water management, and easements shall be met.

8.   All cuts and fills shall comply with the standards and provisions in Section 16.50.100.

C.  Easement Provisions. The following shall govern the location, improvement and layout of easements:

1.   Utilities. Easements for utilities shall be provided on side and rear lot lines where deemed necessary by the appropriate service providers. Insofar as possible, easements shall be continuous, aligned from block to block within the development and compatible with adjoining existing developments. All easements shall not be less than five feet in width.

2.   Unusual Facilities. Easements for unusual facilities such as high voltage electric transmission lines, drainage canals or pondage areas shall be of such width as is determined adequate by the responsible agency, including any necessary maintenance roads. These shall be fully designated upon the final plat or map, as to their use, purpose and ownership.

3.   Watercourses. Where a development is traversed or bounded by a watercourse, drainageway, wasteway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream and of such width for construction, maintenance and control as will be adequate for the purpose as required by the responsible agency. For those developments which are bounded by a stream, stream bank easements shall be required for pedestrian paths. The width of watercourse easements shall be determined by the City and the developer using Chapter 16.50 and the Happy Valley drainage study as guides to the establishment of such easements.

 

4.   Conservation. There shall be provided within any subdivision or planned unit development which borders or has within its boundaries a lake, pond, wetland or perennial stream, a conservation easement of thirty (30) feet in width along both sides of the lake or stream within which building construction shall not be allowed. The dimension shall be measured from the known or documented high water mark. The conservation easement shall be held by the homeowner’s association, if any, or dedicated to the City. Necessary maintenance shall be provided by the grantor of the easement.

D.  Minimum Improvement Standards.

1.   All new street improvements shall conform with the adopted minimum installation, material and construction standards for all public street improvements pursuant to Chapter 16.50, the Happy Valley Transportation System Plan, and the City’s Engineering Design Standards Details Manual.

2.   All new streets within proposed subdivisions and PUDs shall be developed as City streets regardless of the size of the total development or the average lot size within the development; such developments may have private streets developed within them as approved by the City and pursuant to the criteria of Section 16.50.030; and

a.     It shall clearly state on the final plat all the reservations and restrictions relating to such private streets;

b.     A private street shall provide access to no more than five dwelling units;

c.     Private streets may not constitute the total length of roads within a planned unit development;

d.     To insure maintenance of such private roads there shall be established within the organization of any land division a legal and permanent procedure to insure said maintenance. Such procedure shall be prepared by the developer and/or property owner and approved by the City.

3.   All streets within all proposed partitions, subdivisions and planned unit developments shall be a continuation of a County road or City street. A private street may serve a partition if the extension of a public street is not possible, but must meet the private street standards as described in subsection (D)(2) of this section. All new streets shall be compatible with and in accordance with the City’s existing street development pattern and the adopted transportation plan.

E.  County Surveyor’s Requirements. The Clackamas County Surveyor shall require that all surveying and monumentation be pursuant to the appropriate State statutes.

F.  Conditions of Approval.

1.   The City may attach such conditions as are necessary to carry out provisions of this Code, and other applicable ordinances and regulations, and may require reserve strips be granted to the City for the purpose of controlling access to adjoining undeveloped properties. See Chapter 16.50 (Public Facilities).

2.   As a condition of any approval, a waiver of remonstrance against the formation of a local improvement district for the construction, improvement or extension of Level I and Level II services which benefit the property owner shall be required by the City.

3.   In situations where this Code requires the dedication of real property to the City, the City shall either: (a) include in the written decision evidence that shows that the required property dedication is directly related to and roughly proportional to the projected impacts of the development on public facilities and services, or (b) delete the dedication as a condition of approval.

(Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.070 Variances authorized.
Variances to the standards of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 16.71, Variances. Applications for variances shall be submitted at the same time an application for land division or lot line adjustment is submitted, and the applications shall be reviewed together. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.080 Final plat submission requirements and approval criteria.
A.  Submission Requirements. Final plats shall be reviewed and approved by the City prior to recording with Clackamas County. The applicant shall submit the final plat within two years of the approval of the preliminary plat as provided by Section 16.63.040. Specific information about the format and size of the plat, number of copies and other detailed information can be obtained from the Planning Official.

B.  Approval Criteria. The Planning Official and City Engineer shall review the final plat and shall approve or deny the final plat based on findings regarding compliance with the following criteria:

1.   The final plat is consistent in design (e.g., number, area, dimensions of lots, easements, tracts, right-of-way) with the approved preliminary plat, and all conditions of approval have been satisfied;

2.   All public improvements required by the preliminary plat have been installed and approved by the City Engineer or appropriate service provider (e.g., road authority). Alternatively, if eighty (80) percent of the required public improvements are complete, and the developer has provided a performance guarantee for the incomplete work in accordance with Section 16.63.100;

3.   The streets and roads for public use are dedicated without reservation or restriction other than reversionary rights upon vacation of any such street or road and easements for public utilities;

4.   The streets and roads held for private uses have been approved by the City as conforming to the preliminary plat;

5.   The plat and deed contain a dedication to the public of all public improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, public pathways and trails, access reserve strips, parks, sewage disposal storm drainage and water supply systems;

6.   The applicant has provided copies of all recorded homeowners association covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs); deed restrictions; private easements and agreements (e.g., for access, common areas, parking, etc.); and other recorded documents pertaining to common improvements recorded and referenced on the plat;

7.   The plat complies with the applicable sections of this Code (i.e., there have been no changes in land use or development resulting in a Code violation since preliminary plat approval);

8.   Certification by the City or service district, as applicable, that water and sanitary sewer service is available to every lot depicted on the plat; or bond, contract or other assurance has been provided by the subdivider/partitioner to the City that such services will be installed in accordance with Chapter 16.50, Public Facilities, and the bond requirements of Section 16.63.100. The amount of the bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider/partitioner shall be determined by a registered professional engineer, subject to review and approval by the City;

9.   The plat contains an affidavit by the surveyor who surveyed the land, represented on the plat to the effect the land was correctly surveyed and marked with proper monuments as provided by ORS Chapter 92, indicating the initial point of the survey, and giving the dimensions and kind of such monument and its reference to some corner established by the U.S. Geological Survey, or giving two or more permanent objects for identifying its location.

(Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.090 Public improvements required.
Before City approval is certified on the final plat, all required public improvements shall be installed, inspected, and approved. Alternatively, if eighty (80) percent of the required public improvements are complete, the subdivider/partitioner shall provide a performance guarantee for the incomplete work, in accordance with Section 16.63.100. (Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.100 Performance guarantee.
Performance Guarantee Required. When a performance guarantee is required under Section 16.63.090, the subdivider/partitioner shall file an assurance of performance with the City pursuant to Section 16.50.080. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.110 Filing and recording.
A.  Filing Plat with County. Within sixty (60) days of the City approval of the final plat, the applicant shall submit the final plat to Clackamas County for signatures of County officials as required by ORS Chapter 92.

B.  Proof of Recording. Upon final recording with the County, the applicant shall submit to the City a mylar copy and three paper copies of all sheets of the recorded final plat. This shall occur prior to the issuance of building permits for the newly created lots.

C.  Prerequisites to Recording the Plat.

1.   No plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem taxes and all special assessments, fees, or other charges required by law to be placed on the tax roll have been paid in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92;

 

2.   No plat shall be recorded until it is approved by the County Surveyor in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.120 Re-platting and vacation of plats.
A.  Re-platting and Vacations. Any plat or portion thereof may be re-platted or vacated upon receiving an application signed by all of the owners as appearing on the deed.

B.  Procedure. All applications for a re-plat or vacation of a plat shall be processed in accordance with the procedures and standards for a plat vacation, street vacation, property line adjustment (including “re-plat”) (See Chapter 16.61, Types of Review Procedures). The road authority(ies) shall be notified of all applications for re-plats and street vacations. All street vacations shall also conform to the ORS Chapter 271.

C.  Basis for Denial. A re-plat or vacation application may be denied if it abridges or destroys any public right in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys; or if it fails to meet any applicable criteria.

D.  Recording of Vacations. All approved plat vacations shall be recorded in accordance with Section 16.63.110 and the following procedures:

1.   Once recorded, a re-plat or vacation shall operate to eliminate the force and effect of the plat prior to vacation; and

2.   Vacations shall also divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications described on the plat.

E.  After Sale of Lots. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated only in the manner herein, and provided that all of the owners of lots within the platted area consent in writing to the plat vacation.

F.  Street Requirement. Except as prohibited by law (e.g., ORS 92.837, Manufactured Home Park), in approving a right-of-way vacation or re-plat, the City may require dedication of access ways, paths or trails as a condition of the vacation of any public easement or right-of-way, in order to establish or maintain a safe, convenient and direct pedestrian and bicycle circulation system. Such requirements shall be coordinated with the applicable road authority. (Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.130 Planned unit development.
A.  Purpose. This section of the Code serves to specify the purposes, objectives, procedures, standards, requirements, conditions and other information necessary to accomplish a planned unit development (PUD). The purpose and intent of this section is to allow an alternative to the traditional subdivision that encourages conservation of natural features by relating design to the existing landscape; through the efficient use of land and public services (particularly, but not limited to situations where the existence of slopes, drainageways, or other natural features may preclude traditional subdivision design); and the creation of public and private common open space.

B.  Objectives. The following, though not requirements, are the objectives of the PUD portion of this chapter and shall be utilized to realize the inherent advantages of coordinated, flexible, comprehensive, long-range planning of such development:

1.   To provide more desirable living environments by preserving the natural character of open field, stands of trees, brooks, ponds, floodplains, hills and similar natural assets;

2.   To encourage, with regard to residential use, the provision of open space and the development of recreational facilities in a generally central location and within reasonable distance of all living units;

3.   To encourage developers to use a more creative and flexible approach in the development of living areas within the City;

4.   To provide for more efficient and aesthetic use of open areas;

5.   To encourage variety in the physical development pattern of the community by providing a variety and mixture of housing types and siting as well as the design of access and circulation.

C.  Area of Applicability. PUDs may be established in residential, commercial or industrial districts on parcels of land, which are suitable for and of sufficient size to be planned and developed in a manner consistent with the purposes and objectives of this section.

D.  All residential developments shall be developed as PUDs pursuant to the provisions in Section 16.63.130 whenever one or more of the following criteria apply:

1.   Any site larger than two acres where a minimum of ten (10) percent of the site contains environmentally constrained areas subject to Chapters 16.35 and/or Sections 16.34.010 through 16.34.080;

2.   All properties, either individual tax lots or contiguous lots under common ownership, consisting of fifty (50) or more acres on which are proposed to be developed more than one hundred (100) units;

3.   Any development in a residential district proposing more than four manufactured homes or forty (40) percent attached or common-wall units;

4.   Any development utilizing density transfer pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.63.

E.  Necessity for Application. For the purpose of considering any planned unit development, the developer may apply to the City at any time after the pre-application conference and review, using such forms as may be provided for the processing of a preliminary planned unit development. If the planned unit development includes a subdivision, one form for both purposes will be satisfactory.

F.  Filing Requirements.

1.   These requirements shall be the same as found in Section 16.63.050.

2.   At the time of formal application, the developer shall submit the following plan elements in detailed graphic form:

a.     Proposed land use and densities (see Section 16.63.020(F) for density and calculations);

b.     Building types and densities;

c.     Circulation pattern;

d.     Parks, playgrounds, open space, land dedication and easements;

e.     Existing natural features;

f.      Related land maps (topography, etc.);

g.     Location, arrangement, etc. of auto parking;

h.     Preliminary renderings of typical buildings;

i.      Preliminary tree planting schedule;

j.      Preliminary landscape plan in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 16.42.

3.   At the time of formal application, the developer shall submit the following program elements in detailed written form:

a.     Proposed ownership pattern;

b.     Operation and maintenance proposal;

c.     Waste disposal facilities;

d.     Lighting;

e.     Water supply;

f.      Tables illustrating acres for dwellings, off-street parking, streets, parks, playgrounds, dedicated lands, open space, schools and percentages of the gross and net development areas for each;

g.     Tables illustrating overall density, density by dwelling types and details of any density bonus or calculations;

h.     Preliminary documents providing for maintenance of open space and dedication of public spaces, development rights, easements, drainageways and land dedications or fees in lieu thereof;

i.      General time table of development;

j.      Qualifications of Proposed Design Team. All master plans for residential and neighborhood planned unit developments shall be prepared by professionals qualified in at least two of the four following: (i) a licensed architect, (ii) a registered professional engineer, (iii) a registered landscape architect, or (iv) a member of the American Planning Association;

k.     Proof of authorization for the agent to act on the landowner’s behalf, if appropriate, on a form supplied by the City, with all signatures notarized;

l.      Stages of development and construction.

G.  Distribution of Preliminary Subdivision Plats or Planned Unit Development Plans. As found in Section 16.63.050.

H.  Approval Criteria.

1.   The preliminary plat approval criteria as described in Section 16.63.030;

2.   In considering the preliminary planned unit development proposal, the Planning Commission shall apply the following additional criteria when making a determination:

a.     Density.

i.      The number of dwelling units permitted in a development is based on the net development area which is determined by subtracting twenty (20) percent of the gross development area and dividing by the minimum lot area per dwelling unit as required by the development district,

ii.     Where any site contains more than one development district within its project boundaries, any density calculations shall be applied in the same proportion as that of the development district which are represented in the project area,

iii.    In any planned unit development, the total siting of density as calculated through Section 16.63.020(F) in any steep slopes and natural resource overlay area shall not exceed the net density of the applicable district.

b.     Open Space.

i.      All planned unit developments shall have a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the development’s gross land area dedicated to public or commonly held open space and/or recreational area. The extent to which any type of open space satisfies the total open space requirement shall be in the sole discretion of the City. This twenty (20) percent requirement does not affect the density calculation.

(A)   Publicly dedicated open space must be adequate to carry out the Happy Valley Parks Master Plan, at the determination of the City. In all other instances, lands which are least suitable for development and/or which offer the greatest natural habitat potential should be given the highest priority for dedication as open space. Dedicated open space shall be suitable for linkage through a network of trails, bike paths, and greenways.

(B)   Considering the existing and planned public parks within the City, publicly dedicated open spaces within any PUD should focus on activities not otherwise available or planned for in existing and planned public parks.

ii.     Land area to be used for scenic, landscaping or open recreational purposes within the development shall not include streets, rights-of-way, driveways or parking spaces.

iii.    All open space areas shall be improved, preserved and maintained as a natural area and/or recreation area. All proposed open space areas that are identified as significant natural resources by the City’s significant wetlands and riparian corridors map, the urban forestry plan tree inventory, or any other ordinance of the City, shall be enhanced, preserved and maintained as natural areas. Prior to preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall submit a landscape plan showing the required elements detailed below in the corresponding subsections (H)(2)(c) (Natural Area) and (H)(2)(d) (Recreational Area) for approval by the review body. Landscape plans shall incorporate existing natural features wherever possible.

iv.    All trees in open space areas, except hazard trees and trees in utility or access easements, over six inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) shall be retained on the site regardless of proposed use and incorporated into the required landscape plan. Open space areas shall provide assurance to the City for one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated cost of the open space project through a bond, escrow account or certified letter of credit. Open space areas shall be completed as shown in the approved plans and inspected and approved by the City prior to final approval (“walk-through”) of the infrastructure improvements, or shall be provided for by financial guarantee. The City will require a maintenance bond or other financial guarantee for the open space improvements which will be held for two years after improvements are made to ensure plant survival. Plants that do not survive shall be replaced by the applicant during the first two years after the open space is improved. The applicant may obtain park system development charge credits for open space areas that are improved according to this section and then dedicated to the City if located within the Happy Valley Parks Master Plan. The City reserves the right to refuse offers of dedication.

v.     For all natural features on the site, including streams, intermittent streams, ponds and/or wetlands, the applicant shall obtain verification from the appropriate State and Federal agencies of jurisdiction over the feature. If a State and/or Federal agency claims jurisdiction over a natural feature on the site, and where the requirements of this chapter conflict with the requirements of the regulatory agency(s), the most stringent requirements shall apply.

c.     Natural Area. The required landscape plan for a natural area shall be prepared by a certified professional biologist, ecologist and/or landscape architect and include:

i.      Clearly defined methods for improving and protecting native vegetation and habitat on the site and mitigating the impacts of the proposed PUD;

ii.     Planting of native plants that are on the City native plant list (see Happy Valley Plant List, Appendix A) and of the same ecosystem type that existed on the site prior to initial development disturbances;

iii.    All proposed open space areas that are included in the City’s urban forestry plan tree inventory shall incorporate the management suggestions from the plan for that area;

iv.    Plantings shall include a mix of at least three species each of groundcover, shrubs and trees. Plantings adjacent to significant water features shall be designed to provide shade for the water feature;

v.     Plantings shall be of a sufficient quantity to provide structurally diverse vegetation on the site;

vi.    Native vegetation shall be verified by the professional preparing the plan to cover at least seventy (70) percent of the site in five years. Plantings shall be arranged to replicate natural conditions, using methods such as clustering where appropriate. Exceptions to seventy (70) percent cover requirement may be granted by the review body if the applicant submits substantial evidence to convince the review body that the site cannot achieve this level of cover;

vii.   A plan for removal of harmful or invasive species, as identified in the Nuisance or Prohibited Plants sections of the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A), on the site detailing specific treatments, timing and long-term maintenance to rid the site of invasive species. All invasive species on the site shall be removed prior to dedication of the site to the homeowner’s association or the City. The use of herbicides for controlling harmful and invasive species should be minimized. The following best management practices are required where herbicide application is deemed necessary by the professional preparing the landscape plans:

(A)   If herbicides, pesticides and/or fertilizers are proposed, an evaluation of application methods, effects on target and nontarget species, and the potential impacts to aquatic and terrestrial systems shall be included in the plan. Consider persistence, soil/water mobility, toxicity and plant uptake when selecting appropriate chemicals,

(B)   Treatments for the control or removal of invasive plants in riparian/wetland areas shall be limited to hand or wick applications by qualified personnel,

(C)   Apply chemicals during calm, dry weather to avoid transport from target areas by wind and/or water. Avoid applications where irrigation water may wash chemicals from target areas,

(D)   Maintain unsprayed buffer areas near aquatic habitats and other sensitive areas. A minimum two hundred (200) foot radius, no-spray buffers shall be maintained around all known populations of sensitive, threatened and endangered plant and animal species,

(E)   Application shall not occur in the vicinity of wetlands or ponds from January through June to minimize the potential for adverse impacts to amphibians during the breeding and egg development periods;

viii.  A detailed map showing the natural area, the proposed improvements on the site, and the site’s connections to other wildlife habitat areas as determined by a certified wildlfe biologist. If there are no existing connections, detail methods for providing connections. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the review body if the applicant submits substantial evidence to the review body that the site has no opportunity for connectivity;

ix.    A three-year irrigation plan for new plantings detailing available irrigation facilities or other watering methods that will be used to serve the site. The applicant shall water the new plantings using a timed irrigation system or other watering method during the months of June through September;

x.     If a passive recreational facility is proposed, a plan for the facility including methods for installing the facility with minimal impact on the natural area. The professional preparing the plan shall considering buffers for streams and wetlands, erosion, and removal of trees when locating the passive recreational facility. Areas with significant natural resources may require permits from state and/or Federal regulatory agencies to install such facilities. All trails and pathways shall conform to the City’s transportation system plan;

xi.    A ten (10) year maintenance plan for the open space with cost projections to be provided to the future owners of the property (the homeowner’s association or Happy Valley). If the open space is dedicated to the homeowner’s association, the codes, covenants, and restrictions of the PUD shall include a provision requiring the homeowner’s association to abide by the approved ten (10) year maintenance plan or submit an alternative plan to the Planning Official or designee for approval. If the open space is dedicated to the City, the City Public Works Department agrees to abide by the ten (10) year maintenance plan or provide an alternative plan for approval by the Planning Official or designee.

d.     Recreational Area. Proposed recreational uses may be passive or active. The recreational use shall be approved by the review body and shall conform with the Happy Valley Parks Master Plan, as appropriate, and the City’s Transportation System Plan. Passive recreational facilities proposed in a natural area are subject to the requirements of the Natural Area (subsection (I)(b)(5)(A) of this section). Active recreational facilities in a recreational area are subject to the criteria of this subsection and shall not abut arterial roadways or include non-active spaces such as stormwater detention facilities. Recreational facilities located near an arterial roadway shall be separated by a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet, to include landscaping per subsection (I)(2)(d)(i) and a minimum six-foot tall solid wood fence. The required landscape plan for a recreational area shall be prepared by a certified professional landscape architect or other qualified professional and shall include:

i.      Planting plans to include a mix of at least three species each of groundcover, shrubs, and trees. Plantings shall not include any plants on the City’s nuisance plant list (see Happy Valley Plant List, Appendix A). Plantings shall provide for at least fifty (50) percent groundcover of the site and shall provide for at least twenty (20) percent of the site being planted with a mix of trees and shrubs. Use of native plant species is encouraged;

ii.     A plan for removal of harmful or invasive species, as identified by in the nuisance or prohibited plants sections of the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A), on the site detailing specific treatments, timing, and long-term maintenance to rid the site of invasive species. All harmful or invasive species on the site shall be removed prior to dedication of the site to the homeowner’s association or the City. The use of herbicides for controlling harmful and invasive species should be minimized. The following best management practices are required where herbicide application is deemed necessary by the professional preparing the landscape plans:

(A)   If herbicides, pesticides and/or fertilizers are proposed, an evaluation of application methods, effects on target and nontarget species, and the potential impacts to aquatic and terrestrial systems shall be included in the plan. Consider persistence, soil/water mobility, toxicity and plant uptake when selecting appropriate chemicals,

(B)   Treatments for the control or removal of invasive plants in riparian/wetland areas shall be limited to hand or wick applications by qualified personnel,

(C)   Apply chemicals during calm, dry weather to avoid transport from target areas by wind and/or water. Avoid applications where irrigation water may wash chemicals from target areas,

(D)   Maintain unsprayed buffer areas near aquatic habitats and other sensitive areas. A minimum two hundred (200) foot radius, no-spray buffers shall be maintained around all known populations of sensitive, threatened and endangered plant and animal species,

(E)   Application shall not occur in the vicinity of wetlands or ponds from January through June to minimize the potential for adverse impacts to amphibians during the breeding and egg development periods;

iii.    A description of the recreational use provided and a plan for installing the associated capital improvements to provide the recreational use. Plans shall include facilities for pedestrian access to the use and around the site. All pedestrian connections shall conform to the City’s transportation system plan;

iv.    Plans for an irrigation and drainage system to serve the site. Timed irrigation systems and drainage systems shall be installed prior to landscaping the site;

v.     A ten (10) year maintenance plan for the open space with cost projections to be provided to the future owners of the property (the homeowner’s association or Happy Valley). If the open space is dedicated to the homeowner’s association, the codes, covenants, and restrictions of the PUD shall include a provision requiring the homeowner’s association to abide by the approved ten (10) year maintenance plan or submit an alternative plan to the Planning Official or designee for approval. If the open space is dedicated to the City, the City Public Works Department agrees to abide by the ten (10) year maintenance plan or provide an alternative plan to be approved by the Planning Official or designee;

vi.    The applicant shall submit a landscape plan for any proposed detention facility. The landscape plan shall include a mixture of native plants, trees and shrubs suitable to the environment of the facility, with the intention of screening and buffering the facility from surrounding residences and providing shade to the interior of the facility. An irrigation system shall be installed to water plants in the detention facility during the months of June through September;

vii.   Open space tracts shall be recorded as tracts on the final plat. For the assurance of permanent open space, the applicant shall record all open space tracts as permanent open space on the final plat.

e.     Lot Size and Dimensions. Minimum area, width, depth, frontage and setback requirements may be less than development district minimums if in accordance with the general development plan, except that the garage of any structure shall not be located less than twenty (20) feet from a public right-of-way and minimum lot size for single-family detached lots shall not be less than five thousand (5,000) square feet within eighty (80) percent of the net developable area of the subject development. Within the twenty (20) percent remainder area, lot sizes may decrease by a maximum of ten (10) percent. Lots which are located on the perimeter of a proposed development in all residential zones which are adjacent to lots in an R-10, R-15, R-20, or R-40 zone upon which are constructed single-family dwellings, may not be less than seventy-five (75) percent of the average lot area per unit of the immediately abutting lots, or the development district minimum lot size of the subject parcel, whichever is less. If adjacent lands are undeveloped or minimum densities on the subject parcel cannot be met due to natural resource protection requirements, this provision does not apply. All PUD development involving clustered development due to natural resource constraints or involving attached housing shall be subject to a perimeter setback equal to the minimum rear, interior side or street side yard setback of the adjacent residential district, as applicable.

f.      Staging.

i.      Applicant can elect to proceed with the development in successive stages and steps (schedule must be included in the general development plan). Each stage must be eighty (80) percent complete within itself before the successive stage may be commenced.

ii.     The review body shall require development to proceed in stages if Level I facilities serving the site are not adequate to permit full development of the project at any given time. Full development must be staged to be commensurate with the full and adequate provision of Level I facilities and services.

I.   Minimum Design Standards. As pursuant to Section 16.63.060(B).

J.   Minimum Improvement Standards. As pursuant to Section 16.63.060(D).

K.  Final Procedure—Planned Unit Development.

1.   As pursuant to Section 16.63.080;

2.   Changes and Modifications.

a.     Major Changes. Major changes in the approved PUD shall be considered the same as a new petition and shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in this section.

b.     Minor Changes. Minor changes in the general plan may be approved by the Planning Official or designee or designee following the administrative decision process provided that such changes:

i.      Do not increase residential or employment densities;

ii.     Do not change boundaries;

iii.    Do not change any use;

iv.    Do not change the location or amount of land devoted to specific land uses.

Such changes may include minor shifting of the location of buildings, setbacks, proposed streets, public or private ways, utility easements, recreation facilities, public open spaces, etc. For quantifiable changes, a general threshold of ten (10) percent shall be used in determining if a proposed change is minor in nature. For example, ten (10) percent of a required yard, ten (10) percent of lot size, etc.

L.  Density Calculations.

1.   Purpose. Density calculation is the means by which density for any parcel may be determined and ultimately within that parcel in a more efficient and land conscious manner. This portion of the Land Development Code provides the method for calculating the overall density for any given parcel of land which may contain both buildable and unbuildable areas.

2.   Benefit. The following benefits may accrue to the property developer and the City from density calculations:

a.     The minimal extension of services within a cluster as opposed to the entire parcel;

b.     Overall reduced development costs and the resultant lower housing prices;

c.     Greater ease of maintenance of services and facilities;

d.     Energy savings;

e.     Open space;

f.      Greater efficiency of land use;

g.     Protection of slope and resource areas, such as drainageways and creek channels, and hazard areas.

3.   Procedure. Density calculations shall be determined by the procedures in Section 16.63.020(F).

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 534 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.63.140 Property line adjustments.
A property line adjustment is the modification of lot boundaries, when no lot is created or removed. The application submission and approval process is as follows:

A.  Submission Requirements. All applications for property line adjustment shall be made on forms provided by the City and shall include information required for a Type I application, as governed by Section 16.61.020. The application shall include a preliminary lot line map drawn to scale identifying all existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions; footprints and dimensions of existing structures (including accessory structures); location and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject lots; location of natural resource areas and significant trees; existing fences and walls; and any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Official or designee for ensuring compliance with City codes.

B.  Approval Process.

1.   Decision-Making Process. Property line adjustments shall be reviewed by means of a Type I procedure, as governed by Section 16.61.020, using approval criteria contained in Subsection 16.63.140(C) below. The road authority(ies) shall be notified of lot line adjustments that may affect property access or traffic volumes or operations on their facilities.

2.   Time Limit on Approval. The property line adjustment approval shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval, during which time it must be recorded.

3.   Lapsing of Approval. The property line adjustment approval shall lapse if:

a.     The property line adjustment is not recorded within the time limit in Section 16.63.140(B)(2);

b.     The property line adjustment has been improperly recorded with Clackamas County without the satisfactory completion of all conditions attached to the approval; or

c.     The final recording is a departure from the approved plan.

C.  Approval Criteria. The Planning Official or designee shall approve or deny a request for a property line adjustment in writing based on all of the following criteria:

1.   State Law. All property line adjustments shall be consistent with ORS 92.192.

2.   Parcel Creation. No additional parcel or lot is created or removed by the lot line adjustment.

3.   Lot Standards. All lots and parcels conform to the applicable lot standards of the land use district (Article 16.2) including lot area, dimensions, setbacks, and coverage, and no resulting lot is wholly comprised of a flood hazard area or jurisdictional wetland. If a lot is nonconforming as to any development standard, it shall not be made even less conforming by the property line adjustment.

4.   Access and Road Authority Standards. All lots and parcels conform to the standards or requirements of Chapter 16.41 Access and Circulation, and all applicable road authority requirements are met. If a lot is nonconforming to any City or road authority standard, it shall not be made even less conforming by the property line adjustment.

5.   Any adjustment or removal of a property line or public easement involving a parcel in a recorded partition plat or lot line in a recorded subdivision shall be performed by means of the “re-plat” process specified in ORS 92.180 to 92.190, subject to final review and approval by the Clackamas County Surveyor (see Chapter 16.61, Types of Review Procedures).

D.  Recording Property Line Adjustments.

1.   Recording. Upon the City’s approval of the proposed property line adjustment, the applicant shall record the property line adjustment with Clackamas County within one year of approval (or the decision expires), and submit a copy of the recorded survey map and deeds to the City, to be filed with the approved application.

2.   Time Limit. The applicant shall submit a copy of the recorded property line adjustment survey map and deeds to the City within fifteen (15) days of recording and prior to the issuance of any building permits on the re-configured lots.

E.  Extension. The City shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year provided that:

1.   No changes are made to the original property line adjustment as approved by the City;

2.   The applicant can show intent of recording the approved plan within the one-year extension period;

3.   There have been no changes in the applicable Code or plan provisions on which the approval was based. In the case where the property line adjustment conflicts with a Code change, the extension shall be denied; and

4.   The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.64 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
16.64.010 Purpose.
There are certain uses, which, due to the nature of their impacts on surrounding land uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and analysis. These are identified as “conditional uses” in Article 16.2, Land Use Districts. The purpose of Chapter 16.64 is to provide standards and procedures under which a conditional use may be permitted, enlarged or altered if the site is appropriate and if other appropriate conditions of approval can be met. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.64.020 Approvals process.
A.  Initial Application. An application for a new conditional use shall be processed as a Type III-PC procedure (Section 16.61.040). The application shall meet submission requirements in Section 16.64.030, and the approval criteria contained in Section 16.64.040.

B.  Modification of Approved or Existing Conditional Use. Modifications to approved or existing conditional uses shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 16.66, Modifications. (Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.64.030 Application submission requirements.
In addition to the submission requirements required in Chapter 16.61, an application for conditional use approval must include the following information in subsections A through H, as applicable. For a description of each item, please refer to Section 16.62.030, Design Review:

A.  Existing site conditions;

B.  Site plan;

C.  Preliminary grading plan;

D.  A landscape plan;

E.  Architectural drawings of all structures;

F.  Drawings of all proposed signs;

G.  A copy of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants;

H.  Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with all applicable approval criteria in Section 16.64.040. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.64.040 Criteria, standards and conditions of approval.
The City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional use or to enlarge or alter a conditional use based on findings of fact with respect to each of the standards and criteria in subsections A through C.

A.  Use Criteria.

1.   The site size, dimensions, location, topography and access are adequate for the needs of the proposed use, considering the proposed building mass, parking, traffic, noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, visibility, safety, and aesthetic considerations;

2.   The negative impacts of the proposed use on adjacent properties and on the public can be mitigated through application of other Code standards, or other reasonable conditions of approval; and

3.   All required public facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposal.

B.  Site Design Standards. The design review approval criteria (Section 16.62.030) shall be met.

C.  Conditions of Approval. The City may impose conditions that are found necessary to ensure that the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity, and that the negative impact of the proposed use on the surrounding uses and public facilities is minimized. These conditions include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.   Limiting the hours, days, place and/or manner of operation;

2.   Requiring site or architectural design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor and/or dust;

3.   Requiring larger setback areas, lot area, and/or lot depth or width;

4.   Limiting the building or structure height, size or lot coverage, and/or location on the site;

5.   Designating the size, number, location and/or design of vehicle access points or parking areas;

6.   Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and street(s), sidewalks, curbs, planting strips, pathways, or trails to be improved;

7.   Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, water quality facilities, and/or improvement of parking and loading areas;

8.   Limiting the number, size, location, height and/or lighting of signs;

9.   Limiting or setting standards for the location, design, and/or intensity of outdoor lighting;

10. Requiring berms, screening or landscaping and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance;

11. Requiring and designating the size, height, location and/or materials for fences;

12. Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, drainage areas, historic resources, cultural resources, and/or nature resource lands;

13. Requiring the dedication of sufficient land to the public, and/or construction of pedestrian/bicycle pathways in accordance with the adopted plans, or requiring the recording of a local improvement district non-remonstrance agreement for the same. Dedication of land and construction shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 16.41, and Chapter 16.42 in particular.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.64.050 Additional development standards.
A.  Concurrent Variance Application(s). A conditional use permit shall not grant variances to regulations otherwise prescribed by the Development Code. Variance application(s) may be filed in conjunction with the conditional use application, and both applications may be reviewed at the same hearing.

B.  Additional Development Standards. Development standards for specific uses are contained in Article 16.2, Land Use Districts. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.65 MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
16.65.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this section are to:

A.  Implement the Comprehensive Plan and applicable land use district(s) by providing a means for master planning large development sites;

B.  Encourage innovative planning that results in projects that benefit the community (i.e., through compatible mixed use development, improved protection of open spaces, transportation options and consistent application of standards in phased developments);

C.  Preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape features and amenities that may not otherwise be protected through conventional development;

D.  Facilitate the review of multi-phased developments that are intended to be constructed over a three- to seven-year period and ensure that individual phases will be coordinated with each other over the duration of the final master plan;

E.  Ensure that a full range of public facilities and services are available or will be provided for the proposed phased development and to plan the extension of necessary public infrastructure in a timely and efficient manner;

F.  Determine specific land uses, a range of minimum to maximum square footage of nonresidential uses and a range of minimum to maximum densities of residential uses, the arrangement of uses, and the location of public facilities and transportation systems;

G.  Identify, during the public review process, potential impacts, including, but not limited to, noise, shading, glare, utility capacity and traffic and consider alternatives for mitigating these impacts to affected properties and/or public facilities;

H.  Provide the property owner with the assurance needed over the long term to plan for and execute the proposed development. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.020 Applicability.
A.  A master plan prepared in accordance with this chapter is required for the following:

1.   A quasi-judicial application to rezone sites (twenty (20) acres and larger). A preliminary master plan may be submitted for review concurrently with the zone change application or at a later date; however, in no case shall a change to the official zoning map become effective until a final master plan has been approved and effective for the site.

2.   Master plans within these areas shall encourage mixed use developments which will provide commercial retail and office employment opportunities, and compact residential neighborhoods close to the commercial services within the City.

3.   Development within the Regional Center Mixed Use (RC-MU) zone.

4.   Developments within the Mixed Commercial Center (MCC) zone involving twenty (20) acres or more of land.

B.  An applicant may elect to develop a project as a master planned development in compliance with the requirements of this chapter provided the site is at least twenty (20) acres in size. A site may be within any zone or combination of zones and the master plan may allow any combination of uses permitted by the underlying zone or zones within applicable mapped zoning district boundaries. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2017; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.030 Review and approvals process.
A.  Review Steps. There are two required steps to master plan approval, which may be reviewed individually or combined into one package for concurrent review:

1.   The approval of a preliminary master plan; and

2.   The approval of a final master plan.

B.  Approval Process.

1.   The preliminary master plan shall be reviewed using the Type III-PC procedure in Section 16.61.040, the submission requirements in Section 16.65.050, and the approval criteria in Section 16.65.060.

2.   The final master plan shall be reviewed using the Type II procedure in Section 16.61.030, to ensure substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plan and the criteria in Section 16.65.090.

C.  The preliminary master plan may be reviewed concurrently with other applications including a comprehensive plan/zoning map amendment, preliminary land division, specific area plans, land use district map and text amendments.

D.  A land division (final plat), design review, conditional use permit or variance application that implements the various phases of proposed development shall not be submitted concurrently with the preliminary master plan. These applications may be submitted after final master plan approval becomes effective, as described in Section 16.65.100.

E.  A neighborhood meeting is required prior to submittal of a preliminary master plan application. In order to provide the opportunity for early citizen involvement in the master plan review process, the applicant shall provide notice and invite citizen participation by initiating a neighborhood meeting. The meeting shall be scheduled after the pre-application meeting and prior to the formal submittal of a preliminary master plan application. The applicant shall be responsible for scheduling and organizing the meeting, arranging the meeting place, notice and all related costs. The notice shall provide a brief description of the proposal and shall be mailed to those property owners and residents within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed master plan. The meeting may be held in any public or private building capable of accommodating the proceeding. The building selected should be in the vicinity of the proposed development. The applicant shall submit a summary of the questions raised and responses made at this meeting with the preliminary master plan application as required in Section 16.65.050. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.040 Modification of district standards (Article 16.2) and community design standards (Article 16.4).
The district standards in Article 16.2 and design standards of Article 16.4 may be modified through the master plan approval without the need for variances, except that the following standards within Articles 16.2 and 16.4 shall not be modified:

A.  Public improvement standards and engineering design criteria shall not be modified without variance to such standards approved by the City Engineer. The City may grant such variances concurrently with other planned development approvals;

B.  Residential densities, as allowed under the Comprehensive Plan; and

C.  Industrial and commercial uses, if not otherwise allowed in a residential district, shall not be allowed in a residential district master plan. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.050 Preliminary master plan submission.
A.  General Submission Requirements. The applicant shall submit an application containing all of the general information required for a Type III-PC procedure, as governed by Section 16.61.040. In addition, the applicant shall submit the following:

1.   A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant;

2.   The proposed number of residential units and/or square footage of commercial, industrial and/or public uses and the density or intensity of proposed uses, including applicable Floor Area Ratios (FARs);

3.   Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in Section 16.65.060;

4.   Special studies prepared by qualified professionals may be required by the Planning Official, Planning Commission or City Council to determine potential traffic, geologic, noise, environmental, natural resource and other impacts, and required mitigation.

B.  Additional Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection A above, the concept plan, data, and narrative shall include the following exhibits and information:

1.   Existing conditions map, as defined in Section 16.62.030, Design review application submission requirements;

2.   A vicinity map drawn to scale depicting existing bus stops, streets, driveways, pedestrian and bicycle connections, fire hydrants and other transportation/fire access issues within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed master plan site;

3.   Proposed site plan identifying land uses, building envelopes, pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation and access, parking areas, open space, utility connections, boundaries of existing and proposed land use districts and other information necessary to convey the general development plan;

4.   Grading concept and stormwater management plan including existing and proposed elevations, site grades and contours, general drainage patterns and discharge locations, and the estimated size and location of stormwater management systems components;

5.   Landscape concept (e.g., shows retention of existing vegetation and general planting areas);

6.   Architectural concept (e.g., information sufficient to describe architectural styles, building heights, and general materials);

7.   Sign concept plan (e.g., locations, general size, style and materials of signs);

8.   A public right-of-way/easement/public place map depicting the reservation, dedication, or use of the proposed master plan site for public purposes, including, but not limited to: rights-of-way showing the name and location of all existing and proposed public and private streets within or on the boundary of the proposed master plan site, the right-of-way and paving dimensions, and the ownership and maintenance status, if applicable, and the location, width and construction material of all existing and proposed sidewalks; pedestrian access ways and trails; proposed easements; existing easements; parks; open spaces, including plazas; transit facilities; and school sites;

9.   A Traffic Impact Study, as specified in Section 16.61.090, the scope of which shall be established by the City’s Traffic Engineer;

10. A Phasing Plan. The phasing plan shall illustrate the proposed location of buildings, streets, utilities and landscaping. Phasing shall progress in a sequence that provides street connectivity between the various phases and accommodates other required public improvements such as wastewater facilities, stormwater management, electricity and water. The phasing plan shall consist of maps and a narrative with an overall schedule or description of on-/off-site phasing including, but not limited to: the type, location and timing of proposed uses, building locations; proposed public facilities including on-/off-site streets and traffic signals or other traffic control devices and utilities with the designation of construction and maintenance responsibility; estimated start/completion dates with a proposed type of financial guarantee, including, but not limited to, a bond, letter of credit, joint deposit or other security in a form acceptable to the City, submitted by the property owner, a future buyer and/or a developer, to ensure planned infrastructure improvements will occur with each phase, if necessary, or when required by the City, affected local agency or the State (the formal submittal of a required guarantee typically occurs during the final master plan review process and/or development implementation); a statement of the applicant’s intentions with regard to the future selling or leasing (if known at the time of preliminary master plan submittal) of all or portions of the proposed development (where a residential subdivision is proposed, the statement shall also include the applicant’s intentions whether the applicant or others will construct the homes); and the relationship of pedestrian and bicycle connectivity and open space requirements to the proposed phasing;

11. Neighborhood Meeting Summary. The applicant shall submit a summary of issues raised at the neighborhood meeting as specified in Section 16.65.030(D);

12. A copy of all proposed and any existing covenants, conditions, and restrictions that may control development, if applicable; and

13. Annexation. A general schedule of proposed annexation consistent with the phasing plan, if applicable.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.060 Preliminary master plan approval criteria.
The City shall make findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied when approving or approving with conditions, the preliminary master plan. The City shall make findings that not all of the criteria are not satisfied when denying an application:

A.  Comprehensive Plan. All relevant provisions of the Comprehensive Plan are met;

B.  Articles 16.2, 16.3 and 16.4 Standards. All of the land use, development, and design standards contained in Articles 16.2, 16.3 and 16.4 are met, except as may be modified in Section 16.65.040;

C.  Open Space. A residential master plan shall contain a minimum of twenty (20) percent useable open space and a nonresidential master plan shall contain a minimum of ten (10) percent useable open space. A mixed-use master plan shall contain a percentage of open space based on the proportional amount of gross site area used for residential and nonresidential uses. This requirement may be satisfied by Section 16.63.130, if part of a planned unit development. Public open space shall be integral to the master plan. Plans shall emphasize public gathering places such as community centers, plazas, neighborhood parks, trails, and other publicly accessible spaces that integrate land use and transportation and contribute toward a sense of place. Where public or common private open space is designated, the following standards apply:

1.   The open space area shall be shown on the final plan and recorded with the final plat or separate instrument, and

2.   The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

a.     By dedication to the City as publicly owned and maintained open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the City must be within the Happy Valley Parks Master Plan and capital improvement plan and acceptable to the City with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition (i.e., the applicant may be required to provide a level one environmental assessment), and budgetary and maintenance abilities, or

b.     By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, home association or other legal entity;

D.  Transportation System Capacity. With the addition of traffic from the proposed development, there is either sufficient capacity in the City’s existing transportation system to accommodate the development proposed in all future phases or there will be adequate capacity by the time each phase of development is completed. Adopted State and/or local mobility standards, as applicable, shall be used to determine transportation system capacity;

E.  Circulation and Parking. Circulation and parking have been designed to facilitate traffic safety and avoid congestion and to provide bicycle and pedestrian connectivity within the property and to nearby transit stops and public areas;

F.  Public Utilities. Existing public utilities either have sufficient capacity to support the proposed development in all future phases adequately, or there will be adequate capacity available by the time each phase of development is completed;

G.  Physical Features. Physical features, including, but not limited to slopes subject to the City’s Steep Slopes Development Overlay, areas with susceptibility to flooding, significant clusters of trees and shrubs, riparian, wildlife, and wetland resources subject to the City’s Natural Resource Overlay Zone, rock outcroppings and open spaces and areas of historic and/or archaeological significance will be preserved to the extent feasible;

H.  Phasing Plan. The Phasing Plan demonstrates that the construction of required public facilities shall occur in a logical sequence, either in conjunction with, or prior to each phase, or that there are appropriate financial guarantees to ensure the phased public facilities construction will occur;

I.   Compatibility with Adjacent Uses. The proposed preliminary master plan contains design elements including, but not limited to landscaping/screening, parking/traffic management, and multi-modal transportation that limit and/or mitigate identified conflicts between the site and adjacent uses;

J.   Planned Mixed Use Areas. The following list provides a list of objectives of the master plan portion of this title and shall be utilized as general guidelines when evaluating master plans:

1.   To provide for a desirable urban living and working environment with a compact urban form, and a mixture of uses,

2.   To provide for the protection of natural resources, while meeting the employment and population targets set by the Metro Urban Growth Management Functional Plan for the City of Happy Valley,

3.   To encourage developers to use a more creative and flexible approach in the development of commercial and residential areas within the City,

4.   To provide a process that allows creativity and flexibility.

(Ord. 534 § 1, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.070 Administrative procedures.
A.  Preliminary Master Plan—Conditions. The City may attach conditions to a preliminary master plan that the City deems necessary to ensure compliance with the approval criteria in Section 16.65.060 and all other applicable provisions of this Code. All conditions shall be satisfied prior to final master plan approval. Certain conditions may require an adequate financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the City to ensure compliance.

B.  Time Limit. Within two years after the date of approval of the preliminary master plan, the applicant or the applicant’s successor shall prepare and file with the City a final master plan, in conformance with Section 16.65.080.

C.  Extension. The City may, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year provided that:

 

1.   No changes have been made on the preliminary master plan as approved;

2.   The applicant can show intent of applying for final master plan review within the one-year extension period;

3.   There have been no material changes to the applicable elements of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code provisions on which the approval was based; and

4.   The extension request is made before expiration of the original approval period.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.080 Final master plan submission requirements.
The final master plan shall illustrate the location of proposed buildings, streets, utilities, parking and landscape areas. The final master plan shall incorporate all conditions of approval. The final master plan application shall include:

A.  A narrative that lists the conditions of approval, explains how each condition is met and references the applicable preliminary master plan maps and diagrams or plan sheets that required revision as a condition of approval;

B.  The specific maps, diagrams, plan sheets or other documents referenced above that have been revised and/or demonstrate conformance with the preliminary master plan approval; and

C.  Any other information that may be required by the City. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.090 Final master plan approval criteria.
The City may approve the final master plan upon finding that the final plan conforms to the preliminary master plan and required conditions of approval. Minor changes to the approved preliminary master plan may be approved with the final master plan, when the approval body finds that the modification(s) is/are consistent with the criteria in subsections A through G below. Changes exceeding those in subsections A through G below, must be reviewed as major modifications under Section 16.66.030.

A.  Increased residential densities (overall or reallocated between development phases) by no more than twenty (20) percent, provided such increase conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and underlying district;

B.  Increase in lot coverage or impervious surface (overall or reallocated between development phases) by no more than fifteen (15) percent over that which is approved;

C.  Reduction in open space or landscaping by no more than ten (10) percent provided the minimum open space requirements in Section 16.65.060(C) are still met;

D.  Increase in overall automobile parking spaces by no more than ten (10) percent;

E.  Land Use. No change in land use shall be permitted without a major modification to the concept plan;

F.  Proposals to add or increase lot coverage within natural resource areas or areas subject to a potential hazard shall require a major modification to the concept plan;

G.  Major changes in the location of buildings, proposed streets, parking lot configuration, utility easements, and landscaping or other site improvements shall require a major modification pursuant to Chapter 16.66. “Major” in this subsection means by more than one hundred (100) feet, or fifteen (15) percent, relative to setbacks; and

H.  Other substantial modifications not listed in subsections A through G above, shall require approval of a major modification, in conformance with Chapter 16.66. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.100 Final master plan—Effective date.
A.  Effective Date.

1.   Final master plan approval is effective on the date of recordation of the memorandum of final master plan approval.

2.   The final master plan shall remain in effect for not more than seven years unless modified as specified in Section 16.65.120.

B.  Once the final master plan effective date is established, all persons and parties, and their successors, heirs or assigns, who have or will have any interest in the real property within the final master plan boundary, shall be bound by the terms and conditions of approval of the final master plan and the provisions of this section. Notice of the final master plan effective date will be mailed to the applicant. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.65.110 Final master plan—Phasing implementation.
A.  A land division, land use review, design review, conditional use permit or variance application may not be submitted until the final master plan is final.

B.  The approved final master plan shall be the basis evaluating all phases of proposed development, including a land division, land use review, design review, conditional use permit or variance application. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014)

 

16.65.120 Final master plan—Modifications.
A.  Proposed final master plan modifications shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 16.66 Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval.

B.  An applicant may also request an extension of the final master plan time limit beyond the maximum approved time limit of seven years. In no case shall the extension exceed fifteen (15) years from the date of final master plan approval as specified in Section 16.65.100(A). An extension request shall be filed in writing with the City at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the initial seven-year period or any subsequently approved extensions. The time line extension may be granted provided the applicant has made reasonable progress in the implementation of the final master plan and public services and facilities remain available. A request for a time extension shall be processed as minor modifications in accordance with Section 16.66.040. (Ord. 446 § 1, 2014)

 

Chapter 16.66 MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED PLANS AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
16.66.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an efficient process for modifying land use decisions and approved development plans, in recognition of the cost and complexity of land development and the need to conserve City resources. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.66.020 Applicability.
A.  This chapter applies to all development applications approved through the provisions of Article 16.6, including:

1.   Land use review approvals;

2.   Site design review approvals;

3.   Subdivisions, partitions, and property line adjustments;

4.   Conditional use permits;

5.   Master planned developments; and

6.   Conditions of approval on any of the above permit types.

B.  This chapter does not apply to Comprehensive Plan amendments, land use district changes, text amendments, annexations, temporary use permits, or other permits not listed in subsection A. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.66.030 Major modifications.
A.  Major Modification Defined. A major modification(s) is required if one or more of the changes listed below is proposed:

1.   A change in land use;

2.   An increase in density by more than ten (10) percent, provided the resulting density does not exceed that allowed by the land use district;

3.   A change in setbacks or lot coverage by more than ten (10) percent, provided the resulting setback or lot coverage does not exceed that allowed by the land use district;

4.   A change in the type and/or location of access-ways, drives or parking areas affecting off-site traffic;

5.   An increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than fifteen (15) percent where previously specified;

 

6.   A reduction of more than ten (10) percent of the area reserved for common open space; or

7.   Change to a condition of approval, or a change similar to subsections (A)(1) through (6), that may have a detrimental impact on adjoining properties, as determined by the Planning Official.

B.  Major Modification Applications—Approval Criteria. An applicant may request a major modification using a Type II or Type III-HO or -PC review procedure, as follows:

1.   An application for a major application shall include the application form, filing fee and narrative, and a site plan using the same plan format as in the original approval. The Planning Official may require other relevant information, as necessary, to evaluate the request.

2.   The application shall be subject to the same review procedure (Type II or III-HO), decision making body, and approval criteria used for the initial project approval, except that adding a conditional use to an approved project shall be reviewed using a Type III-HO procedure.

3.   The scope of review shall be limited to the modification request. For example, a request to modify a parking lot shall require site design review only for the proposed parking lot and any changes to associated access, circulation, pathways, lighting, trees, and landscaping. Notice shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 16.61.

4.   The decision-making body shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for major modification based on written findings on the criteria.

5.   An application for a major modification shall be reviewed under the criteria in effect on the date the application for the major modification is submitted.

(Ord. 526 § 1, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.66.040 Minor modifications.
A.  Minor Modification. Any modification to a land use decision or approved development plan that is not within the description of a major modification as provided in Section 16.66.030(A), is deemed a minor modification.

B.  Minor Modification Review Procedure. An application for a minor modification shall be reviewed by the Planning Official using a Type I or a Type II review procedure under Section 16.61.020 or 16.61.030. The Planning Official is responsible for determining the appropriate review procedure based on the following criteria:

1.   Minor modifications that involve only clear and objective code standards may be reviewed using a Type I procedure;

2.   Minor modifications that involve one or more discretionary standards shall be reviewed through Type II procedure; and

3.   When the code is unclear on whether the application should be a Type I or Type II review, a Type II procedure shall be used.

C.  Minor Modification Applications. An application for minor modification shall include an application form, filing fee and narrative, and a site plan using the same plan format as in the original approval. The Planning Official may require other relevant information, as necessary, to evaluate the request.

D.  Minor Modification Approval Criteria. The Planning Official shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for minor modification based on written findings that the modification is in compliance with all applicable requirements of the Development Code that applied to the original application for the development or use, and any applicable conditions of approval on the original decision. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.67 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP, SPECIFIC AREA PLANS, LAND USE DISTRICT MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS
16.67.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures for legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to the City’s Comprehensive Plan and ancillary documents, specific area plans, the land use district map and this title (Land Development Code). These will be referred to as “map and text amendments.” Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs and desires, to correct mistakes, or to address changes in the law. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.67.015 Initiation of a plan amendment.
A.  Any change in the text, map or implementing ordinances of adopted Happy Valley land use regulations may be initiated by the City, any resident of the City, property owners or authorized agent. A change in the text may be initiated by as few as one person desiring a revision in the wording, scope, direction or organization of the plan. A change in the map which involves properties and/or district boundaries must be initiated by at least seventy-five (75) percent of the property owners or authorized agents who own or represent at least seventy-five (75) percent of the land area involved in the petition of change. The City may, for the purposes of revising or updating plans to comply with statewide goals, legal guidelines or other necessary criteria, initiate a change in the map or text of any plan and this Land Development Code at any time.

B.  Amendments to the Land Development Code. An amendment to any chapter or section of this title for the purpose of adding or deleting words or subjects, broadening or narrowing scope, providing direction, clarification or improvement of the Development Code may be initiated by any person or persons, including the City itself. See Sections 16.67.020 and 16.67.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.67.020 Legislative amendments.
Legislative amendments are policy decisions made by City Council. Except in the case of expedited annexation, they are reviewed using the Type IV procedure in Section 16.61.050 and shall conform to the Transportation Planning Rule provisions in Section 16.67.060, as applicable. (Ord. 439 § 1(Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.67.030 Quasi-judicial amendments.
A.  Applicability of Quasi-Judicial Amendments. Quasi-judicial amendments are those that involve the application of adopted policy to a specific development application or Code revision, and not the adoption of new policy (i.e., through legislative decisions). Quasi-judicial Comprehensive Plan map/district map amendments shall follow the Type IV procedure, as governed by Section 16.61.040, using standards of approval in Section 16.67.030(C). The approval authority shall be as follows:

1.   The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council on an application for all other Comprehensive Plan map/land use district plan map amendments. The City Council shall decide such applications.

2.   The City Council shall be the review authority for annexations that involve the legislative conversion of existing Clackamas County Comprehensive Plan designations/zoning districts to City Comprehensive Plan designation/zoning districts, per the provisions of Section 16.67.070.

B.  Filing requirements.

1.   In order to have a complete application for any proposed text amendment, the applicant shall submit the necessary application forms, and a narrative addressing applicable Comprehensive Plan objectives and policies, as well as the review criteria within Section 16.40.041.

2.   In order to have a complete application for a proposed Comprehensive Plan map/zoning map or specific area map amendment, the applicant shall submit:

a.     The necessary application forms, and a narrative addressing applicable Comprehensive Plan goals and policies, as well as the review criteria within Section 16.61.040;

b.     A conceptual development plan illustrating a proposed street system, lot pattern, neighborhood circulation plan within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the subject site, and any natural resource or steep slopes areas;

c.     A traffic study prepared by a professional, Oregon-licensed traffic engineer. If a master plan that requires a full traffic impact analysis is required for a Comprehensive Plan map amendment/land use district map, a subsequent master plan may satisfy this provision, as determined by the Planning Official.

C.  Criteria for Quasi-Judicial Amendments. A recommendation or a decision to approve, approve with conditions or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial amendment shall be based on all of the following criteria:

1.   Approval of the request is consistent with the Statewide Planning Goals, applicable Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR), Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS), and the Metro Functional Plan; and

2.   Approval of the request is consistent with the applicable goals and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan; and

3.   The property and affected area is presently provided with adequate public facilities, services and transportation networks to support the use, or such facilities, services and transportation networks are planned to be provided in the planning period; and

4.   The change is in the public interest with regard to neighborhood or community conditions, or corrects a mistake or inconsistency in the Comprehensive Plan or land use district map regarding the property which is the subject of the application; and

5.   When an application includes a proposed Comprehensive Plan map amendment/land use district map amendment, the proposal shall be reviewed to determine whether it conforms to Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 (the Transportation Planning Rule – TPR). If a master plan that requires a full traffic impact analysis is required for a Comprehensive Plan map amendment/land use district map, a subsequent master plan may satisfy this provision, as determined by the Planning Official.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.67.040 Conditions of approval for quasi-judicial amendments.
A quasi-judicial decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions; conditions shall be based on applicable regulations and factual evidence in the record. Legislative amendments may only be approved or denied. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.67.050 Record of amendments.
The records of the Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code and all amendments to them shall be officially held within the office of the City Recorder. All amendments to text and/or official map shall be approved or rejected by the City Council and acknowledged by the mayor and attested by the City Recorder. Each action that changes a district boundary shall be included on a new official map and approved by the Mayor and attested by the City Recorder and filed in the office of the City Recorder and will be correct and binding in all cases.

The City Recorder shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this Code and the land use districts map in a format convenient for public use. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.67.060 Transportation planning rule compliance.
A.  Review of Applications for Effect on Transportation Facilities. When a development application includes a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment or land use district change, the proposal shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a transportation facility, in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 (the Transportation Planning Rule – TPR) and the traffic impact study provisions of Section 16.61.090. “Significant” means the proposal would:

1.   Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility (exclusive of correction of map errors). This would occur, for example, when a proposal causes future traffic to exceed the levels associated with a “collector” street classification, requiring a change in the classification to an “arterial” street, as identified by the City’s Transportation System Plan (“TSP”); or

2.   Change the standards implementing a functional classification system; or

3.   As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the TSP, allow types or levels of land use that would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; or

4.   Reduce the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP; or

5.   Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP.

B.  Amendments That Affect Transportation Facilities. Except as provided in subsection C, amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and land use regulations which significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility (identified in the TSP). This shall be accomplished by one of the following:

1.   Adopting measures that demonstrate that allowed land uses are consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility; or

2.   Amending the TSP to provide transportation facilities, improvements, or services adequate to support the proposed land uses; such amendments shall include a funding plan to ensure the facility, improvement, or service will be provided by the end of the planning period; or

3.   Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or

4.   Amending the planned function, capacity or performance standards of the transportation facility; or

5.   Providing other measures as a condition of development or through a development agreement or similar funding method, specifying when such measures will be provided.

C.  Exceptions. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or land use regulations with a significant effect on a transportation facility, where the facility is already performing below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP, may be approved when all of the following criteria are met:

1.   The amendment does not include property located in an interchange area, as defined under applicable law;

2.   The currently planned facilities, improvements or services are not adequate to achieve the standard;

3.   Development resulting from the amendment will, at a minimum, mitigate the impacts of the amendment in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the facility by the time of the development; and

4.   The road authority provides a written statement that the proposed funding and timing for the proposed development mitigation are sufficient to avoid further degradation to the facility.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.67.070 Annexations.
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, when the City Council approves the annexation of unincorporated territory from using the expedited annexation process, the ordinance approving the annexation shall amend the City’s Comprehensive Plan map/zoning map to reflect the conversion from the County designation/zone to a corresponding City designation/zone, as shown in Table 16.67.070-1 below. For non-expedited annexations, a concurrent Comprehensive Plan/Zoning Map Amendment is required to be filed as a Type III-PC decision consistent with the requirements of Section 16.61.040.

 

Table 16.67.070-1 Land Designation Conversion Table

 

 

Clackamas County Zone

City of Happy Valley Zone

Urban/Rural Residential

 

R-2.5

SFA

R-5

R-5

R-7

R-7

R-8.5

R-8.5

R-10

R-10

R-15

R-15

R-20

R-20

MR-1

MUR-M1

MR-2

MUR-M2

HDR

MUR-M3

RA-2

R-15

FU-10

FU-10*

RRFF-5

RRFF-5**

FF-10

FF-10**

Natural Resources

 

EFU

EFU**

Commercial

 

NC

MUE

C-2

MCC

C-3

MCC

RCC

MCC

RCO

MUC

OC

CCC

RCHD

MUR-M2

RTL

MUC

OA

MUC

PMU-6

RCMU

Industrial

 

LI

IC

GI

IC

BP

EC

Special Districts

 

OSM

IPU

Sunnyside Village

 

VR-4/5

R-5

VR-5/7

R-5

VCS

IPU

VA

MUR-M1

VO

VO

VTH

VTH

 

* Annexation of this zoning district (outside of properties annexed from the former City of Damascus) would require the creation of a new Comprehensive Plan designation/zoning district within the City that would be determined by the Planning Official based on surrounding Comprehensive Plan designations/zoning districts and a Transportation Planning Rule-compliant Traffic Impact Analysis.

** Clackamas County rural residential and farm zones that are annexed within the City of Happy Valley retain these designations/districts, which are administered by the City via the applicable auspices (for example, yard setbacks) of the Clackamas County ZDO until receiving urban zoning per an adopted urban Comprehensive Plan.

 

B.  When an unincorporated territory within the East Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan area, Aldridge Road Comprehensive Plan area, or the Rock Creek Mixed Employment Comprehensive Plan area is annexed to the City, the ordinance approving the annexation shall apply the applicable zoning designation in the Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan pursuant to the applicable requirements of the Land Development Code.

C.  For any proposed annexation to the City, application shall be made directly to the City of Happy Valley on the appropriate forms and accompanied by the required fee, if any. Upon receipt of the form, the City shall schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission (non-expedited) or City Council (expedited). The City may utilize any lawful annexation process under State, regional or local law, including the expedited annexation process established in the Metro Code. An expedited annexation process shall be sent directly to the City Council for review. Expedited annexations shall be processed as an ordinance pursuant to the City of Happy Valley Charter. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 424 § 1, 2012; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.68 CODE INTERPRETATIONS
16.68.010 Purpose.
Some terms or phrases within the Code may have two or more reasonable meanings. This section provides a process for resolving differences in the interpretation of the Code text.

A.  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be construed as the minimum requirement for the promotion of the public safety, health, and peace and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with or annul any other covenants or agreements between private parties. However, from the effective date of this Land Development Code, all divisions and development of land shall conform to this title. When this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of the buildings, or requires larger space than is imposed or required by other codes, ordinances, rules, regulations, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall govern.

B.  No specific interpretation of this title where clear or objective standards may not exist, or any other discretionary conditions or requirements authorized by this title shall be applied either individually or collectively to deny any application which otherwise meets all stated standards contained in this title. Neither shall any discretionary conditions or requirements be applied to either individually or collectively provide an adverse or negative impact on cost and development time nor to prevent the maximum potential, residential densities or housing types which are permitted by the Comprehensive Plan or this title. (Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.68.020 Code interpretation procedure.
A.  Requests. A request for a Code interpretation shall be made by application to the Planning Official.

B.  Decision to Issue Interpretation. The Planning Official shall advise the person making the inquiry in writing within fourteen (14) days after the request is made whether the Planning Official will make the interpretation.

C.  Written Interpretation. If the City decides to issue an interpretation, it shall require the applicable fee and will be in writing and mailed or delivered to the person requesting the interpretation and any other person who specifically requested the interpretation. The written interpretation shall be issued within fourteen (14) days from the date of notification that an interpretation will be made (subsection B). The decision shall become effective fourteen (14) days later.

D.  Type I Procedure. Code interpretations shall be made using a Type I procedure under Section 16.61.020.

E.  Interpretations on File. The City shall keep on file a record of all Code interpretations. (Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.69 MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS
16.69.010 Temporary use permits.
Temporary uses are characterized by their short-term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses include, but are not limited to: construction trailers, leasing offices, temporary carnivals and fairs, temporary art and music festivals, parking lot sales, retail warehouse sales, and seasonal sales such as Christmas tree sales and vegetable stands. Mobile food/beverage units are subject to Section 16.69.030. Six types of temporary uses require permit approval:

A.  Seasonal and Special Events. These types of uses occur only once in a calendar year and for a period no longer than ninety (90) days. Using the Type I review process, the City shall approve, approve with conditions or deny a temporary use permit based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

1.   The use is permitted in the underlying land use district and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval);

2.   The applicant has proof of the property owner’s permission to place the use on his/her property;

3.   No parking will be utilized by customers and employees of the temporary use which is needed by the property owner to meet his or her minimum parking requirements;

4.   The use provides adequate vision clearance, and shall not obstruct pedestrian access on public streets;

5.   Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the other uses of the property;

6.   The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use;

7.   The use is adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable (the applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits); and

8.   An extension of sixty (60) days may be obtained if determined appropriate by the City Administrator.

B.  Short-Term Outdoor Special Events. These types of events occur for a period no longer than three days and nights. Events that occur annually within the City limits may be reviewed as a conditional use in accordance with Chapter 16.64 of this title. Other events shall be reviewed administratively. The City shall approve, approve with conditions or deny a short term outdoor special event temporary use permit based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

1.   The use is held primarily outdoors and will continue for no longer than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, plus a reasonable time period for setting up before the event, and cleaning up after the event;

2.   The conditional use permit application does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval);

3.   Adequate water and sanitary facilities are provided;

4.   Adequate refuse storage and disposal facilities are provided;

5.   Adequate food services are provided;

6.   Adequate emergency medical facilities and communication systems are provided;

7.   Adequate fire protection is provided;

8.   Adequate security personnel are provided; and

9.   Adequate pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle access are provided.

C.  Temporary Sales Office (Non-Model Home). Using the Type I review process, the City may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for the use of any real property within the City as a temporary sales office or offices for the purpose of facilitating the sale of real property, in any subdivision or tract of land within the City, but for no other purpose, based on the following criteria:

1.   Temporary Sales Office.

a.     The temporary sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be sold;

b.     The property to be used for a temporary sales office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose;

c.     The length of time that the temporary building will be used does not exceed twelve (12) months, and if a temporary building exceeds this time frame, the applicant shall be required to remove the building, or renew the temporary use permit;

d.     The temporary sales office is required to conform to the setbacks of the underlying development district, shall provide skirting, and shall obtain all necessary permits, including building, electrical and plumbing, as applicable; and

e.     The temporary sales office is required to provide a minimum of two temporary off-street parking spaces, to be constructed of compacted gravel or similar pervious surface, or an impervious surface, not subject to stormwater management provisions for stormwater retention/detention/water quality for the period of the temporary use.

D.  Temporary Building (Commercial/ Industrial). Using the Type I review process, the City may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for a temporary trailer or prefabricated building for use on any real commercial or industrial property within the City as a temporary commercial or industrial office or space associated with the primary use on the property, but for no other purpose, based on the following criteria:

1.   The temporary trailer or building shall be located within the boundaries of the parcel of land on which it is located;

2.   The primary use on the property to be used for a temporary trailer is already developed;

3.   Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the other uses of the property;

4.   There is adequate parking for the customers or users of the temporary use pursuant to applicable parking requirements;

5.   The use will not result in vehicular congestion on streets;

6.   The use will pose no hazard to pedestrians in the area of the use;

7.   The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use;

8.   The building complies with applicable building codes;

9.   The use can be adequately served by sewer and water, if necessary. (The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits);

10. The length of time that the temporary building will be used does not exceed twelve (12) months, and if a temporary building exceeds this time frame, the applicant shall be required to remove the building, or renew the temporary use permit;

11. Adequate landscaping, buffering or other method to assure the structure is visually consistent with conditions surrounding the site; and

12. The temporary building is required to provide a minimum of two temporary off-street parking spaces, to be constructed of compacted gravel or similar pervious surface, or an impervious surface, not subject to stormwater management provisions for stormwater retention/detention/water quality for the period of the temporary use.

E.  Temporary Building (Construction Site). Using the administrative review process, the City may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for a temporary trailer or prefabricated building for use on any construction site within the City based on following criteria:

1.   The temporary construction site building shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be sold;

2.   The property to be used for a temporary construction site building shall not be permanently improved for that purpose;

3.   The length of time that the temporary construction site building will be used does not exceed twelve (12) months, and if a temporary building exceeds this time frame, the applicant shall be required to remove the building, or renew the temporary use permit;

4.   The temporary construction site building is required to conform to the setbacks of the underlying development district; shall provide skirting; and shall obtain all necessary permits, including building, electrical and plumbing, as applicable; and

5.   The temporary construction site building is required to provide a minimum of two temporary off-street parking spaces, to be constructed of compacted gravel or similar pervious surface, or an impervious surface.

F.  Temporary Exterior Storage. Using the administrative review process, the Planning Official may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for temporary exterior storage of structures, equipment or materials based on following criteria:

1.   The property to be used for temporary storage shall not be permanently improved for that purpose;

2.   The length of time that the site will be used for storage does not exceed six months (a single six-month extension may be granted by the Planning Official by submittal of a time extension application). If the temporary use exceeds this time frame, the applicant shall be required to remove the stored materials, or renew the temporary use permit;

3.   The areas used for storage are required to conform to the setbacks of the underlying development district;

4.   The areas used for storage shall be screened from view from public streets;

5.   No on-site sales will be conducted;

6.   Dust and erosion control measures have been taken to ensure there will be no impact to air and water quality from dust and mud on the site or on adjacent streets from vehicles entering and leaving the site. During the length of the project, the site must be enclosed or protected in a manner to prevent on-site erosion and to prevent sediment from leaving the site;

7.   The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use;

8.   Temporary gravel parking lots may be constructed that are not subject to stormwater management provisions for stormwater retention/detention/water quality for the period of the temporary use. At the end of the temporary use, the gravel shall be removed and the site must be prepared and seeded with a mixture of one hundred (100) percent perennial rye grass to create a low maintenance vegetative groundcover. An exception to this requirement is sites that have compacted gravel or paving prior to the start of the project. In these cases, the portion of the site that has compacted gravel or paving may remain in compacted gravel or paving. All other portions of the site must be seeded as provided above.

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 443 § 1, 2013; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.69.020 Home occupation permits.
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage those who are engaged in small commercial ventures which could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters or which, by the nature of the venture, are appropriate in scale and impact to be operated within a residence. Home occupations are encouraged for their contribution in reducing the number of vehicle trips often generated by conventional businesses. In addition, the purpose of this section is to establish approval criteria and standards to ensure that home occupations are conducted as lawful uses which are subordinate to the residential use of the property and are conducted in a manner that is not detrimental or disruptive in terms of appearance or operation to neighboring properties and residents. More than one business activity constituting two or more home offices shall be allowed on one property only if the multiple home offices meet all required limitations associated with outside volunteers or employ-ees; clients or customers per day; and, the combined floor space of the business activities does not exceed the limitation of space imposed in subsection (B)(6)(g). Each business activity shall also have separate City business license.

B.  Exemptions. Exemptions from the provisions of this chapter are:

 

1.   Short-term personal or fundraising sales (such as a garage sale or the sale of an individual personal item, fruit, drink or dessert sales by individuals, including minors, or similar sales) from a residence. The maximum duration of garage/yard sales is three consecutive days and/or ten (10) days total in a calendar year;

2.   For-profit production of produce or other food products grown on the premises. This may include temporary or seasonal sale of produce or other food products grown on the premises;

3.   Hobbies which do not result in payment to those engaged in such activity;

4.   Proven nonconforming home occupations as pursuant to Chapter 16.72 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots);

5.   Residential care homes that are protected by the Federal Fair Housing Act, and may have characteristics of a home occupation permit are exempt from the home occupation permit process due to State and Federal law;

6.   Home offices that are undertaken only by the principal occupant(s) of a residential property that include the following characteristics:

a.     No outside volunteers or employees to be engaged in the business activity other than the persons principally residing on the premises,

b.     No exterior signs which identify the property as a business location,

c.     No more than three clients or customers to visit the premises per day for any reason,

d.     No exterior storage of materials,

e.     No deliveries shall be made to the residence other than by traditional small-scale means normally found in a residential area, such as the United States Postal Service, UPS, Federal Express, messenger services, etc. There shall be no commercial vehicle deliveries during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.,

f.      No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line resulting from the operation,

g.     No utilization of more than fifty (50) percent of the combined residence and accessory structure gross floor area. The indoor storage of materials or products shall not exceed the limitations imposed by the provisions of the building, fire, health and housing codes,

h.     No change in the most current Oregon Residential Specialty Code occupancy classification of the dwelling unit or any portion of the dwelling unit, including the garage,

i.      No home office shall require any on- or off-street parking other than that normally required for a residence. In addition, no commercial vehicles (as defined in Section 16.12.030) of any kind shall be utilized in conjunction with a home office;

7.   Licensed Daycare Providers. A licensed daycare provider must meet the definition as detailed in Section 16.12.130. Licensed daycare providers are allowed the following home occupation exceptions:

a.     Home-occupation compliant signage may be placed in the front yard setback,

b.     Home-occupation business hours are unlimited,

c.     Home-occupation daily customer/client visits are limited to that provided by the licensed daycare providers Oregon Revised Statute license limitations, and

d.     Any other exception as mandated under applicable federal or state law.

Any home office that exceeds the parameters of these provisions, as determined by the Planning Official based on answers to the home occupation permit questionnaire, site visits, or other evidence, shall be required to apply for a home occupation permit.

C.  Nonconforming Uses. Ongoing home occupations may be granted nonconforming status provided that they were:

1.   Permitted under County authority prior to annexation to the City and have been in continuous operation since initial approval;

2.   Permitted under City authority prior to 1983 and have since been in continuous operation.

D.  Governing Regulations. Nonconforming home occupations will be regulated as a nonconforming situation, pursuant to the following:

1.   A nonconforming situation may continue until the use is expanded or altered so as to increase the level of noncompliance with this title;

2.   The burden of proving a home occupation’s nonconforming status rests with the property owner or tenant;

3.   Violations. Home occupations without City or County approval which cannot prove nonconforming status shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall cease until the appropriate approvals have been granted.

E.  Prohibited Home Occupations. The following uses are not allowed as home occupations:

1.   Auto-body repair and painting;

2.   On-going mechanical repair conducted outside of an entirely enclosed building;

3.   Junk and salvage operations;

4.   Storage and/or sale of fireworks;

5.   Ambulance service;

6.   Animal hospital or veterinary services;

7.   Any activity involving on-site retail sales is prohibited, except that the sale of items that are incidental to a permitted home occupation is allowed. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music from music teachers, art or craft supplies from arts or crafts instructors, computer software from computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by home business are allowed;

8.   Marijuana production, processing, wholesaling and retailing.

F.  Home Occupations Defined. A separate home occupation permit and/or fee are required for each property on which a home occupation is undertaken. For the purposes of this section, “home” refers to the residential location, including a single-family dwelling unit, accessory dwelling unit, garage, accessory structure, multifamily unit, condominium unit, etc. In addition to the general criteria outlined in subsection E of this section, home occupations shall observe the following additional standards.

Property on which a home occupation is located may show evidence that a business is being conducted from the premises. Therefore, the following is allowed for home occupations:

1.   One non-illuminated sign, not exceeding one and one-half square feet, which shall be attached to the residence or accessory structure or placed in a window;

2.   No more than three outside volunteers or employees who are not a principal resident of the premises;

3.   No more than six daily customers or clients. Customers and clients may not visit the business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and shall not generate excessive traffic or monopolize on-street parking (the generation of excessive traffic or monopolization of on-street parking shall be at the sole discretion of the Planning Official or designee). For properties over one acre in size, with the provision of adequately screened off-street parking, the number of daily customers may be increased to no more than ten (10) daily customers or clients;

4.   For residential properties under two acres in size, storage of materials, goods, and equipment, including no more than two commercial vehicles associated with the home occupation and utilized for commercial purposes, shall be screened entirely from view from any adjacent public right-of-way. Storage shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total lot area and shall not occur within the front yard setback. For residential properties over two acres in size, storage of materials, goods, and equipment, including no more than four commercial vehicles associated with the Class B home occupation and utilized for commercial purposes, shall be screened entirely from view from any adjacent public right-of-way;

5.   Off-Street Parking. Two on-site parking spaces shall be provided for the home occupation in addition to those spaces already required for the dwelling. No more than two customer vehicles may visit the home occupation at any one time and these must use the legal, designated parking spaces outside. For properties over one acre in size, with the provision of adequately screened off-street parking, the number of customer vehicles may be increased to no more than five vehicles at any one time;

6.   Kennels, animal boarding, and commercial animal breeding activities, though the minimum land area (either by lease or ownership) associated with the Class B home occupation that includes these uses shall equal one acre of land, and the total number of animals boarded at any one time shall not exceed twenty-five (25);

7.   Change of the Oregon Residential Specialty occupancy classification of the dwelling unit or any portion of the dwelling unit, including the garage. For example, in the installation of a commercial kitchen or commercial appliances.

G.  Permit Procedures for Home Occupations.

1.   Home Occupation Permit. A home occupation permit will be processed using the Type III-HO quasi-judicial procedure, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 16.61 (Types of Review Procedures).

2.   Conditions of Approval. The City may impose conditions of approval on a home occupation permit to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

a.     Limiting the hours, days, place and manner of operation;

b.     Requiring site and building design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, odor and dust;

c.     Requiring additional building setbacks, and increased lot area, depth or width;

d.     Limiting the building area and outdoor storage used by the home occupation and restricting the location of the use on the site in relationship to adjoining uses;

e.     Designating the size, number, location and design of vehicle access points;

f.      Requiring street right-of-way to be free at all times of vehicles associated with the home occupation;

g.     Requiring landscaping, buffering and/or screening, of the home occupation from adjoining uses and establishing standards for the continued maintenance of these improvements;

h.     Requiring storm drainage improvements, and surfacing of parking and loading areas;

i.      Limiting the extent and type of interior or exterior building remodeling necessary to accommodate the home occupation;

j.      Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor lighting;

k.     Requiring and designating the size, height and location of fences and materials used for their construction;

l.      Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, and other vegetation, watercourses, slopes, wildlife habitat areas and drainage areas;

m.    Limiting the type and number of vehicles or equipment to be parked or stored on the site;

n.     Any other limitations which the review authority considers to be necessary or desirable to make the use comply with this section; and

o.     Any limitations or conditions imposed by the City’s service providers, including, but not limited to, Sunrise Water Authority, Clackamas Fire District #1, CCSD#1, CCSD#5, etc.

H.  Revocation and Expiration of Home Occupation Permits. Grounds for Revocation. The Planning Official or designee may:

1.   Revoke a home occupation approval if the conditions of approval have not been or are not being complied with and the home occupation is otherwise being conducted in a manner contrary to this chapter.

2.   The Planning Official or designee shall approve the use as it exists, revoke the home occupation permit, or compel measures to be taken to ensure compatibility with the neighborhood and conformance with this section after reviewing a complaint. Complaints may be originated by the City of Happy Valley or the public. Complaints from the public shall clearly state the objection to the home occupation, such as:

a.     Generation of excessive traffic;

b.     Exclusive use of on-street parking spaces;

c.     Other offensive activities not compatible with a residential neighborhood.

3.   Cessation of Home Occupation Pending Review. If it is determined by the Planning Official or designee in exercise of reasonable discretion, that the home occupation in question will affect public health and safety, the use may be ordered to cease pending Planning Commission review and/or exhaustion of all appeals.

4.   Waiting Period for Reapplication. When a home occupation permit has been revoked due to violation of these standards, a minimum period of one year shall elapse before another application for a home occupation on the subject parcel will be considered.

5.   Invalidation of Permit. A home occupation permit shall become invalid if the applicant moves his or her residence.

I.   Business License Required. Besides meeting the requirements of this section, the business or commercial use of any home for a home office or home occupation must be supported by an active City business license. No business license will be issued for a home office or home occupation until:

1.   The person wishing to engage in a home office answers the questions within the home occupation permit questionnaire and is determined to be exempt from the home occupation permit process; or

2.   The applicant for a home occupation has been approved and the application certifies that the home occupation will be operated in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the conditions of approval.

(Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 422 § 1, 2012; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.69.030 Mobile food unit sites.
A.  Purpose. Mobile food units, which are defined in OAR 333-150-0000, can provide opportunities to enliven under-utilized parking lots, allow individual entrepreneurship at a small scale, and provide unique eating establishments for the public. The purpose of this section is to allow for mobile food unit sites or “cart pods” where mobile food units (carts) can be parked on a long term basis. As with temporary uses, permanent site improvements may not be required; however, the standards and permit processes of this section are intended to ensure that mobile food unit sites are conducted as lawful uses and in a manner that is not detrimental or disruptive in terms of appearance or operation to neighboring properties and residents.

B.  Exemptions. The following are exempt from provisions of this section:

1.   Locations where mobile food units stop for less than two hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period.

2.   Locations where mobile food units are stored when not in operation are exempt from the provisions of this section; however, the storage of commercial vehicles may be subject to other requirements of the LDC.

3.   Mobile food units and other mobile vending units that are operated as part of an approved farmer’s market.

C.  Mobile Food Unit Site Standards. The following standards apply to mobile food unit sites.

1.   Zoning. Mobile food unit sites are not permitted in residential zones, but are permitted, as restricted, within the commercial and industrial district use tables found within this title.

2.   Accessory Items and Structures. Trash receptacles for customer use shall be maintained no more than ten (10) feet from the mobile food units. Portable accessory items, such as picnic tables, are permitted. With Type II approval, new accessory structures may be constructed, as follows:

a.     A maximum of two restroom structures, provided that the combined square footage does not exceed two hundred (200);

b.     A maximum of two storage buildings, provided that the combined square footage does not exceed two hundred (200);

c.     One trash enclosure; and

d.     Outdoor seating areas, which may have roofs, floors, and railings, but no walls (e.g., decks, picnic shelters), provided that the square footage does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet per mobile vending unit and that no single structure exceeds two hundred (200) square feet.

3.   Signs. Signs are restricted to “A-Frame” signs only, permitted pursuant to Chapter 16.45.

4.   Minimum Setbacks and Separation Distance. All mobile food units on the site shall be located a minimum of:

a.     Five feet from any structure or other mobile food unit;

b.     Ten (10) feet from any front lot line; and

c.     Five feet from any side or rear lot line, except if such lot line abuts a residential district the minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet.

5.   Screening. If the mobile food unit site is located less than twenty (20) feet from a residential zoning district, the residential property shall be screened from the mobile food unit site, which may be a portion of a property including the mobile food unit, seating, queuing, etc., abutting the residential zoning district and may not necessarily extend to the shared property line. Required screening:

a.     May be provided by an existing, continuous, sight-obscuring structure, fence, or hedge;

b.     If new, shall be a continuous, sight-obscuring vegetative screen; or if fencing is utilized as screening, shall be stained cedar or ornate metal. Chain-link fencing with slats shall not qualify as acceptable screening material; and

c.     Shall have a minimum height of six feet.

6.   Setback from Vehicular and Pedestrian Use Areas. Windows and doors used for service to customers shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from loading areas, driveways, on-site circulation drives, and parking lot aisles, and a minimum of five feet from bicycle parking spaces and walkways.

7.   Obstruction of Vehicular and Pedestrian Use Areas and Landscape Areas. No mobile food unit or associated element, such as aboveground power cords, seating areas, trash receptacles, signs, and customer queuing areas, shall occupy bicycle parking spaces, loading areas, or walkways. Mobile vending units shall not occupy landscaping areas approved as part of a prior design review or other land use application. However, occupying existing on-site automobile parking spaces is permitted, provided that such spaces are not simultaneously used for parking or required to meet minimum parking requirements on the site.

 

8.   Surfacing. All mobile food units shall be placed on an existing hard-surfaced area, and any associated parking, loading, and maneuvering areas for vehicles shall be on existing hard-surfaced areas, unless a permeable parking, loading, or maneuvering area surface was authorized as part of a previously implemented design review approval for the site.

9.   Driveway Access. No new or modified driveway access is permitted.

10. Intersection Sight Distance and Roadside Clear Zones. The mobile food unit and any attachments or accessory items shall comply with the intersection sight distance and roadside clear zone standards of the City of Happy Valley Engineering Standards.

11. Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be required per this title if not already provided by an existing use.

12. Utilities. To the extent that utilities are desired by the applicant or required by applicable regulations, mobile vending units shall have self-contained utilities, or if on-site utility connections are proposed, such utilities shall be installed underground, except where prohibited by the utility district or company. Notwithstanding this requirement:

a.     If allowed by the utility district or company and any applicable Oregon Specialty Code, aboveground utility connections are permitted, when a mobile vending unit will remain on the subject property for no more than one hundred twenty (120) days in a calendar year. For the purpose of this exception:

i.      If a mobile vending unit is replaced by another, the number of days shall be calculated by adding the days spent on-site by each unit.

ii.     If a mobile vending unit spends any portion of a day on the subject property, it shall count as one day.

b.     If allowed by the utility district or company and the Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, aboveground power cords are permitted to connect the mobile vending unit to an approved electricity source.

c.     If allowed by the utility district or company and the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, aboveground hoses are permitted to connect the mobile vending unit to an approved water source.

13. Sanitation Facilities. For four carts or less, portable toilets and hand-washing facilities are permitted but may not drain to the surface. For five carts or more, utilization of existing restrooms within an existing building may be utilized, or if new, permanent restrooms shall be constructed.

14. Sewage Disposal. Subsurface sewage disposal is prohibited.

15. Central Pavilions. Subject to subsection (E)(3), outdoor seating areas, which may have roofs, floors, walls, railings, etc. are permitted, provided that the combined square footage does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet per mobile vending unit and that no single structure exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet in size.

16. Vendor Parking. For any mobile food unit site requiring a Type II Design Review approval, vendor parking shall be provided in addition to the off-street parking requirements of Section 16.43.030 (Automobile parking standards) at the rate of one parking stall per mobile food unit. Vendor parking may be satisfied by the provision of off-site, shared parking agreements.

 

D.  Mobile Food Units. The following standards apply to each mobile food unit on the site.

1.   Attachments. Attachments to the mobile vending unit, such as awnings or canopies, are permitted only if they are supported entirely by the unit and do not touch the ground. Neither the mobile food unit nor any item relating to the unit shall lean against or hang from any structure or utility pole. No structure shall be attached to the mobile food unit.

2.   Accessory Storage. Except as specifically allowed by subsection C, items relating to the mobile food unit shall be stored in, on, or under the unit.

3.   Interior Seating or Vending. Customer seating or vending inside the mobile food unit is prohibited.

4.   Skirting. Skirting shall be placed around the perimeter of the mobile vending unit.

5.   Drive-Thru Service. A mobile food unit may include drive-thru service only if drive-thru service is allowed as a primary or accessory use in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. Drive-thru service shall be subject to the related provisions of this title.

6.   Other Licenses Required. Besides meeting the requirements of this section, the operator of a mobile food unit must have an active City business license and must comply with the permit requirements of Clackamas County Environmental Health Department.

E.  Permit Procedures. Mobile food unit site permits will be processed as follows:

1.   Type I. Up to two carts on one site with no accessory structures other than trashcans and portable accessory items, such as picnic tables may be reviewed in accordance with Section 16.61.020 Type I procedure (administrative).

2.   Type II. Up to four carts on one site and/or new accessory structures constructed in accordance with subsection (C)(2) of this section may be reviewed in accordance with Section 16.61.035 Type II-DR procedure (administrative).

3.   Five or more carts on one site and/or improvements or new accessory structures other than those permitted through Type I or Type II approval requires design review approval in accordance with Section 16.61.045 Type III-DR procedure (quasi-judicial). New structures greater than two hundred (200) square feet in size shall be subject to the Happy Valley Style Appendix “B.”

F.  Submittal Requirements. An application for a mobile food unit site permit shall include the following:

1.   A completed application form on a form provided by the Planning Official;

2.   Information sufficient to address the standards in subsection C; and

3.   A site plan of the subject property drawn to scale and including:

a.     The lot lines,

b.     The location of existing structures,

c.     The proposed boundaries of the mobile food unit site. Within the boundaries of the mobile food unit site, the location of all mobile food units, seating areas, and any accessory items or structures shall be shown,

d.     The proposed distance between the mobile vending unit site and adjacent lot lines, as well as the proposed separation distance between units and between units and other on-site structures,

e.     The type and location of any proposed on-site utility connections for mobile food units,

f.      The location of existing loading areas, driveways, on-site circulation drives, parking lot aisles, bicycle and automobile parking spaces, and walkways,

g.     The orientation of service windows and doors on the mobile food units and location of queuing areas,

h.     The location of existing landscaping, and

i.      The dimensions, height, and location of proposed A-Frame signs.

G.  Conditions of Approval. The approval body may impose conditions upon the approval of a mobile food unit site permit to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.   Further limiting the hours, days, place and manner of operation;

2.   Requiring site and building design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, glare, and odor;

3.   Requiring additional building setbacks;

4.   Further limiting the building area and outdoor storage used by the mobile food unit site and restricting the location of the use on the site in relationship to adjoining uses;

5.   Designating the size, number, location and design of vehicle access points;

6.   Requiring landscaping, buffering and/or screening, of the mobile food unit site from adjoining uses and establishing standards for the continued maintenance of these improvements;

7.   Requiring storm drainage improvements, and surfacing of parking and loading areas;

8.   Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor lighting;

9.   Requiring and designating the size, height and location of fences and materials used for their construction;

10. Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, and other vegetation, watercourses, slopes, wildlife habitat areas and drainage areas;

11. Limiting the type and number of vehicles or equipment to be parked or stored on the site;

12. Any other limitations which the staff considers to be necessary or desirable to make the use comply with this section; and

13. Any limitations or conditions imposed by the City’s service providers, including but not limited to Sunrise Water Authority, Clackamas River Water, Clackamas Fire District #1, CCSD#1, CCSD#5, etc.

H.  Approval Period and Time Extension. Unless listed as a permitted use in the underlying zone, a mobile food unit site approval is valid for four years from the date of the final written decision. If the City’s final written decision is appealed, the approval period shall commence on the date of the final appellate decision. During this four-year period, the approval shall be implemented, or the approval will become void. “Implemented” means all necessary development permits shall be obtained and maintained for the approved development. At the end of any four-year period, the applicant may apply for another four-year permit by filing a new, Type II application.

I.   Grounds for Revocation. The Planning Official or designee may:

1.   Revoke a mobile food unit site permit approval if the conditions of approval have not been or are not being complied with and the mobile food unit site is otherwise being conducted in a manner contrary to this chapter.

2.   The Planning Official or designee shall approve the use as it exists, revoke the mobile food unit site permit, or compel measures to be taken to ensure compatibility with the neighborhood and conformance with this section after reviewing a complaint. Complaints may be originated by the City of Happy Valley or the public. Complaints from the public shall clearly state the objection to the mobile food unit site, such as:

a.     Generation of excessive traffic;

b.     Generation of excessive noise or litter;

c.     Other offensive activities not compatible with the surrounding area.

3.   Waiting Period for Reapplication. When a mobile food unit site permit has been revoked due to violation of these standards, a minimum period of one year shall elapse before another application for a mobile food unit site on the subject parcel will be considered.

(Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 443 § 1, 2013)

ARTICLE 16.7 EXCEPTION TO CODE STANDARDS
Chapter 16.71 VARIANCES
16.71.010 Purpose.
This chapter provides standards and procedures for variances, which are modifications to land use or development standards that are not otherwise permitted elsewhere in this title as exceptions to Code standards. This title cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The City’s varied geography, and complexities of land development, require flexibility. This chapter provides that flexibility, while maintaining the purposes and intent of the title. The variance procedures provide relief from specific Code provisions when they have the unintended effect of preventing reasonable development in conformance with all other codes. The variance procedures are intended to provide flexibility while ensuring that the purpose of each development standard is met. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.71.020 Applicability and application requirements.
A.  Exceptions and Modifications versus Variances. A Code standard or approval criterion (“Code section”) may be modified without approval of a variance if the applicable Code section expressly allows exceptions or modifications. If the Code section does not expressly provide for exceptions or modifications, then a variance is required to modify that Code section and the provisions of Chapter 16.71 apply. Except that a variance shall not be approved that would vary the “permitted uses” or “prohibited uses” of a land use district.

B.  Combining Variances With Other Approvals—Permit Approvals by Other Agencies. Variance requests may be combined with and reviewed concurrently by the City approval body with other land use and development applications (e.g., development review, site design review, subdivision, conditional use, etc.), however, some variances may be subject to approval by other permitting agencies, such as ODOT in the case of State Highway access.

C.  Types of Variances. There are three types of variances (Class A, B, or C). The type of variance required depends on the extent of the variance request and the discretion involved in the decision-making process. Regulations described in the following sections of this chapter pertaining to applicability of the type of variance should be considered a guide only. Ultimately, it is at the discretion of the Planning Official to determine whether a variance proposal is processed as a Class A, B, or C.

D.  Application. The variance application shall conform to the requirements for Type I, II, or II applications (Chapter 16.61), as applicable. In addition, the applicant shall provide a narrative or letter explaining the reason for his or her request, alternatives considered, how the stated variance criteria are satisfied, and why the subject standard cannot be met without the variance.

E.  Land Divisions. The variance standards of this chapter apply to individual platted and recorded lots only. However, the lot area and dimensions of a single lot may be modified by up to five percent with a Class B variance. The Class C variance procedure may be used to modify a standard for three or fewer lots, including lots yet to be created through a partition process. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.71.030 Class A variances.
A.  Applicability. The following variances are reviewed using a Type I procedure, as governed by Chapter 16.61, using the approval criteria in subsection B below:

1.   Front Yard Setbacks. Up to a ten (10) percent change to the front yard setback standard in the land use district.

2.   Interior Setbacks. Up to a ten (10) percent reduction of the dimensional standards for the side and rear yard setbacks required in the base land use district.

3.   Lot Coverage. Up to ten (10) percent increase of the maximum lot coverage required in the base zone.

4.   Lot Size. Up to five percent reduction of the minimum lot size required in the base zone.

5.   Landscape Area. Up to five percent reduction in landscape area (overall area or interior parking lot landscape area).

6.   All other land development standards or issues that may generally be addressed by a ten (10) percent benchmark. For variance requests not easily defined by a percentage benchmark, the Planning Official shall determine whether a variance request is eligible for processing as a Class A variance.

B.  Approval Criteria. A Class A variance shall be granted if the applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the following criteria:

1.   The variance requested is required due to the lot configuration, or other conditions of the site;

2.   The variance does not result in the removal of trees, or it is proposed in order to preserve trees, if trees are present in the development area;

3.   The variance will not result in violation(s) of any other adopted ordinance or Code standard; each code standard to be modified shall require a separate variance request;

4.   An application for a Class A variances is limited to one lot per application;

5.   No more than three Class A variances may be approved for one lot or parcel in twelve (12) months.

(Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.71.040 Class B variances.
A.  Applicability Class B variances may be granted in the following areas:

1.   Sections within Article 16.2, Land Use Districts, including setbacks; dimensional standards including lot width, depth and coverage; street frontage requirements; structure height;

2.   Sections within Article 16.3, Specific Area Plan Districts and Overlay Zones;

3.   Sections within Article 16.4, Community Design Standards, including access and circulation, landscaping, street trees, fencing and screening, parking and loading, signs and the Happy Valley Style design standards;

4.   Sections within Article 16.5, Public Facilities;

5.   Other development standards as specified by the Land Development Code.

B.  Procedures. Class B variances are reviewed using a Type II procedure, as governed by Chapter 16.61, using the approval criteria in subsections C through G below. Staff may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts which may result from granting relief.

C.  Variance to Development Standards. The Planning Official or designee may grant a Class B variance of up to twenty (20) percent from any dimensional or development review standard except for lot area which shall be limited to ten (10) percent for a Class B variance if the applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the following criteria:

1.   The variance requested is required due to the lot configuration, or other conditions of the site;

2.   That the condition requiring the variance has not been intentionally created to circumvent the Land Development Code;

3.   That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property;

4.   That the variance, if granted, is the minimum variance that will afford relief and is the least modification possible of the development provisions which are in question;

5.   The variance will not result in violation(s) of any other adopted ordinance or Code standard; each Code standard to be modified shall require a separate variance request;

6.   In granting the variance, the Planning Official or designee may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this title.

D.  Variance to Vehicular Access and Circulation Standards. Where vehicular access and circulation cannot be reasonably designed to conform to the standards of this title within a particular parcel, shared access with an adjoining property shall be considered. If shared access in conjunction with another parcel is not feasible, the City may grant a variance to the access requirements after finding all of the following:

1.   There is not adequate physical space for shared access, or the owners of abutting properties do not agree to execute a joint access easement;

2.   There are no other alternative access points on the street in question or from another street;

3.   The access separation requirements cannot be met;

4.   The request is the minimum variance required to provide adequate access;

5.   The approved access or access approved with conditions will result in a safe access;

6.   The vision clearance requirements of Chapter 16.50 will be met; and

7.   Variances for street access deviations shall be subject to review and approval by the roadway authority.

E.  Variance to Street Tree Requirements. The City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a variance to the street tree requirements in Chapter 16.42, after finding the following:

1.   Installation of the tree would interfere with existing utility lines, and no substitute tree with a lower canopy is appropriate for the site;

2.   The tree would cause visual clearance problems; or

3.   There is not adequate space in which to plant a street tree; and

4.   The City may require the installation of additional or replacement landscaping elsewhere on the site (e.g., parking lot area trees) to compensate for the street tree variance;

5.   Street tree approval or modification of standards within an ODOT or Clackamas County right-of-way may require approval, respectively, by ODOT or Clackamas County.

F.  Variance to Parking and Loading Standards.

1.   The City may approve variances to the minimum or maximum standards for off-street parking (quantities and dimensions of parking spaces) in Chapter 16.43 upon finding all of the following:

a.     The individual characteristics of the use at that location require more or less parking than is generally required for a use of this type and intensity, or modified parking dimensions, as demonstrated by a parking analysis or other facts provided by the applicant;

b.     The need for additional parking cannot reasonably be met through provision of on-street parking or shared parking with adjacent or nearby uses; and

c.     All other Code standards are met.

2.   The City may reduce the number of required bicycle parking spaces pursuant to Chapter 16.71, if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed use by its nature would be reasonably anticipated to generate a lesser need for bicycle parking.

3.   The City may allow a reduction in the amount of vehicle stacking area required in for drive-through facilities if such a reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the size and location of the development, limited services available and other pertinent factors.

4.   The City may modify the loading area standards if such a reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the use, anticipated shipping or delivery traffic generated by the use and alternatives for loading/unloading, such as use of on- or off-street parking areas during non-business hours, provided that traffic is not impeded.

G.  Variance to Maximum or Minimum Yard Setbacks to Avoid or Reduce Impacts to Floodplains, Significant Trees, Wetlands, or Other Natural Features. The City may grant a variance to the applicable setback requirements of greater than twenty (20) percent for the purpose of avoiding or reducing impact to floodplains, significant trees, wetlands, or other natural features. Modification of the standard shall not be more than is necessary for the preservation of the nature feature to be protected. (Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.71.050 Class C variances.
A.  Applicability. Class C variance requests are those that do not conform to the provisions of Sections 16.71.030 and 16.71.040 (Class A and Class B), and that meet the criteria in subsections (B)(1) through (5) below. Class C variances shall be reviewed using a Type III procedure, in accordance with Chapter 16.61.

B.  Approval Criteria. The City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a variance based on all of the following criteria:

1.   The variance requested is required due to the lot configuration, or other conditions of the site;

2.   That the condition requiring the variance has not been intentionally created to circumvent the Land Development Code;

3.   That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, or substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property;

4.   That the variance, if granted, is the minimum variance that will afford relief and is the least modification possible of the development provisions which are in question;

5.   The variance will not result in violation(s) of any other adopted ordinance or Code standard; each Code standard to be modified shall require a separate variance request;

6.   In granting the variance, the City Administrator or appropriate and designated body or agent may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this title.

(Ord. 406 § 1, 2010; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.71.060 Appeals.
Appeals to variance decisions shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.61. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

Chapter 16.72 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
16.72.010 Purpose.
A nonconformity is created when regulations and standards, generally more recent than certain developmental circumstances to which they are applied, cause a pre-existing development to fail to meet those regulations and standards. The purpose of this chapter is to define, explain and delineate the nonconforming situation and to create a workable relationship between this title, the nonconforming situation and the development patterns and trends in the City. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.72.020 Nonconforming uses.
A.  Purpose. A nonconforming use is a use of the land, regardless of the conforming situation of the building or lot, which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this title, but which was lawful at the time it was established.

B.  Continuation of Use. A nonconforming use may be continued even though not in conformity with the regulations for the district in which the use is located as long as it remains otherwise lawful.

C.  Enlarging or Extension of Use.

1.   Pursuant to the provisions and procedures of this chapter, a nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended within a building or on the same lot provided that the more restrictive requirements of either the district involved or the proper district for the use involved applies to such enlargement or extension; and provided further that all current development regulations are complied with, and that additional adverse effects are not created for abutting properties or the neighborhood, e.g., objectionable conditions, visual and noise pollution, vehicular traffic, dust, or street parking, and provided further that the provisions of this chapter are adhered to.

2.   In cases of practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship, a nonconforming use in a residential district may be enlarged within its containing structure or may be permitted to enlarge within the existing floor area of its containing structure or of its land use.

D.  Change of Use. A nonconforming use may not be changed or altered unless the change or alteration is to the same use classification as prescribed in the Development Code or to the classification that more nearly conforms with the regulations for the district in which the use is located.

E.  Discontinuation of Use. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of at least twelve (12) consecutive months, the use shall not be reestablished. For purposes of calculating the twelve (12) month period, a use is discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

1.   On the date when the use of land is physically vacated;

2.   On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services;

3.   On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; or

4.   On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility districts.

F.  Damage and Destruction. When a building which contains a nonconforming use is damaged to an extent exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of its valuation, the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished. Buildings and uses that conform to the Land Development Code requirements may be reestablished. Valuation shall be determined by an independent fee appraiser who shall be acceptable to both the City and the applicant. The cost of the appraisal shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.72.030 Nonconforming buildings.
A.  Purpose. A nonconforming building is an existing building or tower lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of this Land Development Code but which, under the development standards of the currently adopted codes or regulations, fails to meet the stated minimum standards or exceeds any stated maximum standards.

B.  Continuation of the Building.

1.   A nonconforming building may continue to exist and be used although the building may not be in conformity with the regulations for the district in which the structure is located as long as it remains otherwise lawful.

2.   Normal maintenance of a nonconforming structure is permitted.

C.  Enlarging or Alteration of a Building. No such nonconforming development may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but any development or portion thereof may be enlarged or altered in a way that satisfies the current requirements of this Code or will decrease its nonconformity.

D.  Completion of a Building. Nothing contained in this title shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued and construction work has commenced prior to the adoption of this Land Development Code, except that if the designated use will be nonconforming, it shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be discontinued if not in operation within one year of the date of issuance of the building permit.

E.  Change in Use in a Nonconforming Building (see Section 16.72.020(D)).

F.  Damage and Destruction. When a nonconforming building is damaged to an extent exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of its valuation, such nonconforming building shall not be reestablished unless the building will comply with the development standards of all currently adopted ordinances, codes and regulations. Valuation shall be determined by an independent fee appraiser who shall be acceptable to both the City and the applicant. The cost of the appraisal shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant.

G.  Relocation or Removal. Should such development be moved for any reason and by any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of this Code.

H.  Roadway Access. The owner of a nonconforming access connection (i.e., street or highway access) may be required to bring the nonconforming access into conformance with this Title and other applicable standards as a condition of the City or other roadway authority approving a new access connection permit, or a change in land use. (Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.72.040 Nonconforming lots.
A nonconforming lot is an established lot of record which, under the development standards of the currently adopted ordinances, codes and regulations, fails to meet the stated minimum standards or exceeds any stated maximum standards.

A.  Continuation of the Lot. Any single vacant lot of record at the effective date of adoption of this Land Development Code may be used for development even though the lot fails to meet the requirements for area, width or depth that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements pertaining to the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. Further, no division of lots shall be made which will leave remaining any separate lot with an area less than the requirements stated in this chapter.

B.  Enlarging or Alteration of a Lot.

1.   Any nonconforming lot may be enlarged to any extent, even though the lot may remain in nonconformance; provided the enlargement does not cause the lot to exceed any stated maximum standards.

2.   Any nonconforming lot may be altered with regard to size, shape and topography, provided that the degree of nonconformity is not increased.

3.   Any property which is a nonconforming lot may be combined with any other contiguous property which is under the same ownership for the purpose of reducing or removing the nonconforming status of either, both or all lots. When such action has been completed and is on record with the County Clerk and/or Assessor’s offices, the property may be eligible for permits as determined by the City.

(Ord. 427 § 1, 2012; Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

 

16.72.050 Modification of any nonconforming situation.
A.  Purpose. Before any nonconforming use is enlarged or extended or changed in any way; before any nonconforming building is extended, enlarged, rebuilt, moved or changed in any way; or before any nonconforming lot of record is altered with regard to size, shape and topography, an application must be filed with the City for such modification to take place and approval of the application must occur. The required fee must accompany the application at the time of submittal.

B.  Procedure. A Type I application is required for modification to a nonconforming use. The Planning Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent shall hold a public hearing or make an administrative decision and either grant or deny the application. The Planning Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent shall base its decision to grant or deny the application for modification based on findings of fact. If the application is granted, the commission or appropriate and designated body or agent may impose such conditions and requirements as deemed necessary to insure that the intent of this Development Code is obtained. The applicant or owner(s) may appeal such decision to the appropriate appeal body by filing with the City Recorder within fifteen (15) days of the decision by the Planning Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent. If no appeal is filed, the decision shall be deemed final. If an appeal is filed, the appeal body shall hold a public hearing pursuant to the procedures provided in Section 16.61.060(H).

C.  Building Variances. For modification of a nonconforming building, the application will be considered by the designated building official and the application approved or denied based on compliance with all pertinent sections of this title and with the adopted building code in the City. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the applicant within five working days after the receipt of application by the Building Official.

D.  Lot Variances. For modifications of a nonconforming lot, the application will be considered by the Planning Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent and the application approved or denied based on compliance with all pertinent sections of this Code. No nonconforming lot may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but any lot may be enlarged or altered in a way that satisfies the current requirements of this Code or will decrease its nonconformity. Any approval or denial shall be based on findings of fact and shall be documented. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the applicant within five working days after the receipt of application by the City Recorder.

E.  Temporary Permits. The Planning Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent after public hearing may permit the temporary use of a structure or premises in any district for a purpose or use that does not conform to the regulations prescribed elsewhere in this title for the district in which it is located, provided that such use be of temporary nature and does not involve the erection of a substantial structure. A permit for such use may be granted in the form of a temporary and revocable conditional use permit, for not more than a twelve (12) month period, subject to such conditions as will safeguard the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Such permits may be renewable upon reapplication to the Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent and the finding by the commission or appropriate and designated body or agent of a continuing need. However, the finding of a continuing need by the Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent shall not necessarily mean that such permit will be renewed. (Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

APPENDIX A Happy Valley Plant List
Introduction.
 

The Happy Valley Plant List is an integral component of the City of Happy Valley’s natural resource protection program. Native plants identified on the list are required within the City’s Habitat Conservation Areas, pursuant to Chapter 16.34 of the Land Development Code; invasive or harmful plants (identified on the “Nuisance” or “Prohibited” Plant Lists) are prohibited.

Happy Valley’s native plant policy is designed to ensure the continued viability and diversity of indigenous plant and animal communities, promote the use of plants naturally adapted to local conditions, and educate citizens about the region’s natural heritage and the values and uses of native plants.

A healthy native plant community serves many important functions: it provides habitat for native wildlife and preserves critical habitat for rare, threatened and endangered animals and plants; enhances air and water quality by trapping airborne particulates and by filtering sediments and pollutants from runoff before they enter streams and aquifers; stabilizes stream banks and hillside slopes, and dissipates erosive forces; ameliorates the local microclimate, and reduces water and energy needs; and provides scenic, recreational and educational values which, in turn, enhance Happy Valley’s livability. Native plants are part of the region’s natural heritage.

 

The Three Lists: Native, Nuisance and Prohibited.
 

The Happy Valley Plant List is divided into three sections: native plants, nuisance plants and prohibited plants. These sections are summarized below.

The Native Plants section is a listing of native plants historically found in the Portland region. The list divides the plants into three groups: trees and arborescent shrubs, shrubs and ground covers. For each group, the list includes the scientific (Latin) name of a species, its common name, its wetland indicator status, and its associated habitat type. The habitat types are: wetland, riparian, forest, forested slopes, thicket, grass and rocky.

The Nuisance Plants section is a listing of plants found in the Portland region which can be removed manually without requiring further City review; other local, State or Federal laws may still regulate removal of certain plants on this list. Nuisance plants may be native, naturalized or exotic. They are divided into two groups: plants which are considered a nuisance because of their tendency to dominate plant communities, and plants which are considered harmful to humans. Each group identifies the scientific and common plant names and their indicator status.

The Prohibited Plants section is a listing of plants which the City of Happy Valley prohibits from use in all reviewed landscaping situations within the City limits. These plant species pose a serious threat to the health and vitality of native plant and animal communities. Manual removal of these plants is exempt from land use review.

 

Modification of Lists.
 

Plants may be added to or removed from the Native Plant List or Nuisance Plant List as follows. When a request to amend either list is received, the Planning Official will consult with three or more knowledgeable persons with botany, biology or landscape architecture backgrounds to determine whether the requested change is warranted. This decision will be forwarded to the applicant and will be final. The primary source for native plant determination is the five-volume set, Flora of the Pacific Northwest, by Hitchcock and Cronquist.

Adding to or removing plants from the Prohibited Plant List must be done through a legislative procedure as provided in Chapter 16.67 of the Land Development Code.

 

Native Plants.
 

This section provides a list of native plants historically found in the Portland region. The list divides plants into three groups: trees and arborescent shrubs, shrubs and ground covers. Arborescent shrubs are indicated with an “ª” superscript.

The Indicator Status refers to the frequency with which a plant occurs in a wetland; the categories are derived from the List of Plant Species That Occur In Wetlands: Northwest Region (USFWS, Biological Report 88(26.9), 1988). The status of certain plants was revised using the 1993 Supplement to the List (for Region 9). The indicator categories are as follows:

Obligate Wetland (OBL): Occur almost always (estimated probability >99%) under natural conditions in wetlands.

Facultative Wetland (FACW): Usually occur in wetlands (estimated probability 67%-99%), but occasionally found in non-wetlands.

Facultative (FAC): Equally likely to occur in wetlands or non-wetlands (estimated probability 34%-66%).

Facultative Upland (FACU): Usually occur in non-wetlands (estimated probability 67%-99%), but occasionally found in wetlands (estimated probability 1%-33%).

Obligate Upland (UPL): Occur in wetlands in another region, but occur almost always (estimated probability >99%) under natural conditions in non-wetlands in the Northwest region.

 

A positive (+) sign used with an indicator category means that the plant occurs more frequently at the higher end of the range (more frequently found in wetlands). For example, FACW+ indicates that the plant is typically found in Northwest wetlands with an estimated probability of 83%-99%. A negative (-) sign indicates a frequency toward the lower end of the range (less frequently found in wetlands). An NI (no indicator) was recorded for those species for which insufficient information was available to determine an indicator status. If no category or symbol is indicated for a plant then either the plant does not occur in wetlands, or the species was not reviewed by the 1988 or 1993 interagency panels that developed the list.

The Habitat Types are wetland, riparian, forest, forested slopes, thicket, grass and rocky. “Wetland” includes all forms of wetlands found in Portland. “Riparian” includes the riparian areas along the Willamette and Columbia Rivers, and other streams in Portland. “Forest” refers to upland forested areas with little or no slope. “Forested slopes” refers to steeply sloping upland forests such as the west hills and various buttes found in Portland. “Thicket” refers to edges of forests and meadows and includes hedgerows and clumps of vegetation that may be found in meadows. “Grass” refers to open areas or meadows. It may also include clearings in forested areas. “Rocky” refers to rocky upland areas, and may include cliffs.

The information on habitat types is intended to provide general guidance for appropriate planting locations; certain plants, however, have highly specialized habitats which may make them appropriate for use only in specific areas of the region. For this reason, it may be helpful to consult with local botanists or published sources when preparing a planting plan.

 

Sources of Native Plants.
 

Native plants can be acquired through many local and specialty plant nurseries in the Portland area. A useful native plant directory, Hortus Northwest, is available by writing Hortus Northwest, P.O. Box 955, Canby, OR 97013. Occasionally, particularly for large orders or less common plants, growers will need time to propagate and raise plants before they are ready for installation. For this reason, growers may need advance notice of plant orders and project timelines should allow adequate time to fill such orders.

 

Native Groundcovers A-B.
 

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Achillea millefolium

Yarrow

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Achlys triphylla

Vanillaleaf

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Acnatherum lemmonii

Lemmon’s Needlegrass

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Acnatherum occidentalis sp. californica

California Needlegrass

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Actaea rubra

Baneberry

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Adenocaulon bicolor

Pathfinder

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Adiantum aleuticum

Northern Maidenhair Fern

FAC

 

X

X

X

 

 

X

Agoseris grandiflora

Large-flowered Agoseris

 

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

Agrostis exarata

Spike Bentgrass

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Agrostis scabra

Rough Hairgrass

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Alisma gramineum

Narrow-leaved Water Plantain

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alisma plantago-aquatica v. americanum

American Waterplantain

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Allium acuminitum

Hooker’s Onion

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Allium amplectens

Slim-leafed Onion

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Allium cernuum

Nodding Onion

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Alopecurus geniculatus

Water Foxtail

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Amsinckia intermedia

Fireweed Fiddleneck

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Anaphalis margaritacea

Pearly-everlasting

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Anemone deltoidea

Western White Anemone

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Anemone lyallii

Small Wind-flower

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Anemone oregana v. felix*

Oregon Anemone*

FACU

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Angelica arguta

Sharptooth Angelica

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Angelica genuflexa

Kneeling Angelica

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Apocynum androsaemifolium

Spreading Dogbane

 

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

Aquilegia formosa

Red Columbine

FAC

 

X

X

 

X

X

X

Arenaria (see Moehhringia)

Arnica amplexicaulis v. piperi

Clasping Arnica

FACW

X

X

X

 

 

 

 

Artemisia douglasiana

Douglas’s Sagewort

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Artemesia lindleyana

Columbia River Mugwort

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Aruncus sylvester

Goatsbeard

FACU+

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Asarum caudatum

Wild Ginger

FACU

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Aster chilensis sp. hallii

Common California Aster

FAC

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Aster curtus*

White-topped Aster*

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Aster modestus

Few-flowered Aster

FAC+

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Aster oregonensis

Oregon White-topped Aster

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Aster subspicatus

Douglas’s Aster

FACW

X

X

X

 

X

X

 

Athyrium filix-femina

Lady Fern

FAC

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Azolla filiculoides

Duckweed

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Beckmania syzigachne

Slough Grass

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bergia texana*

Texas Bergia*

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Bidens cernua

Nodding Beggars-tick

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bidens frondosa

Leafy Beggars-tick

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bidens vulgata

Western Beggars-tick

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Blechnum spicant

Deer Fern

FAC+

X

X

X

 

 

 

 

Bolandra oregana*

Bolandra*

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

X

Botrychium multifidum

Leathery Grape-fern

FAC

 

 

X

X

 

X

 

Boykinia major

Greater Boykinia

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Boykinia occidentalis

Slender Boykinia

FAC

X

X

X

 

 

 

 

Brasenia Schreberi

Water-shield

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Brodiaea coronaria

Harvest Brodiaea

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Brodiaea howellii

Howell’s Brodiaea

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

 

Brodiaea hyacintha

Hyacinth Brodiaea

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

B. (see also Dichelostemma)

Bromus carinatus

California Borme grass

 

 

X

X

 

 

X

 

Bromus sitchensis

Alaska Brome

 

 

X

X

 

 

X

 

Bromus vulgaris

Columbia Brome

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

*These plants are identified as rare, threatened, or endangered on the Federal, State, or Oregon Natural Hertiage Program Lists (see Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Plants and Animals of Oregon, Oregon Natural Heritage Program, Portland, Oregon; August 1993).

 

 

Native Groundcovers C.
 

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Callitriche heterophylla

Different-leaf Water starwort

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Calochortus tolmiei

Tolmie’s Mariposa

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

X

Calypso bulbosa

Fairy Slipper

FAC+

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Camassia leichtlinii

Leichtlin’s Camas

FACW-

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Camassia quamash

Common Camas

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Campanula rotundifolia

Round-leaf Bluebell

FACU+

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Campanula scouleri

Scouler’s Bellflower

 

 

 

X

X

X

X

 

Cardamine angulata

Angled Bittercress

FACW

X

X

X

 

 

 

X

Cardamine occidentalis

Western Bittercress

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Cardamine oligosperma

Little Western Bittercress

FAC

X

X

X

 

 

X

 

Cardamine penduliflora

Willamette Valley Bittercress

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cardamine pensylvanica

Pennsylvania Bittercress

FACW

X

 

X

 

 

 

 

Cardamine pulcherrima v. tenella

Slender Toothwort

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Carex amplifolia

Big-leaf Sedge

FACW+

X

 

X

 

 

 

 

Carex aperta

Columbia Sedge

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Carex aquatilis v. dives

Sitka Sedge

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Carex arcta

Cluster Sedge

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Carex athrostachya

Slenderbeaked Sedge

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Carex canescens

Gray Sedge

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Carex cusickii

Cusick’s Sedge

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Carex densa

Dense Sedge

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Carex deweyana sp. leptopoda

Dewey’s Sedge

FACU

X

X

X

 

 

 

 

Carex hendersonii

Henderson’s Wood Sedge

FAC

X

 

X

 

 

 

 

Carex obnupta

Slough Sedge

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Carex pachystachya

Thick-headed Sedge

FACU

 

X

X

X

 

X

X

Carex retrorsa

Knot-sheath Sedge

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Carex scoparia

Carex stipata

Sawbeak Sedge

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Carex tumulicola

Foothill Sedge

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Carex utriculata

Beaked Sedge

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Carex vesicaria

Inflated Sedge

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Carex vulpinoida

Fox Sedge

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Castilleja levisecta*

Golden Indian-Paintbrush*

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Centaurium muhlenbergii

Muhlenberg’s Centaury

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

X

X

Cephalanthera austiniae

Phantom orchid

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Cerastium arvense

Field Chickweed

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Ceratophyllum demersum

Coontail

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Chamomilla suaveolens

Pineapple Weed

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Chrysoplenium glechomaefolium

Pacific Watercarpet

OBL

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Cimicifuga elata*

Tall Bugbane*

 

 

 

X

 

X

X

 

Cinna latifolia

Woodreed

FACW

X

X

X

 

 

X

 

Circaea alpina

Enchanter’s Nightshade

FAC+

X

 

X

X

 

 

 

Cirsium hallii

Hall’s Thistle

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Clarkia amoena

Farewell to Spring

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

 

Clarkia rhomboidea

Common Clarkia

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

 

Claytonia perfoliata

Miner’s Lettuce

FAC

 

X

X

X

X

X

X

Collinsia grandiflora

Large-flowered Blue-eyed Mary

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Collinsia parviflora

Small-flowered Blue-eyed Mary

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Collinsia rattannii

Rattan Collinsia

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Collomia grandiflora

Large-flowered Collomia

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Collomia heterophylla

Varied-leaf Collomia

 

 

 

X

 

X

X

X

Comandra umbellata v. californica

Bastard Toadflax

UPL

 

 

X

 

X

X

X

Conyza canadensis v. glabrata

Horseweed

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Coptis laciniata

Cutleaf Goldthread

FAC

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Corallorhiza maculata

Pacific Coral-root

UPL

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Corallorhiza mertensiana

Coral-root

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Corallorhiza striata

Striped Coral-root

FACU

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Coreopsis tinctoria v. atkinsoniana

Columbia Tickseed

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Cornus canadensis

Bunchberry

FAC

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Corydalis scouleri

Western Corydalis

FAC+

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Cryptantha intermedia v. grandiflora

Common Forget-me-not

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

 

Cynoglossum grande

Pacific Hound’s-tongue

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Cyperus aristatus

Awned Flatsedge

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cyperus erythrorhizos

Red-Rooted Flatsedge

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cyperus strigosus

Straw-Colored Flatsedge

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cypripedium montanum

Mountain Lady-slipper

FACU

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Cystopteris fragilis

Brittle Bladder Fern

FACU

 

 

X

X

X

 

X

*These plants are identified as rare, threatened, or endangered on the Federal, State, or Oregon Natural Hertiage Program Lists (see Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Plants and Animals of Oregon, Oregon Natural Heritage Program, Portland, Oregon; August 1993).

 

 

Native Groundcovers D-F.
 

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Danthonia californica

California Oatgrass

FACU

 

X

 

 

 

X

X

Delphinium leucophaeum*

Pale Larkspur*

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Delphinium menziesii v. pyramidale

Menzies’ Larkspur

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Delphinium nuttallii*

Nuttall’s Larkspur*

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Deschampsia cespitosa

Tufted Hairgrass

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Deschampsia elongata

Slender Hairgrass

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Dicentra formosa

Pacific Bleedingheart

FACU

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Dicentra formosa sp. Oregana*

Oregon Bleedingheart*

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Dichelostemma congesta

Northern Saitas

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Disporum hookeri

Hooker Fairybell

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Disporum smithii

Large-flowered Fairy-bell

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Dodocatheon dentatum

White Shooting Star

FAC-

 

X

 

 

X

 

X

Dodecatheon hendersonii

Broad-Leaved Shooting Star

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Dodecatheon pulchellum

Few-flowered Shooting Star

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Downingia elegans

Common Downingia

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Draba verna

Spring Whitlowgrass

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Dryopteris arguta

Wood Fern

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

X

Dryopteris expansa

Spreading Wood Fern

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Eburophyton (see Cephalanthera)

Elatine triandra

Three-stamen Waterwort

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Eleocharis acicularis

Needle Spikerush

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Eleocharis macrostachya

Creeping Spikerush

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Eleocharis obtusa v. obtusa

Ovate Spikerush

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Elodea nuttallii

Nuttall’s Waterweed

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Elymus glaucus

Blue Wildrye

FACU

 

 

X

X

X

X

X

Elymus glaucus sp. jepsonii

Jepson’s Blue Wildrye

 

 

 

X

X

X

X

 

Epilobium angustifolium

Fireweed

FACU+

X

X

X

 

X

X

 

Epilobium ciliatum sp. glandulosum

Common Willow-weed

FACW

X

X

X

 

 

X

 

Epilobium ciliatum sp. watsonii

Watson’s Willow-weed

FACW-

X

X

X

 

 

X

 

Epilobium paniculatum v. paniculatum

Tall Annual Willow Herb

UPL

 

 

X

 

 

X

 

Equisetum hyemale

Common Scouring-rush

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Erigeron annuus

Annual Fleabane

FACU+

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Erigeron decumbens v. decumbens*

Willamette Daisy*

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

 

Erigeron philadelphicus

Philadelphia Fleabane

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Eriogonum cf. nudum

Barestem Buckwheat

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Eriophyllum lanatum

Woolly Sunflower

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Erysimum capitatum sp. capitatum

Prairie Rocket

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Erythronium oregonum

Giant Fawn-lily

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Eschscholzia californica

Gold Poppy

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Festuca californica

California Fescue

 

 

 

X

X

 

X

 

Festuca occidentalis

Western Fescue-grass

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Festuca roemeri

Roemer’s Fescue

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

X

Festuca subulata

Bearded Fescue-grass

FACU+

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Festuca subuliflora

Coast Range Fescue-grass

 

 

X

X

 

 

X

 

Fragaria vesca v. bracteata

Wood Strawberry

 

 

X

X

 

 

X

 

Fragaria vesca v. crinita

Wood Strawberry

 

 

X

X

 

 

X

 

Fragaria virginiana v. platypetala

Broadpetal Strawberry

FACU

 

 

X

 

 

X

 

Fritillaria affinis

Checker Lily

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

*These plants are identified as rare, threatened, or endangered on the Federal, State, or Oregon Natural Hertiage Program Lists (see Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Plants and Animals of Oregon, Oregon Natural Heritage Program, Portland, Oregon; August 1993).

 

 

Native Groundcovers G-L.
 

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Galium aparine

Cleavers

FACU

 

 

X

X

X

X

 

Galium trifidum

Small Bedstraw

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Galium triflorum

Sweetscented Bedstraw

FACU

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Gentiana sceptrum

Staff Gentian

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Gentianella amarella sp. acuta

Northern Gentian

FACW-

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Geranium bicknellii

Bicknell’s Geranium

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Geum macrophyllum

Oregon Avens

FACW-

X

X

X

 

 

X

 

Gilia capitata

Bluefield Gilia

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Glyceria elata

Fowl Mannagrass

FACW+

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Glyceria occidentalis

NW Mannagrass

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gnaphalium palustre

Marsh Cudweed

FAC+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Goodyera oblongifolia

Giant Rattlesnake-plantain

FACU-

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Gratiola ebracteata

Bractless Hedge-Hyssop

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Grindelia integrifolia

Willamette Valley Gumweed

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Gymnocarpium dryopteris

Oak Fern

FAC

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Habenaria dilatata

White Bog-orchid

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habenaria (see also Piperia and Platanthera)

Heracleum lanatum

Cow-parsnip

FAC+

X

X

X

 

 

X

 

Heterocodon rariflorum

Heterocodon

FAC

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Heuchera glabra

Smooth Alumroot

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

X

Heuchera micrantha

Smallflowered Alumroot

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

X

Hieracium albiflorum

White-flowered Hawkweed

 

 

 

X

 

 

X

 

Hordeum brachyanrhe-rum

Meadow Barley

NI

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Howellia aquatilis*

Howellia*

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hydrophyllum tenuipes

Pacific Waterleaf

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Hypericum anagalloides

Bog St. John’s Wort

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Hypericum formosum v. scouleri

Western St. John’s Wort

FAC-

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Impatiens capensis

Orange Balsam

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Impatiens ecalcarata

Spurless Balsam

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Iris tenax

Oregon Iris

 

 

 

X

 

X

X

 

Juncus acuminatus

Tapertip Rush

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus articulatus

Jointed Rush

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus balticus

Baltic Rush

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus bolanderi

Bolander’s Rush

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus bufonius

Toad Rush

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus effusus v. pacificus

Soft Rush

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus ensifolius

Dagger-leaf Rush

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Juncus laccatus

Slender Soft Rush

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus oxymeris

Pointed Rush

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus patens

Spreading Rush

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

Juncus tenuis

Slender Rush

FACW-

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Koeleria macrantha

Junegrass

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lathyrus nevadensis

Nevada Peavine

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lathyrus polyphyllus

Leafy-pea

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

 

Leersia oryzoides

Rice Cutgrass

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ligusticum apiifolium

Parsley-leaved Lovage

 

 

 

X

X

X

X

 

Ligustucum grayii

Gray’s Lovage

 

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

Lilium columbianum

Columbia Lily

FAC

 

 

X

X

X

X

 

Limosella aquatica

Mudwort

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Linanthus bicolor

Bicolored Linanthus

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Linaria canadensis v. texana

Wild Toadflax

 

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lindernia dubia

Common False-pimpernel

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Lindernia dubia v. anagallidea

Slender False-pimpernel

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Linnaea borealis

Twinflower

FACU-

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Listera caurina

Western Twayblade

FACU

X

 

X

X

 

 

 

Listera cordata

Heart-leafed Listera

FACU

X

 

X

X

 

 

 

Lithophragma parviflorum

Small-Flowered Prairiestar

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Lomatium utriculatum

Common Lomatium

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Lonicera ciliosa

Trumpet Vine

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Lotus denticulatus

Meadow Lotus

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lotus formosissimus

Seaside Lotus

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lotus micranthus

Small-flowered Deervetch

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lotus purshiana

Spanish Clover

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

X

Ludwigia palustris

False Loosestrife

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Lupinus bicolor

Two-color Lupine

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lupinus latifolius

Broadleaf Lupine

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lupinus laxiflorus

Spurred Lupine

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lupinus lepidus

Prairie Lupine

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lupinus micranthus

Field Lupine

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lupinus microcarpus

Chick Lupine

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lupinus polyphyllus

Large-leaved Lupine

FAC+

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lupinus rivularis

Stream Lupine

FACU

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Lupinus sulphureaus

Sulfer Lupine

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Luzula campestris v. congesta

Field Woodrush

NI

 

 

X

 

X

X

 

Luzula parviflora

Small-flowered Woodrush

FAC-

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Lycopus americanus

Cut-leaved Bugleweed

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Lycopus uniflorus

Northern Bugleweed

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Lysichitum americanum

Skunk Cabbage

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Lysimachia ciliata

Fringed Loosestrife

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Lysimachia thyrsiflora

Tufted Loosestrife

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

*These plants are identified as rare, threatened, or endangered on the Federal, State, or Oregon Natural Hertiage Program Lists (see Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Plants and Animals of Oregon, Oregon Natural Heritage Program, Portland, Oregon; August 1993).

 

 

Native Groundcovers M-O.
 

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Madia glomerata

Cluster Tarweed

FACU+

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Madia gracilis

Slender Tarweed

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Madia sativa

Chile Tarweed

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Maianthemum dilatatum

False Lily-of-the-valley

FAC

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Marah oreganus

Manroot

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

 

Matricaria (see Chamomilla)

Melica bulbosa

Oniongrass

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Melica geyeri

Geyer’s Oniongrass

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Melica subulata

Alaska Oniongrass

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

 

Mentha arvensis v. glabrata

Field Mint

FACW-

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

Menyanthes trifoliata

Buckbean

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Mertensia platyphylla

Western Bluebells

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Microsteris (see Phlox)

Mimulus alsinoides

Chickweed Monkey-flower

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

X

Mimulus guttatus

Yellow Monkey-flower

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

X

X

Mimulus moschatus

Musk-flower

FACW+

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Mitella caulescens

Leafy Mitrewort

 

 

 

X

X

 

X

 

Mitella pentandra

Five-stamened Mitrewort

FAC

 

X

X

X

 

X

 

Moehringia macrophylla

Bigleaf Sandwort

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Monotropa uniflora

Indian-pipe

FACU

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Montia dichotoma

Dwaft Montia

FAC

X

 

 

 

 

X

X

Montia diffusa*

Branching Montia*

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Montia fontana

Water Chickweed

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

X

X

Montia linearis

Narrow-leaved Montia

 

 

 

X

 

 

X

X

Montia parvifolia

Streambank Springbeauty

FACW-

X

 

X

 

 

 

X

Montia perfoliata

Miner’s Lettuce

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Montia (see also Claytonia)

Montia sibirica

Candy Flower

FAC

 

X

X

X

X

X

 

Myosotis laxa

Small-flowered Forget-me-not

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Navarretia intertexta

Needle-Leaf Navarretia

 

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Navarretia squarrosa

Skunkweed

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Navarretia tagetina

Northern Navarretia

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nemophila menziesii

Baby Blue-eyes

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Nemophila parviflora

Small-flowered Nemophila

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Nemophila pedunculata

Spreading Nemophila

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Nothochelone nemorosa

Turtle Head

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

X

Nuphar luteum sp. polysepalum

Yellow Water-lily

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Oenanthe sarmentosa

Pacific Water-parsley

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Oenothera biennis

Evening Primrose

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Olsynium douglasii

Grass-Widows

 

X

 

 

 

X

 

 

Oplopanax horridus

Devil’s Club

FAC+

 

X

X

X

X

 

 

Orobanche uniflora

Naked Broomrape

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Orthocarpus hispidus

Hairy Owl-Clover

FACU-

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Osmorhiza chilensis

Mountain Sweet-root

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Oxalis oregana

Oregon Oxalis

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Osalis suksdorfii

Western Yellow Oxalis

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Oxalis trilliifolia

Trillium-leaved Wood-sorrel

FAC+

 

X

X

X

 

X

 

*These plants are identified as rare, threatened, or endangered on the Federal, State, or Oregon Natural Hertiage Program Lists (see Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Plants and Animals of Oregon, Oregon Natural Heritage Program, Portland, Oregon; August 1993).

 

 

Native Groundcovers P-R.
 

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Panicum capillare

Old-witch Grass

FACU+

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Paspalum distichum

Knotgrass

FACW

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Penstemon ovatus

Broad-leaved Penstemon

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

Penstemon richardsonii

Cut-leaved Penstemon

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Penstemon serrulatus

Cascade Penstemon

FACU

X

 

 

 

 

X

X

Petasites frigidus v. palmatus

Sweet Coltsfoot

FACW-

X

X

X

 

 

X

 

Phacelia nemoralis

Shade Phacelia

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

 

Phlox gracilis

Microsteris

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Piperia elegans

Elegant Rein-orchid

 

 

X

 

 

X

X

 

Piperia unalascensis

Alaska Rein-orchid

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Pentogramma triangularis

Gold-back Fern

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Plagiobothrys figuratus

Fragrant Plagiobothrys

FACW

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Platanthera stricta

Slender Bog-orchid

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Plectritis congesta

Rosy Plectritis

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Poa compressa

Canada Bluegrass

FACU+

 

 

X

 

 

X

 

Poa grayana

Gray’s Bluegrass

FACU

 

X

 

 

 

X

 

Poa howellii

Howell’s Bluegrass

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Polygonum aviculare

Doorweed

FACW-

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Polygonum douglasii

Douglas’ Knotweed

FACU

 

X

 

 

 

X

 

Polygonum douglasii sp. spergulariiforme

Fall Knotweed

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

Polygonum hydropiperoides

Common Waterpepper

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Polygonum polygaloides sp. kelloggii

Kellogg’s Knotweed

FAC

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Polygonum nuttallii

Nutall’s Knotweed

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Polygonum persicaria

Lady’s Thumb

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Polygonum punctatum*

Dotted Smartweed*

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Polypodium glycyrrihiza

Licorice Fern

 

 

X

X

X

X

 

X

Polystichum munitum

Sword Fern

FACU

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Potamogeton natans

Broad-leaved Pondweed

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Potentilla glandulosa

Sticky Cinquefoil

FAC-

 

 

X

 

 

X

 

Potentilla gracilis v. gracilis

Slender Cinquefoil

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Potentilla palustris

Marsh Cinquefoil

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Prosartes hookeri

Hooker’s Fairybells

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Prosartes smithii

Smith Fairybells

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Prunella vulgaris v. lanceolata

Heal-all

FACU+

 

X

 

 

 

X

 

Psoralea (see Rupertia)

Pteridium aquilinum

Bracken Fern

FACU

 

 

X

 

X

X

 

Pyrola asarifolia

Wintergreen

FACU

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Pyrola picta

White-Vein Pyrola

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Ranunculus alismaefolius

Water-plaintain Buttercup

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Ranunculus aquatilis v. hispidulus

White Water-plantain Buttercup

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ranunculus cymbalaria

Shore Buttercup

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Ranunculus flammula

Creeping Buttercup

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Ranunculus macounii v. oreganus

Macoun’s Buttercup

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Ranunculus occidentalis

Western Buttercup

FAC

X

 

 

 

X

X

 

Ranunculus orthorhyncus

Straightbeak Buttercup

FACW-

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Ranunculus pensylvanicus

Pennsylvania Buttercup

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Ranunculus scleratus

Celery-leaved Buttercup

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Ranunculus uncinatus

Little Buttercup

FAC

 

X

 

 

 

X

 

Rorippa columbiae*

Columbia Cress*

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Rubus ursinus

Pacific Blackberry

FACU

 

X

X

X

X

X

X

Rumex obtusifolius

Bitter Dock

FAC

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Rumex occidentalis

Western Dock

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Rupertia physodes

California Tea

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rumex salicifolius v. salicifolius

Willow-leaved Rumex

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

*These plants are identified as rare, threatened, or endangered on the Federal, State, or Oregon Natural Hertiage Program Lists (see Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Plants and Animals of Oregon, Oregon Natural Heritage Program, Portland, Oregon; August 1993).

 

 

Native Groundcovers S-Z.
 

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Sagina decumbens sp. occidentalis

Western Pearlwort

FACU+

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Sagittaria latifolia

Wapato

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sanguisorba occidentalis

Annual Burnet

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Sanicula bipinnatafida

Purple Sanicle

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Sanicula crassicaulis

Pacific Sanicle

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Satureja douglasii

Yerba buena

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Saxifraga ferruginea

Rusty Saxifrage

FAC

 

X

 

 

 

 

X

Saxifraga integrifolia

Swamp Saxifrage

NI

X

 

 

 

 

X

X

Saxifraga mertensiana

Merten’s Saxifrage

FACW

X

 

X

X

 

 

X

Saxifraga nuttallii

Nuttall’s Saxifrage

OBL

X

 

X

X

 

 

X

Saxifraga occidentalis v. rufidula

Western Saxifrage

FAC

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Saxifraga oregana

Oregon Saxifrage

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

X

Scirpus acutus

Hardstem Bulrush

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Scirpus americanus

American Bulrush

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Scirpus cyperinus

Wooly Sedge

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Scirpus microcarpus

Small-fruited Bulrush

OBL

X

 

X

 

X

 

 

Scirpus tabernaemonti

Softstem Bulrush

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Scoliopus hallii

Oregon Fetid Adder’s-tongue

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Scrophularia californica

California Figwort

FACW-

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sedum oreganum

Oregon Stonecrop

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Sedum spathulifolium

Spatula-leaf Stonecrop

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

Selaginella douglasii

Douglas’ Selaginella

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

X

Senecio bolanderi v. harfordii

Bolander’s Groundsel

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Sidalcea campestris*

Meadow Sidalcea*

NI

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Sidalcea nelsoniana*

Nelson’s Checker-mallow*

FAC

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Silene antirrhina

Sleepy Catchfly

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Sisyrinchium angustifolium

Blue-eyed Brass

FACW-

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Smilacina racemosa

Western False Solomon’s Seal

FAC-

X

 

X

X

X

 

 

Smilacina stellata

Starry False Solomon’s Seal

FAC-

 

 

X

X

X

X

 

Solidago canadensis

Canada Goldenrod

FACU

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Sparganium emersum v. emersum

Simplestem Bur-reed

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Spiranthes romanzoffiana

Ladies-tresses

FACW

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Spirodela polyrhiza

Great Duckweed

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Stachys cooleyae

Cooley’s Hedge-nettle

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

X

Stachys ajugoides v. rigida

Great Betony

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Stachys palustris v. pilosa

Swamp Hedge-nettle

FACW+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Stellaria crispa

Crisped Starwort

FAC+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Streptopus amplexifolius

Clasping-leaved Twisted-Stalk

FAC-

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Sullivantia oregana*

Sullivantia*

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

X

Synthyris reniformis

Snow Queen

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Tellima grandiflora

Fringecup

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Teucrium canadense v. occidental

Wood Sage

FAC+

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Thalictrum occidentale

Western Meadowrue

FACU

 

X

X

 

 

X

 

Tiarella trifoliata

Laceflower

FAC-

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Tiarella trifoliata v. unifoliata

Trefoil Tiarella

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Tolmiea menziesii

Pig-a-back

FAC

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Tonella tenella

Small-flowered Tonella

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Trichostema lanceolatum

Mt. Blue-Curls

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

 

Trientalis latifolia

Western Starflower

FAC-

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Trifolium bifidum

Pinole Clover

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Trifolium eriocephalum

Wooly Head Clover

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Trifolium microcephalum

Small-Head Clover

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Trifolium microdon

Thimble Clover

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Trifolium oliganthum

Few-Flowered Clover

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Trifolium tridentatum

Sand Clover

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Trifolium variegatum

White-tip clover

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Trillium chloropetalum

Giant Trillium

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Trillium ovatum

Western Trillium

FACU

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Triodanis perfoliata

Venus’ Looking-glass

UPL

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Trisetum canescens

Tall Trisetum

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Trisetum cernuum

Nodding Trisetum

FACU

X

X

X

 

 

 

 

Typha latifolia

Common Cattail

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

Urtica dioica

Stinging Nettle

FAC+

X

X

X

X

 

 

 

Vancouveria hexandra

White Inside-out Flower

 

 

X

X

X

 

X

 

Veratrum californicum

False Hellebore

FACW+

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Verbena hastata*

Wild Hyssop*

FAC+

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Veronica americana

American Brooklime

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Vicia americana

American Vetch

FAC

 

 

X

 

 

X

 

Vicia gigantea

Giant Vetch

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Viola adunca

Early Blue Violet

FAC

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Viola glabella

Stream Violet

FACW+

X

X

X

X

 

 

 

Viola hallii

Hall’s Violet

FAC

 

 

X

X

 

X

 

Viola howellii

Howell’s Violet

 

 

 

X

 

 

X

 

Viola palustris

Marsh Violet

OBL

X

 

 

 

 

X

 

Viola praemorsa v. praemorsa

Canary Violet

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

 

Viola sempervirens

Evergreen Violet

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Whipplea modesta

Yerba de Selva

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

*These plants are identified as rare, threatened, or endangered on the Federal, State, or Oregon Natural Hertiage Program Lists (see Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Plants and Animals of Oregon, Oregon Natural Heritage Program, Portland, Oregon; August 1993).

 

 

Native Shrub List.
 

Native Plant List—Shrubs

Scientific Name

Common Name

Fire Accelerant? *+

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Amelanchier alnifolia

Western Serviceberry

N

FACU

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Arctostaphylos columbiana

Hairy Manzanita

Y

 

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Arctostaphylos uvaursi

Kinnikinnick

Y

FACU-

 

 

 

 

 

X

X

Berberis aquifolium

Tall Oregongrape

Y

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Berberis nervosa

Dull Oregongrape

Y

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Ceanothus cuneatus

 

Y

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Ceanothus sanguineus

Oregon Tea-tree

Y

UPL

 

 

X

X

X

X

 

Ceanothus velutinus v. laevigatus

Mountain Balm

Y

 

 

 

X

 

X

X

 

Cornus sericea sp. sericea

Red-osier Dogwood

N

FACW

X

X

 

 

X

 

 

Corylus cornuta

Hazelnut

N

FACU

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Euonymus occidentalis

Western Wahoo

N

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Gaultheria shallon

Salal

Y

FACU

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Holodiscus discolor

Ocean-spray

N

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Lonicera hispidula

Hairy Honeysuckle

N

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

 

Lonicera involucrata

Black Twinberry

N

FAC+

X

X

 

 

 

X

 

Mahonia (see Berberis)

 

Oemleria cerasiformis

Indian Plum

N

FACU

 

X

X

X

X

 

 

Philadelphus lewisii

Mockorange

N

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Physocarpus capitatus

Pacific Ninebark

N

FACW-

 

X

X

 

X

 

 

Rhus (see Toxicodendron)

Ribes bracteosum

Blue Currant

N

FAC

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Ribes divaricatum

Straggly Gooseberry

N

FAC

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Ribes lobbii

Pioneer Gooseberry

N

 

 

 

X

 

X

X

 

Ribes sanguineum

Red Currant

N

 

 

X

X

X

X

X

 

Ribes viscosissimum

Sticky Currant

N

FAC

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Rosa gymnocarpa

Baldhip Rose

N

FACU

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Rosa nutkana v. nutkana

Nootka Rose

N

FAC

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

Rosa pisocarpa

Swamp Rose

N

FAC

 

X

 

X

 

 

 

Rubus leucodermis

Blackcap Raspberry

N

 

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Rubus ursinus v. macropetalus

Dewberry

N

NI

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Rubus parviflorus

Thimbleberry

N

FAC-

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Rubus spectabilis

Salmonberry

N

FAC+

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

Sambucus cerulea

Blue Elderberry

N

FACU

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

Sambucus racemosa

Red Elderberry

N

FACU

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Spiraea betulifolia v. lucinda

Shiny-leaf Spiraea

N

FAC

 

X

 

 

X

 

X

Spiraea douglasii

Douglas’s Spiraea

N

FACW

X

X

 

 

X

 

 

 

Symphoricarpos albus

Common Snowberry

N

FACU

 

 

X

X

X

 

 

Symphoricarpos mollis

Creeping Snowberry

N

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

 

Vaccinium ovatum

Evergreen Huckleberry

Y

 

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

Vaccinium parvifolium

Red Huckleberry

N

 

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

Viburnum ellipticum

Oval-leaved Viburnum

N

 

 

 

 

X

 

X

 

* Fire Accelerant Y: plans with higher than average flammable combustion potential due to flammability chemicals present within the leaves, needles, and stems; Fire accelerant N (nuetral): plants with average flammable combustion potential (There are no chemicals present within the stems, leaves, and needles that make it less flammable or more flammable than average).

+ Riccardi, et al. In Press. Quantifying physical characteristics of wildland fuels in the Fuel Characteristic Classification System. Canadian Journal of Forest Research.

 

 

Native Tree List.
 

Native Plant List—Trees and Arborescent Shrubs

Scientific Name

Common Name

Fire Accelerant? *+

Indicator Status

Habitat Type

Wetland

Riparian

Forest

F. Slope

Thicket

Grass

Rocky

Arborescent Shrubs

Plants with an ª are arborescent (tree-like) shrubs.

Acer circinatumª

Vine Maple

N

FAC-

 

 

X

X

 

X

 

Malus fuscaª

Western Crabapple

N

FACW

 

X

X

 

X

 

 

Prunus virginianaª

Common Chokecherry

N

FACU

 

X

X

 

X

 

 

Salix fluviatilisª

Columbia River Willow

N

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Salix hookerianaª

Piper’s Willow

N

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Salix sessilifoliaª

Soft-leaved Willlow

N

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Salix sitchensisª

Sitka Willow

N

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Trees

Abies grandis

Grand Fir

Y

FACU-

X

X

X

X

 

 

 

Acer macrophyllum

Big-leaf Maple

N

FACU

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Alnus rubra

Red Alder

N

FAC

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Arbutus menziesii

Madrone

N

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

Cornus nuttallii

Western Flowering Dogwood

N

 

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Crataegus suksdorfii

Black Hawthorn

N

FAC

X

X

X

X

X

 

 

Fraxinus latifolia

Oregon Ash

N

FACW

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Pinus ponderosa

Ponderosa Pine

Y

FACU-

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Populus balsamifera sp. trichocarpa

Black Cottonwood

N

FAC

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Populus tremuloides

Quaking Aspen

N

 

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Prunus emarginata

Bitter Cherry

N

FACU

 

X

 

X

X

 

 

Pseudotsuga menziesii

Douglas Fir

Y

FACU

 

 

X

X

 

 

 

Pyrus (see Malus)

 

N

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Quercus garryana

Garry Oak

N

 

 

 

X

X

 

X

 

Rhamnus purshiana

Cascara

N

FAC-

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Salix lucida sp. lasiandra

Pacific Willow

N

FACW+

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Salix rigida v. macrogemma

Rigid Willow

N

OBL

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

Salix scouleriana

Scouler Willow

N

FAC

X

X

X

 

 

 

 

Taxus brevifolia

Pacific Yew

Y

NI

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

Thuja plicata

Western Red Cedar

Y

FAC

X

X

X

X

 

 

 

Tsuga heterophylla

Western Hemlock

Y

FACU-

 

X

X

X

 

 

 

* Fire Accelerant Y: plans with higher than average flammable combustion potential due to flammability chemicals present within the leaves, needles, and stems; Fire accelerant N (nuetral): plants with average flammable combustion potential (There are no chemicals present within the stems, leaves, and needles that make it less flammable or more flammable than average).

 

+ Riccardi, et al. In Press. Quantifying physical characteristics of wildland fuels in the Fuel Characteristic Classification Syste. Canadian Journal of Forest Research.

 

 

Nuisance Plant List.
Plants on this list can be removed without further City review; other local, state, or federal laws may still regulate removal of certain plants on this list. These plants may be native, naturalized, or exotic. They are divided into two groups — plants which are considered a nuisance because of their tendency to dominate plant communities, and plants which are considered harmful to humans.

 

 

Nuisance Plant List

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Acer platanoides

Norway maple

NI

Acroptilon repens

Russian knapweed

 

Aegopodium podagraria and variegated varieties

Goutweed

 

Agropyron repens

Quack grass

 

Ailanthus altissima

Tree-of-heaven

NI

Alliaria officinalis

Garlic Mustard

 

Alopecuris pratensis

Meadow foxtail

 

Anthoxanthum odoratum

Sweet vernalgrass

 

Arctium minus

Common burdock

 

Arrhenatherum elatius

Tall oatgrass

 

Bambusa sp.

Bamboo

 

Betula pendula lacinata

Cutleaf birch

 

Brachypodium sylvaticum

False brome

 

Bromus diandrus

Ripgut

 

Bromus hordeaceus

Soft brome

 

Bromus inermis

Smooth brome-grasses

 

Bromus japonicus

Japanese brome-grass

 

Bromus sterilis

Poverty grass

 

Bromus tectorum

Cheatgrass

 

Buddleia davidii (except cultivars and varieties)

Butterfly bush

 

Callitriche stagnalis

Pond water starwort

 

Cardaria draba

Hoary cress

 

Carduus acanthoides

Plumeless thistle

 

Carduus nutans

Musk thistle

 

Carduus pycnocephalus

Italian thistle

 

Carduus tenufolius

Slender flowered thistle

 

Centaurea biebersteinii

Spotted knapweed

 

Centaurea diffusa

Diffuse knapweed

 

Centaurea jacea

Brown knapweed

 

Centaurea pratensis

Meadow knapweed

 

Chelidonium majou

Lesser celandine

 

Chicorum intybus

Chicory

 

Chondrilla juncea

Rush skeletonweed

 

Cirsium arvense

Canada thistle

FACU+

Cirsium vulgare

Common thistle

FACU

Clematis ligusticifolia

Western clematis

FAC-

Clematis vitalba

Traveler’s joy

 

Convolvulus arvensis

Field Morning-glory

 

Convolvulus seppium

Lady’s-nightcap

 

Cortaderia selloana

Pampas grass

 

Crataegus sp. except suksdorfii

Hawthorn, except native species

 

Daucus carota

Queen Anne’s lace

 

Dipsaucus fullonum

Common teasel

 

Egeria densa

South American waterweed

OBL

Elodea densa

South American waterweed

 

Equisetum arvense

Common horsetail

FAC

Equisetum telemateia

Giant horsetail

FACW

Erodium cicutarium

Crane’s bill

 

Euphorbia lathyrus

Mole plant

 

Festuca arundinacea

Tall fescue

 

Foeniculum vulgare

Fennel

 

Galium odoratum

Sweet woodruff

 

Geranium lucidum

Shining geranium

 

Geranium robertianum

Robert geranium

 

Geum urbanum

European avens

 

Heracleum mantegazzianum

Giant hogweed

 

Hieracium aurantiacum

Orange hawkweed

 

Hieracium cespitosum

Yellow hawkweed

 

Hieracium laevigatum

Smooth hawkweed

 

Hieracium pilosella

Mouse-ear hawkweed

 

Holcus lanatus

Velvet grass

 

Houttuynia cordata

Chameleon plant

 

Hydrilla verticillata

Hydrilla

 

Hypericum perforatum

St. John’s wort

 

Hypocharis radicata

Spotted cat’s ear

 

Ilex aquafolium

English holly

 

Impatiens glandulifera

Policemen's helmet

 

Iris pseudacorus

Yellow flag

OBL

Juncus effusus v. effusus

European soft rush

 

Lactuca muralis

Wall lettuce

 

Lactuca serriola

Prickly lettuce

 

Lamium maculatum

White Nancy

 

Lapsana communis

Nipplewort

 

Lemna minor

Duckweed, water lentil

OBL

Leontodon autumnalis

Fall dandelion

FAC

Leucanthemum vulgare

Oxeye daisy

 

Ligustrum vulgare

Privet

 

Linaria dalmatica sp. dalmatica

Dalmation toadflax

 

Linaria vulgaris

Yellow toadflax

 

Lolium multiflorum

Annual ryegrass

 

Lotus corniculatus

Bird’s foot trefoil

 

Ludwigia hexapetala

Water primrose

 

Lunaria annua

Money plant

 

Lychnis alba

White campion

 

Lysimachia nummularia

Creeping jenny

 

Lythrum portula

Spatula leaf purslane

 

Melilotus alba

Sweetclover

 

Melilotus officinalis

Yellow sweetclover

 

Melissa officianalis

Lemon balm

 

Mentha pulegium

Penny royal

 

Myriophyllum aquaticum

Parrots feather

 

Myriophyllum spicatum

Eurasian watermilfoil

OBL

Nymphaea odorata

Fragrant water lily

 

Onopordum acanthium

Scotch thistle

 

Panicum capillare

Witchgrass

 

Parentucellia viscosa

Parentucellia

 

Paulownia tomentosa

Princess tree

 

Phalaris aquatica

Harding grass

 

Phleum pratensis

Timothy grass

 

Phragmites australis

Common reed

 

Phytolacca americana

Pokeweed

 

Poa annua

Annual bluegrass

FAC

Polygonum aviculare

Doorweed

 

Polygonum coccineum

Water smartweed

OBL

Polygonum convolvulus

Climbing bindweed

FACU-

Polygonum cuspidatum

Japanese knotweed

 

Polygonum polystachyum

Himalayan knotweed

 

Polygonum sachalinense

Giant knotweed

FACU

Populus alba

White poplar

 

Potamogeton crispus

Curly leaf pondweed

 

Prunus avium (except cultivars and varieties)

Sweet cherry

 

Prunus laurocerasus

English, Portugese laurel

 

Pueraria lobata

Kudzu

 

Ranunculus ficaria

Lesser celandine

 

Ranunculus repens

Creeping buttercup

 

Robinia pseudoacacia (except cultivars and varieties)

Black locust

 

Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum

European watercress

 

Rosa eglanteria

Sweet briar

 

Rosa multiflora

Multiflora rose

 

Rubus laciniatus

Evergreen blackberry

FACU+

Rumex acetosella

Red sorrel

 

Rumex crispus

Curly dock

 

Secale cerale

Cultivated rye

 

Senecio jacobaea

Tansy ragwort

FACU

Silene alba

White campion

 

Silybum marianum

Blessed milk thistle

 

Sisyrimbium officinale

Hedge mustard

 

Solanum dulcamara

Blue bindweed

FAC+

Solanum sarrachoides

Hairy nightshade

 

Sonchus arvensis sp. arvensis

Perennial sowthistle

 

Sorbus aucuparia (except cultivars and varieties)

European mountain ash

 

Sorghum halepense

Johnson grass

 

Taeniatherum caput-medusa

Medusahead

 

Tanacetum vulgare

Common tansy

 

Taraxacum officinale

Common dandelion

FACU

Trifolium arvense

Hare’s foot clover

 

Trifolium hybridum

Alsike clover

 

Trifolium repens

White clover

 

Trifolium subterraneum

Subterraneum clover

 

Ulex europaeus

Gorse

 

Ulmus pumila

Siberian elm

 

Utricularia inflata

Swollen bladderwort

 

Utricularia vulgaris

Common bladderwort

 

Verbascum blattaria

Moth mullein

 

Verbascum thapsus

Mullein

 

Verbena bonariensis

Tall verbena

 

Vicia cracca

Tufted vetch

 

Vicia sativa

Common vetch

 

Vicia villosa

Hairy vetch

 

Vinca major

Periwinkle (large leaf)

 

Vinca minor

Periwinkle (small leaf)

 

Vulpia myuros [Festuca myuros]

Rat-tailed fescue

 

Xanthium spinoseum

Spiny cocklebur

FACU

Nuisance Plant List—Harmful Plants

Conium maculatum

Poison-hemlock

FACW-

Laburnum watereri

Golden chain tree

 

Rhus diversiloba

Poison oak

 

Solanum nigrum

Garden nightshade

FACU

 

 

Prohibited Plant List.
 

Prohibited Plant List

The Prohibited Plants section is a listing of plants which the City of Portland prohibits being used in all reviewed lanscaping situations withing the City limits. This provision applies to the below named species only, and includes any sub-species, varieties, or cultivars of these species. Additional plant species are prohibited by adopted land use plans in specific areas or situations.

Scientific Name

Common Name

Indicator Status

Cytisus scoparius

Scotch broom

 

Hedera helix

English ivy

 

Lythrum salicaria

Purple loosestrife

FACW+

Phalaris arundinacea

Reed canarygrass

FACW

Rubus discolor

Himalayan blackberry

FACU

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

