


CHARTER

CHARTER TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PREAMBLE

Chapter I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES

1.    Title.

2.    Name.

3.    Boundaries.

Chapter II POWERS

4.    Powers.

5.    Construction.

6.    Distribution.

Chapter III COUNCIL

7.    Council.

8.    Council Wards.

9.    Mayor.

10.    Council President.

11.    Rules.

12.    Meetings.

13.    Quorum.

14.    Vote Required.

15.    Record.

Chapter IV LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY

16.    Ordinances.

17.    Ordinance Adoption.

18.    Effective Date of Ordinances.

Chapter V ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY

19.    Resolutions.

20.    Resolution Approval.

21.    Effective Date of Resolutions.

Chapter VI QUASI-JUDICIAL AUTHORITY

22.    Orders.

23.    Order Approval.

24.    Effective Date of Orders.

Chapter VII ELECTIONS

25.    Councilors.

26.    Mayor and Municipal Court Judge.

27.    Run-Off Elections for Mayor, Municipal Court Judge and Ward Specific Councilors.

28.    State Law.

29.    Qualifications.

30.    Nominations.

31.    Terms.

32.    Oath.

33.    Vacancies.

34.    Filling Vacancies.

Chapter VIII OTHER OFFICERS

35.    City Manager.

36.    City Attorney.

37.    Municipal Court and Judge.

Chapter IX PERSONNEL

38.    Compensation.

39.    Merit Systems.

Chapter X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

40.    Debt.

41.    Water and Sewer Fund.

42.    Ordinance Continuation.

43.    Repeal.

44.    Continuation of Rights and Liabilities.

45.    Severability.

46.    Amendments and Revisions.

47.    Time of Effect.

THE CITY OF HERMISTON 2015 CHARTER 


PREAMBLE

We, the voters of Hermiston Oregon exercise our power to the fullest extent possible under the Oregon Constitution and laws of the state, and enact this Home Rule Charter.


CHAPTER I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES


Section 1 Title.

This charter may be referred to as the 2015 Hermiston Charter.


Section 2 Name.

The City of Hermiston, Umatilla County, Oregon, continues as a municipal corporation with the name “City of Hermiston.”


Section 3 Boundaries.

The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or are legally modified. The city will maintain as a public record an accurate and current description of the boundaries. 


CHAPTER II POWERS


Section 4 Powers.

The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow the city, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 5 Construction.

The charter will be liberally construed so that the city may exercise fully all powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law. 


Section 6 Distribution.

The Oregon Constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all municipal legislation to city voters. This charter vests all other city powers in the council except as the charter otherwise provides. The council has legislative, administrative and quasi-judicial authority. The council exercises legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by resolution, and quasi-judicial authority by order. The council may not delegate its authority to adopt ordinances.


CHAPTER III COUNCIL


Section 7 Council.

The council shall be made up of eight councilors, one person from each ward who must be a resident of that ward and is elected by the city at large, and four persons who are residents of the city and are elected by the city at large.


Section 8 Council Wards.

The city of Hermiston is hereby divided into four wards, designated and bounded as follows:

Ward I shall consist of the northwest quarter of the city having its easterly boundary being First Street commencing at Gladys Avenue and thence north to the city limits and its southern boundary being Gladys Avenue and Hermiston Avenue with extension thereto commencing at Gladys Avenue and First Street thence west to the city limits.

Ward II shall consist of the southwest quarter of the city having its northern boundary being Gladys Avenue and Hermiston Avenue with extension thereto commencing at Gladys Avenue and First Street thence west to the city limits and its easterly boundary being First Street commencing at Gladys Avenue thence south to the city limits.

Ward III shall consist of the northeast quarter of the city having its westerly boundary being First Street commencing at Gladys Avenue thence north to the city limits and its southern boundary being Gladys Avenue from First to 7th streets thence south on 7th Street to Diagonal Boulevard thence northeast along Diagonal Boulevard to the east city limits.

Ward IV shall be the southeast quarter of the city having its northern boundary being Gladys Avenue from First to 7th streets thence south on 7th Street to Diagonal Boulevard thence northeast along Diagonal Boulevard to the city limits and its westerly boundary being First Street commencing at Gladys Avenue thence south to the city limits.

All ward quadrant boundary lines will be extended upon annexation. 


Section 9 Mayor.

The mayor presides over and facilitates council meetings, preserves order, enforces council rules, and determines the order of business under council rules. The mayor has no veto authority and shall sign all ordinances passed by the council within ten days after their passage. The mayor has no vote on council matters unless there is a tie vote, and in the case of a tie vote on any matter before the council, the mayor shall cast the deciding vote. The Mayor shall be deemed a member of the Council for the purposes of any voting requirements set forth in this Charter whenever the Mayor votes to break a tie on any matter before the Council. The mayor must sign all approved records of council proceedings. The mayor shall appoint members of the council to commissions, boards and committees that are established by state law, ordinance, council rules, resolution or motion, and with the consent of council, shall appoint non-council members to commissions, boards and committees established by state law, ordinance or resolution. The mayor serves as the political head of the city government. 


Section 10 Council President.

At its first meeting in each odd numbered year, the council must elect a president from its membership. The president presides in the absence of the mayor and acts as mayor when the mayor is unable to perform his or her duties on account of absence, illness, or other cause. The president retains the right to vote on all matters while presiding over the council, but does not have authority to cast an additional vote to break a tie. 


Section 11 Rules.

The council must by resolution adopt rules to govern its meetings.


Section 12 Meetings.

The council must meet at least once a month at a time and place designated by its rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with council rules.


Section 13 Quorum.

Five members of the council shall constitute a quorum to conduct business, but a smaller number may meet and compel attendance of absent members as prescribed by council rules. The mayor shall be deemed a member of the council for the purpose of constituting a quorum. 


Section 14 Vote Required.

The express approval of a majority of councilors present is necessary for any council decision, except when this charter requires approval by a majority of the council. 


Section 15 Record.

A record of council meetings must be kept in a manner prescribed by the council rules. 


CHAPTER IV LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY


Section 16 Ordinances.

The council will exercise its legislative authority by adopting ordinances. The enacting clause for all ordinances must state “The City of Hermiston ordains as follows:”.


Section 17 Ordinance Adoption. 

(a)    Except as authorized by subsection (b), adoption of an ordinance requires approval by at least five members of the council at two meetings. 

(b)    The council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the unanimous approval of all councilors present, provided at least five members of the council are present and the proposed ordinance is available in writing to the public at least three business days before the meeting. 

(c)    Any substantive amendment to a proposed ordinance must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the council adopts the ordinance at that meeting.

(d)    After the adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.

(e)    After adoption of an ordinance, the city custodian of records must endorse it with the date of adoption and the custodian’s name and title.


Section 18 Effective Date of Ordinances.

Ordinances take effect on the 30th day after adoption, or on a later day provided in the ordinance. An ordinance may take effect as soon as adopted or other date less than 30 days after adoption if it contains an emergency clause.


CHAPTER V ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY


Section 19 Resolutions.

The council will normally exercise its administrative authority by approving resolutions or motions. The approving clause for resolutions may state “The City of Hermiston resolves as follows:”.


Section 20 Resolution Approval. 

(a)    Approval of a resolution or any other council administrative decision requires approval by the council at one meeting. 

(b)    Any substantive amendment to a resolution must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the council adopts the resolution at that meeting.

(c)    After approval of a resolution or other administrative decision, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.

(d)    After approval of a resolution, the city custodian of records must endorse it with the date of approval and the custodian’s name and title.


Section 21 Effective Date of Resolutions.

Resolutions and other administrative decisions take effect on the date of approval, or on a later day provided in the resolution. 


CHAPTER VI QUASI-JUDICIAL AUTHORITY


Section 22 Orders.

The council will normally exercise its quasi-judicial authority by approving orders. The approving clause for orders may state “The City of Hermiston orders as follows:”.


Section 23 Order Approval. 

(a)    Approval of an order or any other council quasi-judicial decision requires approval by the council at one meeting. 

(b)    Any substantive amendment to an order must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public at the meeting before the council adopts the order.

(c)    After approval of an order or other council quasi-judicial decision, the vote of each member must be entered in the council minutes.

(d)    After approval of an order, the city custodian of records must endorse it with the date of approval and the custodian’s name and title.


Section 24 Effective Date of Orders.

Orders and other quasi-judicial decisions take effect on the date of final approval, or on a later day provided in the order. 


CHAPTER VII ELECTIONS


Section 25 Councilors. 

(a)    The term of a councilor in office when this charter is adopted is the term for which the councilor was elected. 

(b)    The members of the council shall be elected for a period of four years.

(c)    At the general election in 2016 and at each general election every four years thereafter, four councilors who are residents of the city shall be elected by the city at large to four year terms. The four candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected into office.

(d)    Subject to section 27, at the state primary election in 2018 and at each state primary election every four years thereafter, there shall be one council person elected to a four year term from each ward.

(e)    All council positions, whether at large or from each ward, shall be elected by the city at large. 


Section 26 Mayor and Municipal Court Judge.

(a)    The term of the mayor in office when this charter is adopted is the term for which the mayor was elected. 

(b)    Subject to Section 27, at the state primary election in 2016 and at each state primary election every four years thereafter, a mayor will be elected by the city at large for a four-year term. 

(c)    The term of the municipal court judge in office when this charter is adopted is the term for which the municipal court judge was elected.

(d)    Subject to Section 27, at each state primary election a municipal judge will be elected by the city at large for a two-year term.


Section 27 Run-Off Elections for Mayor, Municipal Court Judge and Ward Specific Councilors.

Notwithstanding Sections 25(d) and 26, if three (3) or more candidates file nominating petitions or declarations of candidacy for mayor, municipal court judge or ward specific councilperson then a nonpartisan primary election shall be had for such position at the state primary election. The two candidates who receive the highest number of votes in a primary election for a certain position shall be the nominees whose name shall appear on the ballot at the general election to be held the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November following the primary election. When any candidate receives a majority of all votes cast for the office for which that person is a candidate at a primary election, the name of that candidate shall be printed separately on the ballot at the general election under a designation equivalent to “Vote for One” and no other name shall be printed on the ballot in opposition to such candidate. One space, however, shall be left following such name in which the voter may insert the name of any person for whom the voter wishes to cast a ballot. The names of the nominees elected at the primary election shall be printed on the Official Ballot for the regular general election without any political party designation.


Section 28 State Law.

City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or ordinances provide otherwise. All elections for city offices must be nonpartisan.


Section 29 Qualifications. 

(a)    The mayor, municipal court judge and each councilor must be a qualified elector under state law, and reside within the city for at least one year immediately before election or appointment to office. 

(b)    No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one city office.

(c)    Neither the mayor, municipal court judge nor any councilor may be employed by the city. 

(d)    The council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of the mayor, the municipal court judge and its members subject, however, to review by any court of competent jurisdiction.


Section 30 Nominations.

The council must adopt an ordinance prescribing the manner for a person to be nominated to run for mayor, municipal court judge or a city councilor position.


Section 31 Terms.

The term of an officer elected to an office at a regular city election shall commence the first day of the year immediately following the election, and continues until the successor qualifies and assumes the office. 


Section 32 Oath.

The mayor, the municipal court judge and each councilor must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitutions and laws of the United States and Oregon.


Section 33 Vacancies.

The office of mayor, councilmember or municipal court judge becomes vacant: 

(a)    Upon the incumbent’s:

(1)    Death, 

(2)    Adjudicated incompetence, or

(3)    Recall from the office. 

(b)    Upon declaration by the council after a hearing of the incumbent’s: 

(1)    Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the term of office is to begin, 

(2)    Absence without council consent from all council meetings within a 60-day period or from fifty percent of all council meetings in any calendar year, 

(3)    Ceasing to reside in the city or the ward from which he or she was elected, 

(4)    Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law, 

(5)    Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty, 

(6)    Unauthorized release of executive session material;

(7)    Resignation from the office, or

(8)    Removal under Section 35(i).


Section 34 Filling Vacancies. 

(a)    If less than two years remain in the term of a mayor or councilmember whose office becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining council members. The appointee’s term of office runs from appointment until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that office. 

(b)    If two or more years remain in the term of a mayor or councilmember whose office becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be filled at a special election, which shall occur at the first election date that meets all requirements of state and city election laws. A person elected to fill a vacancy under this subsection shall serve until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that office. Until a vacancy is filled by a special election and the person takes office in accordance with this subsection, the remaining members of the council may appoint a person to fill the vacancy for the interim period of time.

(c)    A municipal court judge vacancy shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the council members. The appointee’s term of office runs from appointment until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that office. 

(d)    If a disability prevents a council member from attending council meetings or a member is absent from the city, a majority of the council may appoint a councilor pro tem.


CHAPTER VIII OTHER OFFICERS


Section 35 City Manager. 

(a)    The office of city manager is established as the administrative head of the city government. The city manager is responsible to the mayor and council for the proper administration of all city business. The city manager will assist the mayor and council in the development of city policies, and carry out policies established by ordinances and resolutions.

(b)    A majority of the council must appoint and may remove the manager. The appointment must be made without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of education and experience in competencies and practices of local government management.

(c)    The manager must reside in the city.

(d)    The manager may be appointed for a definite or an indefinite term, and may be removed at any time by a majority of the council. The council must fill the office by appointment as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs. 

(e)    The manager must:

(1)    Attend all council meetings unless excused by the mayor or council;

(2)    Make reports and recommendations to the mayor and council about the needs of the city;

(3)    Administer and enforce all city ordinances, resolutions, franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and other city decisions;

(4)    Appoint, supervise and remove city employees;

(5)    Organize city departments and administrative structure;

(6)    Prepare and administer the annual city budget;

(7)    Administer city utilities and property; 

(8)    Encourage and support regional and intergovernmental cooperation;

(9)    Promote cooperation among the council, staff and citizens in developing city policies, and building a sense of community; 

(10)    Perform other duties as directed by the council;

(11)    Delegate duties, but remain responsible for acts of all subordinates.

(f)    The manager has no authority over the council or over the judicial functions of the municipal judge but retains authority over the administrative functions of the municipal court. 

(g)    The manager and other employees designated by the council may sit at council meetings but have no vote. The manager may take part in all council discussions.

(h)    When the manager is temporarily disabled from acting as manager or when the office of manager becomes vacant, the council must appoint a manager pro tem. The manager pro tem has the authority and duties of manager, except that a manager pro tem may appoint or remove employees only with council approval. No manager pro tem shall hold this position for more than six months unless by reappointment.

(i)    No council member may directly or indirectly attempt to coerce the manager or a candidate for the office of manager in the appointment or removal of any city employee, or in administrative decisions regarding city property or contracts. Violation of this prohibition is grounds for removal from office by a majority of the council after a public hearing. In council meetings, councilors may discuss or suggest anything with the manager relating to city business.


Section 36 City Attorney.

The office of city attorney is established as the chief legal officer of the city government. A majority of the council must appoint and may remove the city attorney. 


Section 37 Municipal Court and Judge.

(a)    The municipal court judge will hold court in the city at such place as the council directs. The court will be known as the Hermiston Municipal Court. 

(b)    All proceedings of this court will conform to state laws governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

(c)    All areas within the city and areas outside the city as permitted by state law are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

(d)    The municipal court has jurisdiction over every offense created by city ordinance. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties created by such ordinances. The court also has jurisdiction under state law unless limited by city ordinance.

(e)    The municipal court judge may: 

(1)    Render judgments and impose sanctions on persons and property; 

(2)    Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city; 

(3)    Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of a city offense; 

(4)    Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas; 

(5)    Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve for trials before the court; 

(6)    Penalize contempt of court; 

(7)    Issue processes necessary to enforce judgments and orders of the court; 

(8)    Issue search warrants; and 

(9)    Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions assigned by ordinance. 

(f)    The municipal court judge shall be licensed to practice law in the State of Oregon. Failure of the municipal court judge to maintain a license to practice law in the State of Oregon shall be deemed a forfeiture of office upon declaration by the council after a hearing. 

(g)    The council may appoint and may remove municipal court judges pro tem to serve in the absence of the municipal court judge. A municipal court judge pro tem must be licensed to practice law in the State of Oregon at any time the municipal court judge pro tem is engaged in official duties.

(h)    The council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate state court.


CHAPTER IX PERSONNEL


Section 38 Compensation.

The council must authorize the compensation of city officers and employees as part of its approval of the annual city budget. 


Section 39 Merit Systems.

The council by resolution will determine the rules governing recruitment, selection, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, layoff, and dismissal of city employees based on merit and fitness.


CHAPTER X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


Section 40 Debt.

City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.


Section 41 Water and Sewer Fund.

All funds now in or hereafter derived from the city water system, and city sewer system, or either of them, shall be placed in a single fund and kept therein separate and apart from all other city funds, and shall not be used for any purpose other than the expense of operating and maintaining said city water system and city sewer system, or either of them, and for betterments and extensions thereto, and for the purpose of paying interest and principal of water bonds and sewer bonds, or either of such bonds.


Section 42 Ordinance Continuation.

All ordinances consistent with this charter in force when it takes effect remain in effect until amended or repealed. 


Section 43 Repeal.

All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are repealed.


Section 44 Continuation of Rights and Liabilities.

No right or liability of the city existing at the time this charter takes effect shall be impaired or discharged by adoption of this charter, except as this charter otherwise provides.


Section 45 Severability.

The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by a court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter.


Section 46 Amendments and Revisions.

No amendment, revision or repeal of this Charter shall take effect unless approved by City voters. Either the council by a majority vote or City voters by an initiative petition may refer an amendment of this Charter to the City voters. Only the Council, by a majority vote, may refer a revision or repeal of this Charter to the City voters.


Section 47 Time of Effect.

This charter takes effect July 1, 2015.

Adopted on May 19, 2015.


TITLE I General Provisions

Chapter

10.    GENERAL PROVISIONS


CHAPTER 10 General Provisions

Section

10.01    Title of code

10.02    Interpretation

10.03    Application to future ordinances

10.04    Captions

10.05    Definitions

10.06    Rules of interpretation

10.07    Severability

10.08    Reference to other sections

10.09    Reference to offices

10.10    Errors and omissions

10.11    Official time

10.12    Reasonable time

10.13    Ordinances repealed

10.14    Ordinances unaffected

10.15    Effective date of ordinances

10.16    Repeal or modification of ordinance

10.17    Ordinances which amend or supplement code

10.18    Section histories; statutory references

10.99    General penalty

Cross-reference:

Ordinances generally; see Charter, Chapter VIII


10.01 TITLE OF CODE.

This codification of ordinances by and for Hermiston shall be designated as the Code of Hermiston and may be so cited.


10.02 INTERPRETATION.

Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.


10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.

All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.


10.04 CAPTIONS.

Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.


10.05 DEFINITIONS.

(A)    General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.

(B)    Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY. The city of Hermiston, Oregon.

CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.

COUNTY. Umatilla County, Oregon.

MAY. The act referred to is permissive.

MONTH. A calendar month.

OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.

OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.

PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.

PREMISES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. The same meaning as that set forth in ORS 801.400.

SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.

SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.

STATE. The State of Oregon.

SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.

WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.

YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00)


10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.

The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:

(A)    AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written "and/or," if the sense requires it.

(B)    Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized agent or deputy.

(C)    Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.

(D)    General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.


10.07 SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.


10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.

Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.


10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.

Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.


10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.

If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.


10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.

The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.


10.12 REASONABLE TIME.

(A)    In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice.

(B)    The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.


10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.

This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.


10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.

All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.


10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.

All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.


10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.

(A)    Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.

(B)    No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.

(C)    When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.


10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE

(A)    If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.

(B)    Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.


10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES

(A)    As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 60-01, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 70-01, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 80-01, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 85-01, passed 1-1-85)

(B)    (1)    If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.

Example: (ORS 192.410) (Ord. 80-01, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 85-01, passed 1-1-85).

(2)    If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information.

Example:

§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.

This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.

Statutory reference:

For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see ORS 192.420


10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.

(A)    Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, an offense created by this code is a violation if the code provides that violation of the code is punishable by a fine but does not provide that the offense is punishable by a term of imprisonment. This code may provide for punishment in addition to a fine as long as the punishment does not include a term of imprisonment.

(B)    Conviction of a violation does not give rise to any disability or legal disadvantage based on conviction of a crime.

(C)    Violations are classified for the purpose of sentencing into the following categories:

(1)    Class A violations;

(2)    Class B violations;

(3)    Class C violations;

(4)    Class D violations;

(5)    Unclassified violations as described in subsection (D); and

(6)    Specific fine violations as described in subsection (E).

(D)    An offense described in this code that is designated as a violation but does not specify the classification of the violation is an unclassified violation. An unclassified violation is a Class B violation.

(E)    A specific fine violation is any offense described in this code that:

(1)    Is not designated as a crime or as a Class A, B, C, or D violation;

(2)    Is not punishable by a term of imprisonment as a penalty for committing the offense; and

(3)    Is punishable by a specific fine as the penalty for committing the offense.

(F)    Except as provided in this section, a sentence to pay a fine for a violation shall be a sentence to pay an amount not exceeding the schedule of penalties for violations as required by ORS Chapter 153, Violations and Traffic Offenses.

(G)    If no special corporate fine is specified in the law creating the violation, a sentence to pay a fine for a violation committed by a corporation shall be in an amount not to exceed twice the fine established under this section for a violation by an individual. If a special corporate fine is specified in the law creating the violation, the sentence to pay a fine shall be governed by the law creating the violation.

(H)    If a person or corporation has gained money or property through the commission of a violation, instead of sentencing the defendant to pay the fine provided for in subsection (F) or (G) of this section, the court may sentence the defendant to pay an amount fixed by the court, not exceeding double the amount of the defendant’s gain from the commission of the violation. For the purposes of this subsection (H), the defendant’s gain is the amount of money or the value of property, as determined under ORS 164.115, derived from the commission of the violation, less the amount of money or the value of property, as determined under ORS 164.115, returned to the victim of the violation or seized by or surrendered to lawful authority before the time sentence is imposed.

(Ord. 2182, passed 10-24-11)




TITLE III Administration

Chapter

30.    [RESERVED]

31.    CITY OFFICIALS

32.    BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS

33.    CITY POLICIES

34.    FINANCE

35.    PUBLIC CONTRACTS

36.    EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS

37.    URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY


CHAPTER 30 [Reserved]


CHAPTER 31 City Officials

Section

31.01    Position of Violations Clerk established

Cross-reference:

For provisions concerning various city officials, see Charter Chapter V


31.01 POSITION OF VIOLATIONS CLERK ESTABLISHED.

There is hereby established the position of Violations Clerk in the Office of the Municipal Judge of the city. The Violations Clerk is to be appointed by the Municipal Judge of the city. The Violations Clerk is authorized to accept pleas, accept bail forfeitures and similar functions as outlined in guidelines to be established by the judges of the municipal court.

(Ord. 1156, passed 8-14-78)


CHAPTER 32 Boards, Committees, Commissions

Section

Creation of Boards, Committees, Commissions

32.01    General provisions

32.02    Types of advisory boards, committees and commissions

32.03    Appointment, term, removal of members

32.04    Compliance with state law required

32.05    Officers

32.06    Quorum, meetings, rules and voting

32.07    Relationship to City Council

Library Board

32.08    Library Board established

32.09    Membership and term

32.10    Powers and duties

32.11    Meetings

Airport Advisory Committee

32.12    Airport Advisory Committee established

32.13    Membership and term

32.14    Powers and duties

32.15    Meetings and voting

Planning Commission

32.16    Planning Commission established

32.17    Membership and term

32.18    Powers and duties

32.19    Meetings

Hispanic Advisory Committee

32.20    Hispanic Advisory Committee

32.21    Membership and term

32.22    Powers and duties

32.23    Meetings and voting

Faith-Based Advisory Committee

32.24    Faith-Based Advisory Committee established

32.25    Membership and term

32.26    Powers and duties

32.27    Meetings and voting

Budget Committee

32.28    Budget Committee established

32.29    Membership, qualifications and term

32.30    Powers and duties

Parks and Recreation Committee

32.31    Parks and Recreation Committee established

32.32    Membership and term

32.33    Powers and duties

32.34    Meetings and voting

Recreation Projects Fund Advisory Committee

32.35    Recreation Projects Fund Advisory Committee established

32.36    Membership and term

32.37    Powers and duties

32.38    Meetings and voting

Cross-reference:

Parks and Recreation Committee, see § 93.01

Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center Advisory Committee

32.39    Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center (EOTEC) Advisory Committee established

32.40    Membership and term

32.41    Powers and duties

32.42    Meetings and voting

CREATION OF BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS


32.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

The City Council may create standing citizen advisory boards, committees or commissions to aid the Council in the conduct of public affairs. The City Council may also create ad hoc citizen committees to accomplish a specific task or project. All standing citizen advisory boards, committees and commissions shall be governed by this chapter, except that if application of a provision of this chapter conflicts with an applicable state statute, the state statute shall prevail. The specific enabling provisions for each standing advisory board, committee and commission are contained in this chapter.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.02 TYPES OF ADVISORY BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.

(A)    "Ad hoc committee" means a temporary committee appointed for a specific term to accomplish a specific task or project. Ad hoc citizen committees shall be established by resolution of the Council. The resolution shall set forth the term of the committee, the task or project to be accomplished, the timeline for completion of the task or the project, and such other direction as the Council deems appropriate.

(B)    "Advisory board" means a standing committee that is not required by state law, appointed by the Council to advise and make recommendations to the Council regarding topics as specified in the Committee’s enabling provision. Advisory boards shall be created by general ordinance amending this chapter.

(C)    "Commission" means a standing committee that is required by state law or to which the Council has delegated final decision-making authority. Commissions shall be created by a general ordinance amending this chapter, except where a commission is appointed pursuant to an independent state mandate.

(D)    State Statutory Committees. Where state law requires a committee to have a specific name, such as in the case of the Budget Committee, that name shall supersede the distinctions created by this section.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.03 APPOINTMENT, TERM, REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.

(A)    The City Council shall appoint persons to positions or vacancies on advisory boards, committees or commissions upon the Mayor’s recommendation by motion. The Council may interview or otherwise screen applicants for such positions as it deems appropriate.

(B)    Qualifications for appointment and term of office for a position on a city advisory board, committee or commission shall be as provided in the enabling provision for such board, committee or commission in this chapter. If a position becomes vacant before the expiration of the term, the Council shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term. Initial terms for a newly created advisory board, committee or commission shall be staggered in the resolution of appointment so that a majority of the positions do not become vacant in the same year and so that an equal or approximately equal number of positions become vacant each year. The term of office for positions on an ad hoc committee shall be established in the resolution creating the committee. If a member of an advisory board, committee or commission is qualified pursuant to the enabling provision at the time of appointment but later ceases to be qualified, he or she may nonetheless complete the appointed term. If the Council fails to appoint a successor prior to the expiration of a term of office, the predecessor shall continue in office until a successor is duly appointed.

(C)    Members of city advisory boards, committees or commissions may request a leave of absence from their positions of up to nine months. The Council will follow their established procedures for filling all openings including a temporary vacancy cause by a leave of absence.

(D)    No person shall be appointed to serve simultaneously on more than two of the standing boards, committees or commissions established under this chapter, without a specific waiver granted by the Council.

(E)    When making appointments, the Mayor and Council shall consider the diversity of the membership of boards, committees and commissions including but not exclusively geographic and ethnic diversity.

(F)    Members of boards, committees and commissions shall not receive compensation for their services but may receive actual and necessary travel or other expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties as members of the board, committee or commission, but only with the prior approval of the City Manager.

(G)    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, members of all city advisory boards, committees and commissions shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. An advisory board, committee or commission may recommend removal of one of its members to the City Council for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. A member of city advisory boards, committees and commissions may be removed by the Council, after hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. “Misconduct” includes failure to declare a conflict of interest and failure to comply with any applicable requirement of the Hermiston Code. “Nonperformance of duty” includes unexcused absence from three or more consecutive meetings, or unexcused absence from four or more meetings within a single calendar year.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16; Am. Ord. 2256, passed 5-29-18)


32.04 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW REQUIRED.

All advisory boards, committees and commissions, and any subcommittees thereof, shall comply with the State of Oregon Public Records Law, Public Meetings Law, Code of Ethics, laws regarding conflicts of interest, and any other applicable state laws. Each committee, advisory board, committee or commission shall be responsible for ensuring that its subcommittees comply with these laws.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.05 OFFICERS.

(A)    Each advisory board, committee and commission shall elect a Chair and a Vice-Chair from its membership at its first regular meeting of each fiscal year. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent appointment of Co-Chairs, as the advisory board, committee or commission deems appropriate. Co-Chairs shall divide or share the powers and duties of the Chair as the advisory board, committee or commission deems appropriate.

(B)    The Chair shall:

(1)    Set the agenda. Any member of the committee, advisory board, committee or commission may request that an item of business appear on the agenda. The advisory board, committee or commission may by majority vote compel that item be placed on the agenda.

(2)    Preside at all meetings.

(3)    Be responsible for maintaining communication with the Council liaison and city staff assigned to the committee.

(4)    Call special meetings. A majority of the members of the advisory board, committee or commission may also call a special meeting.

(5)    Be responsible for attendance of members and report to the Council if and when repeated absences impair a member’s ability to serve on the advisory board, committee or commission.

(C)    The Vice-Chair shall exercise the duties of the Chair in the Chair’s absence.

(D)    City staff shall serve as secretary to the committee. The City Manager shall determine which department or staff person shall staff an advisory board, committee or commission.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.06 QUORUM, MEETINGS, RULES AND VOTING.

(A)    Quorum. A majority of the members of an advisory board, committee or commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business.

(B)    Vote. Except as otherwise expressly provided by the City Code or other applicable law or regulation, the concurrence of a majority of all members eligible to vote shall be necessary to decide any question. [Oregon Attorney General’s Public Records and Meeting Manual, Appendix L-3, page 438 (2014)] An abstention does not count as either an affirmative or a negative vote. Nevertheless, a member who is present but abstains may be counted toward making up a quorum.

(C)    Meetings. An advisory board, committee or commission, in consultation with staff, shall establish a regular meeting at such time, interval, and place as the advisory board, committee or commission deems necessary. Special meetings may be called as provided in § 32.05.

(D)    Rules of Procedure. An advisory board, committee or commission may from time to time adopt and amend rules of procedure consistent with the laws of the state, the City Charter, and any other applicable provisions of the City Code.

(E)    Recommendations. All recommendations to the Council shall be made in writing.

(F)    Subcommittees. No advisory board, committee or commission shall appoint a standing subcommittee, an outside advisory committee or an ad hoc subcommittee without first obtaining approval of the City Council. The City Council may approve, deny or modify the request to create a subcommittee. Prior to voting to request the Council to approve creation of a subcommittee, the advisory board, committee or commission shall first request and consider a report from staff regarding the costs and time involved in staffing such a subcommittee. Any request to form such subcommittees shall be submitted to the City Council in writing and shall contain:

(1)    An explanation of the function of and need for the subcommittee;

(2)    The number and any qualifications of its members;

(3)    The staff analysis of the cost and time involved in staffing the subcommittee; and

(4)    If the subcommittee is an ad hoc subcommittee, a deadline for completion of the ad hoc subcommittee’s responsibilities.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.07 RELATIONSHIP TO CITY COUNCIL.

(A)    Council Authority. The City Council is the elected legislative and policy making body of the City. Unless governed by a specific state mandate, advisory boards, committees and commissions are appointed pursuant to the Council’s authority and shall have only those powers and functions as expressly delegated by the Council. Generally, advisory boards, committees and commissions are expected to provide advice and recommendations to the Council and help the Council implement the Council goals. Council members may attend meetings of the affected advisory board, committee or commission. A councilor may not speak on behalf of the City Council at a board, committee or commission meeting unless authorized to do so by the Council.

(B)    Annual Meeting. The City Council may hold an annual meeting with each standing advisory board, committee and commission except the Budget Committee. The purpose of such meeting will be to note accomplishments, to address concerns and to discuss issues related to the duties and activities of the advisory board, committee or commission. Annual meetings of related advisory boards, committees or commissions may be held jointly, as the Council deems appropriate.

(C)    Council Liaison. Each year the Mayor appoints a liaison or liaisons from the City Council to each advisory board, committee and commission. The purpose of a Council liaison is to provide a direct line of communication between the advisory board, committee or commission and the City Council. Council liaisons and the chair of the affected advisory board, committee or commission shall have joint obligation to keep the Council and the advisory board, committee or commission informed of relevant City or advisory board, committee or commission information. Council liaisons to each advisory board, committee and commission may be rotated annually.

(D)    Expenditure of Funds. No advisory board, committee or commission shall have the authority to expend City funds, or to obligate the City for payment of any sum of money, except as expressly delegated or authorized by prior approval by the City Council.

(E)    Additional Duties and Projects. In addition to the duties established for each advisory board, committee or commission in its enabling provision contained in this chapter, the City Council may from time to time assign an advisory board, committee or commission such other duties or projects as the Council deems appropriate.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

LIBRARY BOARD


32.08 LIBRARY BOARD ESTABLISHED.

A public library called the Hermiston Public Library was established in 1915 with a Library Board having been appointed under the provisions of state law, ORS 357.456.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.09 MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A)    The Hermiston Public Library Board is composed of five members.

(B)    Public Library Board members shall serve four-year staggered terms running from July 1 through June 30. One member shall initially hold office for one year, one for two years, one for three years, and two for four years from July 1 in the year of their appointment. Board members may serve two consecutive full terms. Appointment to fill an unexpired term does not apply to this limitation. Any person may be appointed again to the Board after an interval of one year.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.10 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Board will oversee and advise the Librarian, Mayor and Council on the following topics:

(A)    Rules and policies for the governance of the library;

(B)    Preparation and submission of an annual budget request;

(C)    Expenditures from the library fund;

(D)    The acceptance, use or expenditure of any real or personal property or funds donated to the library;

(E)    Working with the Umatilla County Library District; and

(F)    Such other activities as the Librarian, Mayor and Council may request.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.11 MEETINGS.

The Library Board’s regular meetings will be held at least quarterly at a time and date decided by the Board.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE


32.12 AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.

There is hereby created the Hermiston Airport Advisory Committee to advise the Mayor, Council and City Manager on all airport matters.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.13 MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A)    The Hermiston Airport Advisory Committee is composed of five members.

(B)    Airport Advisory Committee members shall serve three-year staggered terms from November 1 to October 31.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.14 POWERS AND DUTIES.

(A)    The Committee shall promulgate rules governing the commercial and noncommercial aeronautical activities on the Hermiston Airport, which rules shall not abridge, enlarge, or modify the rules and standards of the Federal Aviation Administration. The rules thus adopted and any amendments which may be adopted from time to time shall be submitted to the Council and shall go into effect the first day of the month following the close of the City Council meeting at which the rules were considered, unless the Council shall provide an earlier effective date. The Council may, by resolution, amend, repeal or supplement any of the rules.

(B)    In addition to the requirements imposed by state law, with respect to any meeting at which final action will be taken on the promulgation, modification or repeal of a rule under subsection (A) of this section, the Committee shall cause to be posted at the Hermiston Airport a notice which shall include the time and place and a description of the substance of the agenda of the hearing or meeting at least two weeks before such hearing or meeting.

(C)    The Committee or City Recorder shall make available upon request by anyone a copy of any rule which the Committee proposes to promulgate, modify or repeal.

(D)    The Recorder shall cause the rules which have become effective under subsection (A) of this section, as they may be amended, repealed or supplemented by the Council, to be arranged, indexed, printed, published and annotated.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.15 MEETINGS AND VOTING.

The Airport Advisory Committee’s regular meetings will be held at least quarterly at a time and date decided by the Committee. The concurrence of a majority of members present and eligible to vote shall be necessary to decide any question. 

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

PLANNING COMMISSION


32.16 PLANNING COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.

Pursuant to the authority contained in the Charter and ORS 227.020, there is hereby created a city Planning Commission.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.17 MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A)    The Hermiston Planning Commission is composed of nine members.

(B)    Planning Commission members shall serve three-year staggered terms running from April 1 to March 31.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.18 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Commission shall have all the powers which are now or hereafter granted to it by this code, other ordinances and resolutions of the city, and by general laws of the state.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.19 MEETINGS.

The Planning Commission’s regular meetings will be held at least quarterly at a time and date decided by the Commission.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

HISPANIC ADVISORY COMMITTEE


32.20 HISPANIC ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

The City of Hermiston Hispanic Advisory Committee is established to advise the Mayor, City Council and City Manager on Hispanic affairs as they relate to the City of Hermiston.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.21 MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A)    The Hermiston Hispanic Advisory Committee is composed of five members with ties to Hermiston’s Hispanic community.

(B)    Hispanic Advisory Committee members shall serve three-year staggered terms running from July 1 to June 30.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.22 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Hispanic Advisory Committee provides a means of communication between the city’s Hispanic community and the city’s elected and appointed officials. The Committee also provides representatives that the city’s Hispanic community can contact with issues, concerns, and problems which relate to the City of Hermiston. This enhanced communication will assist in the development of a stronger community that is respectful of all nationalities, races, ethnic groups and cultures.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.23 MEETINGS AND VOTING.

The Hispanic Advisory Committee’s regular meetings will be held at least quarterly at a time and date decided by the Commission. The concurrence of a majority of members present and eligible to vote shall be necessary to decide any question.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

FAITH-BASED ADVISORY COMMITTEE


32.24 FAITH-BASED ADVISORY COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.

The City of Hermiston Faith-Based Advisory Committee is established to advise and assist the Mayor, City Council and City Manager on policy issues where faith-based leaders can be effective working in conjunction with the City of Hermiston.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.25 MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A)    The Hermiston Faith-Based Advisory Committee is composed of five members with a connection to Hermiston’s faith-based community.

(B)    Faith-Based Advisory Committee members shall serve three-year staggered terms running from January 1 to December 31.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.26 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Faith-Based Advisory Committee provides a means of communication between the city’s religious community and the city’s elected and appointed officials. The Committee can help determine where the city can have a positive impact on the quality of life of the residents of the City of Hermiston.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.27 MEETINGS AND VOTING.

The Faith-Based Advisory Committee’s regular meetings will be held at least quarterly at a time and date decided by the Committee. The concurrence of a majority of members present and eligible to vote shall be necessary to decide any question.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

BUDGET COMMITTEE


32.28 BUDGET COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.

Pursuant to ORS 294.414, the City of Hermiston Budget Committee is hereby created. 

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.29 MEMBERSHIP, QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM.

(A)    The Committee is made up of the City Council and an equal number of appointed citizen members.

(B)    Appointed Members.

(1)    Must reside inside the city limits;

(2)    May not be officers or employees of the city; and

(3)    Must be qualified voters of the city.

(C)    Budget Committee members serve three-year staggered terms running from January 1 to December 31, such that approximately one-third of the terms of appointed members end each year. Members may apply for reappointment.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.30 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Budget Committee shall be responsible for reviewing the budget message and the budget document. The Committee may request and receive any information it requires for the revision and preparation of the budget document and may compel the attendance of any such officer or employee at its meetings. Once satisfied with the budget document, the Committee will approve the document and forward it to the City Council for public hearing and adoption.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE


32.31 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.

The City of Hermiston’s Parks and Recreation Committee is established to advise the Mayor, Council and City Manager on items related to the parks system and the recreation programs of the City of Hermiston.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.32 MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A)    The Hermiston Parks and Recreation Committee is composed of seven members.

(B)    Parks and Recreation Committee members shall serve three-year staggered terms running from November 1 to October 31.

(C)    Applicants who reside within the Hermiston city limits shall be given preference for appointment to the Parks and Recreation Committee.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.33 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Parks and Recreation Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council on all park and recreation matters and act as the Community Tree Board.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.34 MEETINGS AND VOTING.

The Parks and Recreation Committee’s regular meetings will be held at least quarterly at a time and date decided by the Committee. The concurrence of a majority of members present and eligible to vote shall be necessary to decide any question.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

RECREATION PROJECTS FUND ADVISORY COMMITTEE


32.35 RECREATION PROJECTS FUND ADVISORY COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.

The City of Hermiston’s Recreation Projects Fund Advisory Committee is hereby created and established to advise the Mayor, Council and City Manager on items related to allocation of transient lodging funds to recreation-related projects.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.36 MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A)    The Hermiston Recreation Projects Fund Advisory Committee is composed of five members as set out in § 112.27.

(B)    Recreation Projects Fund Advisory Committee members shall serve three-year staggered terms running from January 1 to December 31.

(C)    Members of this Committee shall live within the boundaries of the Hermiston School District.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.37 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The City of Hermiston’s Recreation Projects Fund Advisory Committee solicits applications for and then makes recommendations to the Mayor, Council and City Manager on items related to allocation of transient lodging funds to recreation-related projects pursuant to § 112.27. 

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)


32.38 MEETINGS AND VOTING.

The Recreation Projects Fund Advisory Committee’s regular meetings will be held at least annually at a time and date decided by the Committee. The concurrence of a majority of members present and eligible to vote shall be necessary to decide any question.

(Ord. 2242, passed 12-12-16)

EASTERN OREGON TRADE AND EVENT CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE


32.39 EASTERN OREGON TRADE AND EVENT CENTER (EOTEC) ADVISORY COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.

The City of Hermiston’s Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center (EOTEC) Advisory Committee is established to advise the Mayor, Council and City Manager on items related to the operations, maintenance and development of the EOTEC.

(Ord. 2253, passed 3-26-18)


32.40 MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A)    The EOTEC Advisory Committee is composed of five members with the following affiliations:

(1)    One member appointed upon recommendation of the Umatilla County Fair Board with strong preference given to Fair Board members.

(2)    One member appointed upon recommendation of the Farm-City Pro Rodeo Board with strong preference given to Rodeo Board members.

(3)    One member appointed upon recommendation of the Greater Hermiston Hospitality and Tourism Committee.

(4)    Two members appointed at large.

(B)    EOTEC Advisory Committee members shall serve three-year staggered terms running from July 1 to June 30. One member shall initially hold office for one year, two members for two years, and two members for three years from July 1 in the year of their appointment.

(C)    Applicants who reside within the Hermiston city limits shall be given preference for appointment to the EOTEC Advisory Committee.

(D)    The EOTEC General Manager and the City Manager or designee will be the staff liaisons to the EOTEC Advisory Committee.

(Ord. 2253, passed 3-26-18)


32.41 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The EOTEC Advisory Committee shall advise the Mayor, Council and City Manager on items related to the operations, maintenance and development of the EOTEC.

(Ord. 2253, passed 3-26-18)


32.42 MEETINGS AND VOTING.

The EOTEC Advisory Committee’s regular meetings will be held at least quarterly at a time and date decided by the Committee. The concurrence of a majority of members present and eligible to vote shall be necessary to decide any question.

(Ord. 2253, passed 3-26-18)


CHAPTER 33 City Policies

Section

Disposition of Found and Unclaimed Property

33.01    Definitions

33.02    Surrender of found property

33.03    Records and reports

33.04    Treatment of surplus property

33.05    Treatment of unclaimed property

33.06    Abandoned motor vehicles

33.07    Owner’s responsibility and expense

33.08    Redemption of property

33.09    Discretion of City Manager

Public Grievance for Discrimination

33.20    Purpose

33.21    Duties of City Manager

33.22    Duties of Finance Director/Recorder

33.23    Resolution procedure

Trial by Jury in Municipal Court

33.35    Definitions

33.36    Adoption of state statutes

33.37    Trial by jury in criminal cases

33.38    Jury list

33.39    Jurors’ fees

33.40    Jury fees

Criminal History Checks for City Employees

33.50    Purpose

33.51    Procedure

Explanatory Statements Relating to Municipal Legislation Referred or Initiated by Petition

33.60    Adoption of state law

33.61    Filing deadline for initiative petitions

DISPOSITION OF FOUND AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY


33.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

FOUND PROPERTY. Money or personal property of any description other than contraband, firearms used in commission of a crime, other property being held as evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding, animals, or motor vehicles, the true owner of which cannot be readily ascertained, and which is:

(1)    Found by any officer or employee of the city in or about any vehicle, structure, park, lot, street, or other place or premises owned by or under control of the city; or

(2)    Surrendered to an officer or employee of the city by any person reporting it to have been found at any place.

PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes goods but not money.

SURPLUS PROPERTY. Any personal property belonging to and owned by the city, which has been determined by the City Manager to be of no further use to the city.

UNCLAIMED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle taken into custody after notice as provided herein.

UNCLAIMED PROPERTY. Money or personal property of any description other than contraband, firearms used in the commission of a crime, animals or motor vehicles, and which has, for any reason, come into the custody, actual or constructive, of the city and is no longer required to be held by the city for any purpose, and remains unclaimed for 30 days after notice to the owner or other interested person(s) as provided herein.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93; Am. Ord. 2270, passed 12-10-18)


33.02 SURRENDER OF FOUND PROPERTY.

Any person (hereinafter called "finder") who reports having found property, at any place in the city limits, to any officer or employee of the city and, if the owner of the found property is unknown, the finder may exercise his or her rights under ORS 98.005 and retain the found property. Or, after being provided with a copy of ORS 98.005, Finders’ Rights and Duties, the finder may surrender the found property to the custody of any officer or employee of the city and thereby surrenders and waives any claim of right, title, or interest in the found property.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93; Am. Ord. 2270, passed 12-10-18)


33.03 RECORDS AND REPORTS.

(A)    The officer or employee of the city into whose custody found property first comes shall deliver to the custody of the Police Department the property together with a report. The report shall set forth the following information as is known to the author:

(1)    The date, time, name and address of finder, and place of the finding;

(2)    The date and time the property came into the custody of the city; and

(3)    A description of the property; the location where the property is kept.

(B)    When found property comes into the custody of the Police Department the Police Department shall cause an identification tag to be attached to the property.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93)


33.04 TREATMENT OF SURPLUS PROPERTY.

(A)    Determination that personal property is surplus and of no further use to a using agency is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the City Manager.

(B)    Disposition of surplus property is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the City Manager.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93)


33.05 TREATMENT OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.

(A)    Any officer or employee of the city who has, for any reason, the actual or constructive custody of unclaimed property shall deliver the property to be held under the jurisdiction of his department head. After ten days from time of delivery, or sooner if the department head or his designee deems the property to be of such value that more secure storage is advisable, the property shall be delivered to the custody of the Police Department.

(B)    Within ten days of the property coming into the custody of the Police Department, the Department shall make diligent inquiry, including, but not limited to, an examination of the property for identifying markings, to discover the name and address of the owner, conditional vendor, mortgagee, or any person(s) interested therein.

(C)    If the owner or other interested person(s) can be readily ascertained, or has been ascertained within ten days of the Police Department custody, the Department shall cause notice to be sent by certified mail to the owner or interested person(s) so that he or she may claim the property within 30 days of the date on which the notice is sent.

(D)    Unclaimed property shall be held for at least 30 days following the notice to the owner or other interested person(s), during which time the owner may redeem the property by satisfactorily establishing his or her ownership thereof and payment of costs as provided herein.

(E)    The Chief of Police, whenever he or she deems necessary, shall transmit to the evidence/property manager a list of all found and unclaimed property in his or her possession. After this transmittal, the property shall come into the custody and control of the Evidence/Property Manager.

(F)    Unclaimed property valued at $25 or more and which remains unclaimed and not redeemed after the redemption period set forth in divisions (C) and (D) above shall be disposed of by the Evidence/ Property Manager as follows:

(1)    At a time set by the City Manager, all unclaimed property shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash.

(2)    In default of bids from others, the City Manager may dispose of the property at his discretion without necessity of taking further bids.

(3)    Notice of the time and place of the auction shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than five days nor more than 15 days before the date of the sale. The notice shall contain a general description of the property to be sold.

(4)    At the time of the payment of the purchase price for property sold under this section, the City Manager or a representative of the City Manager shall make, execute, and deliver, on behalf of the city, a bill of sale, in duplicate, the original to be delivered to the purchaser and the copy to be kept on file in the office of the City Manager. The bill of sale shall include the following:

(a)    The name and address of the purchaser;

(b)    The date of the sale;

(c)    The consideration paid;

(d)    A brief description of the property; and

(e)    A stipulation that the city does not warrant the condition or title of the property.

(5)    The sale and conveyance of unclaimed property shall be without redemption.

(6)    Property sold pursuant to this section shall be delivered to the purchaser only upon presentation of the bill of sale therefor, issued pursuant to division (D) of this section.

(G)    Found and unclaimed property valued at less than $25 and not redeemed may be disposed of by the City Manager in a manner most advantageous to the city.

(H)    The proceeds of any sale under this section shall be applied as follows: First, to the payment of the cost of the sale and expenses incurred in the preservation and custody of the property, and; second, the balance, if any, shall be paid to the Finance Director/Recorder of the city and shall be credited to the general fund.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93; Am. Ord. 2270, passed 12-10-18)


33.06 ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.

Motor vehicles shall be held and disposed of as provided by ORS Chapter 819.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93)


33.07 OWNER’S RESPONSABILITY AND EXPENSE.

Found property, unclaimed property and unclaimed motor vehicles which come into the custody, actual or constructive, of the city for any reason, shall be held at the expense of the owner and any costs incurred by the city in finding, transportation, giving of notice, storage, care, and custody of the property shall be paid by the owner or other person(s) lawfully entitled to possession and upon payment of same the property may be released.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93)


33.08 REDEMPTION OF PROPERTY.

(A)    The property shall be held by the city for a minimum period of 30 days after the property comes into the custody of the city, during which time the owner may redeem the property by satisfactorily establishing his ownership thereof, and the payment of any costs as provided herein.

(B)    Found property which remains unclaimed and not redeemed after the redemption period set forth in division (A) above shall be disposed of as unclaimed property pursuant to city ordinance.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93)


33.09 DISCRETION OF CITY MANAGER.

The City Manager may, but is not required to, use additional or extraordinary efforts to locate owners or sell property as he or she sees fit in his or her sole discretion.

(Ord. 1817, passed 5- -93; Am. Ord. 2270, passed 12-10-18)

PUBLIC GRIEVANCE FOR DISCRIMINATION


33.20 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this public grievance procedure is to establish a formal method the public shall pursue should they feel their city government is discriminating against handicapped persons.

(Ord. 1544, passed 10-8-84)


33.21 DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.

The City Manager is hereby designated to be the responsible city employee in all handicapped discrimination complaints.

(Ord. 1544, passed 10-8-84)


33.22 DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR/RECORDER.

The Finance Director/Recorder is hereby designated to be the responsible city employee to record data necessary and required by the Office of Revenue Sharing and to make same available to the City Auditor.

(Ord. 1544, passed 10-8-84)


33.23 RESOLUTION PROCEDURE.

Grievances shall be resolved in the following manner:

(A)    Step 1. The complainant shall file his grievance, in writing, to the City Manager.

(B)    Step 2. With respect to any complaint submitted to the city in compliance with Step 1, the parties shall make earnest effort to reach early agreement. If resolution is not reached within ten days, the complaint shall be submitted to the City Council.

(C)    Step 3. All unresolved complaints will be submitted to the City Council for final city resolution. Presentations will be made by the complainant and determination will be made by the City Council at the regularly scheduled meeting following notification of the request.

(D)    Step 4. If the complainant is not in agreement with the City Council resolution, the complainant may appeal the Council’s decision to the appropriate tribunal.

(Ord. 1544, passed 10-8-84)

TRIAL BY JURY IN MUNICIPAL COURT


33.35 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CHIEF OF POLICE. The CHIEF OF POLICE of the city or his duly appointed representative.

CITY. The City of Hermiston, Oregon, a municipal corporation.

COURT. The municipal court of the City of Hermiston, Oregon.

COURT CLERK. Any person(s) sworn in as a clerk of the court.

DISTRICT. The City of Hermiston, Oregon.

FINANCE DIRECTOR/RECORDER. The FINANCE DIRECTOR/RECORDER of the City of Hermiston, Oregon, or his duly appointed representative.

JUDGE. A JUDGE of the municipal court of the City of Hermiston, Oregon.

SHERIFF. The Chief of Police of the city.

(Ord. 1407, passed 4-12-82)


33.36 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES.

The following enumerated sections of the Oregon State Statutes of 2007 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter so far as they pertain to trial by juries in the municipal court:

(A)    ORS 10.010 through 10.105 and ORS 10.115.

(B)    ORS 54.010 through 54.050.

(C)    ORS 54.100 through 54.130 and ORS 54.160.

(Ord. 1407, passed 4-12-82; Am. Ord. 2020, passed 9-11-00; Am. Ord. 2154, passed 3-9-09)


33.37 TRIAL BY JURY IN CRIMINAL CASES.

In all prosecutions for any crime over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, the prosecution and the defendant shall have the right of trial by jury, of six in number. Except as otherwise provided in this code, juries shall be selected in the same manner in which juries are selected for misdemeanor cases in circuit courts. The verdict of the jury shall be unanimous.

(Ord. 1407, passed 4-12-82; Am. Ord. 2154, passed 3-9-09)


33.38 JURY LIST.

(A)    On the first Monday of January of each year, the Finance Director/Recorder shall deliver to the municipal judge a current roll of the registered voters in the city. The Court Clerk, under the direction of the Municipal Judge, shall select and make from the roll a jury list of persons to serve as jurors for the next three months, and until another is selected. Subsequent jury lists for each following three month period will be prepared at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the current jury list.

(B)    The list, when made, will be dated and signed by the Municipal Judge and Court Clerk.

(C)    No person shall be placed on the jury list who has served on the jury list of the court during the preceding 12 months.

(Ord. 1407, passed 4-12-82)


33.39 JURORS’ FEES.

Each juror shall be entitled to an attendance fee as adopted by resolution, but not less than $10 for each day’s required attendance.

(Ord. 1407, passed 4-12-82; Am. Ord. 2020, passed 9-11-00)


33.40 JURY FEES.

If a case is tried by a jury and the defendant is found guilty, the clerk shall tax against the defendant the total amount of the jury trial fee. The jury trial fee constitutes a monetary obligation payable to the court, and shall be made part of the judgment in the case by the clerk without further notice to the defendant or further order of the court. The jury trial fee is the amount provided by ORS 10.061 in courts other than circuit courts for payment for each juror sworn multiplied by the number of jurors constituting a jury in § 33.37.

(Ord. 2154, passed 3-9-09)

CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES


33.50 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this subchapter is to authorize the Police Department to access Oregon State Police (OSP) criminal offender information through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS) for applicants seeking employment and/or volunteer work with the city in accordance with OAR 257-10-025(1)(a).

(Ord. 1965, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord. 2130, passed 2-12-07)


33.51 PROCEDURE.

All proceedings pursuant to this subchapter shall be conducted in accordance with ORS 181.555 and OAR 257 10 025, which establish procedures for access to criminal record information possessed by the Oregon State Police (OSP) through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS), and as supplemented below:

(A)    Those applicants for employment and appointed volunteers with the city who are required to have a criminal history background checks shall authorize the city to conduct a criminal offender information check through the OSP-LEDS system.

(B)    The Personnel Department will maintain the criminal history authorization form and request that a criminal history check be made if it is determined this will be in the best interest of the city in filling the position.

(C)    The Hermiston Police Department will conduct the check on the prospective employee or volunteer and report to the Personnel Department that the applicant’s record indicated "no criminal record" or "criminal record".

(D)    If the applicant’s record is reported a "criminal record," the Personnel Department will, in accordance with OAR 257 10 025 (1)(c), request a written criminal history report from the OSP Identification Services Section and pay the applicable fee for this service. The Personnel Department will make the written criminal history record available to the selecting official for his consideration in making the hiring decision.

(E)    The written criminal history record on persons who are not hired or appointed as a volunteer will be retained in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166 40 080 for a period of three years and thereafter will be destroyed by shredding.

(F)    The criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history who are hired or appointed will become a part of the confidential personnel file of the employee or volunteer. Access to confidential personnel files is limited to authorized persons who have an official need to access the files as sanctioned by law or regulation.

(G)    Applicants for employment or appointment as a volunteer who have a felon criminal history or a history of conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or theft will be closely examined by the selecting official(s) to determine if the applicant possesses the required degree of public trust and confidence. Each selection will, however, be made on an individual, case by case basis, taking into account the applicant’s qualifications, the requirements of the particular job or volunteer post applied for and the results of the criminal history check. Factors such as the age of the offender at the time of the offense, the type of offense and subsequent rehabilitation and the public sensitivity of the position under consideration shall be taken into account in evaluating a criminal history report.

(H)    Hiring an applicant or appointing a volunteer with a criminal history record require a positive recommendation by the Chief of Police and the approval of the City Manager or governing body after full disclosure and consideration of the criminal history the applicant.

(Ord. 1965, passed 9-14-98)

EXPLANATORY STATEMENTS RELATING TO MUNICIPAL LEGISLATION REFERRED OR INITIATED BY PETITION


33.60 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.

Except as provided in this chapter, the general laws of the state concerning initiative and referendum shall apply to any initiative or referendum of a city measure.

(Ord. 2151, passed 8-25-08)


33.61 FILING DEADLINE FOR INITIATIVE PETITIONS.

The date the first signature of an initiative petition is affixed shall be no later than 90 days after the issuance of the ballot title for the measure, and the initiative petition shall be filed with the city recorder for certification and approval no later than 180 days after the date the first signature on the petition has been affixed or at the end of 145 days from the effective date of this subchapter, whichever is later.

(Ord. 2151, passed 8-25-08)


CHAPTER 34 Finance

Section

System Development Charges

34.01    Scope

34.02    Definitions

34.03    System development charge imposed

34.04    Method for establishment

34.05    Methodology

34.06    Authorized expenditure

34.07    Project plan

34.08    Charge collection

34.09    Exemptions

34.10    Credits

34.11    Notification; appeals

34.12    Annual accounting

Local Improvement District Ordinance

34.25    Short title

34.26    Definitions

34.27    Initiation of LID formation

34.28    LID formation

34.29    Public hearing and City Council decision on formation

34.30    Remonstrances

34.31    Construction of the local improvement

34.32    Assessments

34.33    [Reserved]

34.34    Lien notice

34.35    Installment payments

34.36    Lien recording and docket

34.37    Unknown owner

34.38    Reassessments

34.39    City funds

34.40    [Reserved]

34.41    Financing

34.42    Parking improvements

34.43    Miscellaneous

34.44    Apportionment on partition or subdivision

Cross-reference:

Public contracts, see Ch. 35

SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES


34.01 SCOPE.

The system development charges imposed herein are separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Facilities or assets used for:

(1)    Water supply, treatment and distribution;

(2)    Sewer and wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;

(3)    Drainage and flood control;

(4)    Transportation; or

(5)    Parks and recreation.

DEVELOPMENT. Conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, or creating or terminating a right of access.

IMPROVEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.

LAND AREA. The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right of way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.

OWNER. The OWNER(S) of record title or the purchaser(s) under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

PARCEL OF LAND. A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision or other development ordinances.

PERMITTEE. The person to whom a building permit, development permit or right of way access permit is issued.

QUALIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. A capital improvement that is:

(1)    Required as a condition of development approval;

(2)    Identified in the System Development Charge Fund Project Plan; and

(3)    Not located on or continuous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval.

REIMBURSEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.

SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE. A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.03 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE IMPOSED.

Unless exempted pursuant to herein, a systems development charge is hereby imposed upon all development within the city.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.04 METHOD FOR ESTABLISHMENT.

Systems development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of City Council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge, the type of permit to which the charge applies, and, if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire city, the geographic area subject to the charge.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.05 METHODOLOGY.

(A)    The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of the then existing facilities, prior contributions by then existing system users, the value of unused capacity, rate making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the City Council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute not more than an equitable share of the cost of then existing facilities.

(B)    The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related and other relevant factors identified by the City Council.

(C)    The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be adopted by resolution.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.06 AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE.

(A)    Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.

(B)    Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of debt for improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by projected development.

(C)    Capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the Systems Development Charge Fund Project Plan adopted by the city.

(D)    System development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this subchapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge funds.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.07 PROJECT PLAN.

(A)    The City Council shall adopt by resolution the Systems Development Charge Fund Project Plan. This plan:

(1)    Defines the amount of current or under construction capacity available for new development and the cost of the facilities comprising this capacity;

(2)    Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues; and

(3)    Lists the estimated cost and estimated construction time frame of each improvement.

(B)    In adopting this plan, the City Council may incorporate by reference all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section. The City Council may modify this project plan at any time through the adoption of an appropriate resolution.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.08 CHARGE COLLECTION.

(A)    The systems development charge is payable upon issuance of:

(1)    A building permit;

(2)    A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit;

(3)    Approval to connect or increase the usage of the system or systems provided by the city; or

(4)    A right of way access permit.

(B)    The resolution which sets the amount of the charge shall designate the permit or systems to which the charge applies.

(C)    The City Manager or his designee shall collect the applicable system development charge from the permittee or system user.

(D)    The City Manager or his designee shall not issue the permit or allow connection or increased usage of the system(s) until the charge has been paid in full, unless an exemption is granted pursuant to § 34.09.

(E)    All moneys collected through the system development charge shall be retained in a separate fund and segregated by type of system development charge and by reimbursement versus improvement fees.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.09 EXEMPTIONS.

(A)    Exemptions include all structures and uses established and existing on or before the effective date of the resolution.

(B)    Additions to single family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit as defined by the city’s Building Code are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(C)    An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of a capital improvement are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.10 CREDITS.

(A)    A permittee is eligible for credit against the system development charge for constructing a qualified capital improvement. A qualified capital improvement means one that meets all of the following criteria:

(1)    Is required as a condition of development approval by the city;

(2)    Is identified in the adopted System Development Charge Fund Project Plan; and

(3)    Is not located within or contiguous to the property or parcel that is subject to development approval; or

(4)    Is not located in whole or in part on, or contiguous to, property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

(B)    This credit shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed. Credit under this section may be granted only for the cost of that portion of the improvement that exceeds the facility size or capacity needed to serve the development project.

(C)    In applying the adopted methodology, the city may grant a credit against the improvement charge for capital facilities provided as part of the development that reduces the development’s demand upon existing capital improvements or the need for further capital improvements or that would otherwise have to be constructed at city expense under the then existing City Council policies.

(D)    When the construction of a qualified public improvement gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project receiving development approval, the excess credit may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project.

(E)    All credit requests must be in writing and filed with the city before the issuance of a building permit. Improvement acceptance shall be in accordance with the usual and customary practices, procedures and standards of the city. The amount of any credit shall be determined by the city and based upon the subject improvement construction contract documents, or other appropriate information, provided by the applicant for the credit. Upon a finding by the city that the contract amounts exceed prevailing market rate for a similar project, the credit shall be based upon market rates. The city shall provide the applicant with a credit on a form provided by the city. The credit shall state the actual dollar amount that may be applied against any system development charge imposed against the subject property. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating qualification for a credit.

(F)    Credits shall be apportioned against the property which was subject to the requirements to construct an improvement eligible for credit. Unless otherwise requested, apportionment against lots or parcels constituting the property shall be proportionate to the anticipated public facility service requirements generated by the respective lots or parcels. Upon written application to the city, however, credits shall be reapportioned from any lot or parcel to any other lot or parcel within the confines of the property originally eligible for the credit. Reapportionment shall be noted on the original credit form retained by the city.

(G)    Any credits may be assigned; however, they shall apply only to that property subject to the original condition for land use approval upon which the credit is based or any partitioned or subdivided parcel or lots of property to which the credit has been apportioned. Credits shall only apply against system development charges, are limited to the amount of the fee attributable to the development of the specific lot or parcel for which the credit is sought and shall not be a basis for any refund.

(H)    Any credit request must be submitted before the issuance of a building permit. The applicant is responsible for presentation of any credit and no credit shall be considered after issuance of a building permit.

(I)    Credits shall be used by the applicant within ten years of their issuance by the city.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.11 NOTIFICATION; APPEALS.

(A)    The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or amendment of the system development charge methodology. These persons shall be so notified in writing of any proposed changes at least 45 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend methodology(ies). This methodology shall be available at least 30 days prior to the public hearing.

(B)    No challenge to the system development charge methodology shall be accepted after 60 days following final adoption by the City Council.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)


34.12 ANNUAL ACCOUNTING.

The city shall provide an annual accounting for system development charges showing the total amount of system development charges collected for each system along with a list of projects funded in whole or in part through system development charges.

(Ord. 1938, passed 9-8-97)

LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT ORDINANCE


34.25 SHORT TITLE.

This subchapter shall be known as the Local Improvement District Ordinance.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.26 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

ACTUAL COST. All direct or indirect costs incurred by the city to deliver goods or services or to undertake a capital construction project. The actual cost of providing goods or services to a property or property owner includes the average cost or an allocated portion of the total amount of the actual cost of making a good or service available to the property or property owner, whether stated as a minimum, fixed or variable amount. It includes, but is not limited to, the costs of labor, materials, supplies, equipment rental, property acquisition, permits, engineering, financing, reasonable program delinquencies, return on investment, required fees, insurance, administration, accounting, depreciation, amortization, operation, maintenance, repair or replacement and debt service, including debt service payments or payments into reserve accounts for debt service and payment of amounts necessary to meet debt service coverage requirements. (ORS 223.001)

ESTIMATED ASSESSMENT. With respect to each property to be assessed in connection with a local improvement, the total assessment that, at the time of giving notice of the assessment and the right to object or remonstrate, the city estimates will be levied against the property following completion of the local improvement. The estimate shall be based on the city’s estimate at that time of the actual costs of the local improvement and the proposed formula for apportioning the actual costs to the property. It shall be determined by excluding from estimated actual costs the estimated financing costs associated with any bonds issued to accommodate the payment of the assessment in installments and including in estimated actual costs the estimated financing costs associated with interim financing of the local improvement. (ORS 223.001)

FINAL ASSESSMENT. With respect to each property to be assessed in connection with a local improvement, the total assessment levied against the property following completion of the local improvement. The total assessment shall be based on the actual costs of the local improvement and the formula for apportioning the actual costs to the property. (ORS 223.001)

FINANCING. All costs necessary or attributable to acquiring and preserving interim or permanent financing of a local improvement. Financing may include the salaries, wages and benefits payable to employees of the city to the extent reasonably allocable to the work or services performed by the employees in connection with the local improvement or any part thereof; provided, that the city establishes a record keeping system to track the actual work done or services performed by each employee on or in connection with such local improvement. (ORS 223.001)

LOCAL IMPROVEMENT. A capital construction project or part thereof that provides a special benefit to or rectifies a problem caused by specific properties, including:

(1)    The widening, construction, improvement, repair or reconstruction of any right-of-way, including sidewalks, curbs, gutters and bicycle ways;

(2)    The installation, reconstruction or replacement of street lights;

(3)    Constructing, reconstructing or repairing any water, sanitary or storm sewer or water facility, including but not limited to mains, laterals, water detention or quality features, dams and dikes;

(4)    Construction, reconstruction or repair of off-street parking facilities;

(5)    Construction, reconstruction, improvement or repair of any park, playground or recreational facility;

(6)    Undergrounding of utilities;

(7)    The acquisition of real property or an interest in real property for any improvement;

(8)    Any other improvement for which an assessment is authorized by state law. (ORS 223.001/310.140)

LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT or LID. The area determined by City Council to be specially benefited by the local improvement within which properties may be assessed to pay the cost of the local improvement.

LOT. Lot, block or parcel of land.

NOTICE. Deposit with the U.S. Postal Service with first class postage paid or by personal delivery.

OWNER. The owner or owners of the title to real property, or the contract purchaser of real property, of record, as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the County Assessor or the owner’s agent authorized in writing to act for the owner. In the case of ownership by a corporation, LLC, partnership or similar entity, the person duly authorized by the entity shall be deemed to be the owner for purposes executing any petition, waiver, remonstrance, installment payment agreement or other document.

PROJECT. All work reasonably necessary to complete the local improvement.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 1124, passed 3-13-78; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.27 INITIATION OF LID FORMATION.

(A)    Formation of a local improvement district may be initiated by resolution of the City Council or by petition.

(B)    A petition for formation shall include:

(1)    A general description of the proposed local improvement;

(2)    A proposed boundary for the local improvement district, including the address and map and tax lot number of each property proposed to be benefited by the local improvement;

(3)    The signature of each of the owners of more than 50% of the lots within the proposed boundary;

(4)    The fee, if any, established by the City Council for preparation of the report provided for in subsection (D) of this section.

(C)    The City Council shall consider any valid petition but may decline to initiate formation of the local improvement district or may modify the local improvement district or the nature or scope of the public improvement proposed by petition.

(D)    The resolution initiating formation shall direct the City Manager to have a report prepared containing the following information and any other information requested by the City Council or deemed relevant by the City Manager:

(1)    A description of the local improvement project and its boundaries based on preliminary project plans and specifications;

(2)    A preliminary determination of the feasibility of making the proposed improvement, including an estimate of the actual cost of the proposed local improvement;

(3)    A map of the proposed local improvement district with the address and the map and tax lot number or other sufficient description and ownership of each specially benefited property with a brief explanation of why the properties benefit;

(4)    The proposed methodology for allocating the improvement project costs among and between the specially benefited properties, together with a description of other funds, if any, proposed to be used;

(5)    The assessed valuation of each property and an estimate of the assessment amount for each lot or portion thereof, with a statement of the amount of outstanding assessments against any lot proposed to be assessed by the improvement.

(E)    The City Manager shall have a copy of the report filed in the office of the Finance Director when completed.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.28 LID FORMATION.

(A)    After consideration of the City Manager report, City Council shall by resolution decide whether to declare its intention to form the local improvement district and make the local improvement as proposed or as modified by the City Council. The resolution of intent shall include:

(1)    A description of the local improvement, including its scope and location;

(2)    A map of the proposed local improvement district boundary, including the address, map and tax lot and ownership information for each property within the boundary;

(3)    An estimate of the actual cost of the improvement;

(4)    The proposed methodology for establishing special benefit and levying assessments, the estimated assessment to be levied against each property and a description of funds other than assessments, if any, that may be used to fund the local improvement;

(5)    The location, date and time of a public hearing on formation of the local improvement district.

(B)    Notice of public hearing on formation. At least ten days prior to the public hearing on formation, the City Manager shall mail or personally deliver notice to the owners of each property proposed to be located within the local improvement district. In addition to the date, time and location of the hearing, the notice shall include:

(1)    A general description of the proposed local improvement and the boundary of the district, including the address of each property proposed to be included.

(2)    The estimated cost of the proposed local improvement, the methodology for levying assessments and the estimated assessment for each property. The notice shall note that these are estimates only and that the final assessment may be greater.

(3)    A statement that the City Manager report is available for review.

(4)    A statement that any interested person may testify or submit written comments on the proposed local improvement district and that any property owner may formally object by submitting a written remonstrance stating the reason for the objection and signed by each owner of the property, which remonstrance must be received by the City Manager no later than 5:00 p.m. on the business day before the public hearing.

(5)    A form for remonstrance as provided in § 34.30.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.29 PUBLIC HEARING AND CITY COUNCIL DECISION ON FORMATION.

(A)    At the public hearing, the City Council shall provide a reasonable opportunity for persons to testify and shall consider any written comments received with any remonstrances.

(B)    At the conclusion of testimony, the City Council shall:

(1)    Decline in its discretion to form the local improvement district and terminate formation;

(2)    Receive remonstrances. If valid remonstrances are received from the owners of more than 60% of the lots that otherwise would be assessed, the City Council may terminate the district formation, suspend the formation for not less than six months or approve the formation, notwithstanding the remonstrances as provided in § 34.30;

(3)    Adopt an ordinance approving the project and district formation as proposed or as modified in the City Council’s discretion. The approval shall specify whether an estimated assessment shall be levied and the amount thereof to be levied against each specially benefited property. If the City Council modification causes any property to be subject to a substantially increased proposed assessment, it shall continue the public hearing and direct that written notice of the modification be sent to the owners in the proposed district, unless the affected owners waive objection to the proposed increase at the hearing; or

(4)    Continue the hearing to a time and date certain for further consideration, not to exceed 90 days.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.30 REMONSTRANCES.

(A)    To be valid, remonstrances shall be in writing and at a minimum include an objection to the local improvement district with a brief statement as to the reasons for the objection. It shall be signed by each of the owners of the property.

(B)    Only remonstrances actually received by the City Manager by 5:00 p.m. on the business day before the public hearing shall be counted. Remonstrances shall not be counted if the property is subject to a non-remonstrance agreement.

(C)    A remonstrance may be withdrawn; provided, that each owner does so orally or in writing prior to the close of the hearing.

(D)    If valid remonstrances constituting more than 60% of the lots within the proposed district are timely received, the City Council shall either terminate formation or suspend formation for not less than six months. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may by ordinance override the remonstrances and approve formation if by unanimous vote the City Council determines that the proposed local improvement is immediately needed to address a threat to public health, safety or welfare.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.31 CONSTRUCTION OF THE LOCAL IMPROVEMENT.

(A)    The city may construct the public improvements using its own forces or by contract as provided in the city’s public contracting rules and state law. The construction plans may modify the local improvement as reasonably necessary to conform to applicable codes or in the exercise of normal and customary project construction judgment. The city may combine the local improvement with a public improvement project as it deems appropriate; provided, that the costs of the local improvement are apportioned or otherwise reasonably attributed to the local improvement district.

(B)    City Council in its sole discretion may reject any or all bids, rebid the project or abandon the local improvement. The City Council may levy final assessments for the cost of preparing construction plans and bidding if it determines that the properties in the district were specially benefited.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.32 ASSESSMENTS.

(A)    The City Council shall conduct a public hearing to consider objections to the estimated assessment, if any, and the final assessment.

(B)    Notice of the public hearing on the estimated assessment or final assessment shall be provided by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property to be assessed at least ten days in advance of the hearing. The notice shall include the name of the owner, a description of the property to be assessed, the estimated or actual cost of the local improvement to be assessed and the amount to be assessed against each property with a description of the methodology for assessment. It shall state that any objections to the proposed assessment may be submitted in writing or orally prior to the close of the public hearing, that the City Council may modify the proposed estimated or final assessments and that at the conclusion of the hearing the City Council intends to levy assessments which shall constitute a lien on the property.

(C)    Final assessments shall be levied based on a report submitted to City Council by the City Manager upon completion of the local improvement project. The report shall include:

(1)    The actual cost of the local improvement, less the amount, if any, paid for using funds other than assessments;

(2)    The final amount recommended to be assessed for each property based on the methodology approved by the City Council in the formation resolution, adjusting for any estimated assessment payments received.

(D)    If the initial assessment has been made based on an estimated assessment, and on the completion of work the actual cost is found to be greater than the estimated cost, the City Council shall make a deficit assessment for the actual cost. If an estimated assessment which was greater than the final assessment has been paid, the payor or the payor’s assigns or legal representative shall be refunded the difference. (ORS 223.395)

(E)    The City Council shall review the estimated assessment or the final assessment report and make any modifications it deems appropriate. City Council shall adopt an assessment ordinance, schedule a public hearing and direct that notice of the proposed estimated or final assessment be provided to the owners within the local improvement district. The ordinance shall specify the payment dates, interest and penalties to be included in any installment payment agreement for final assessments or otherwise applicable to delinquent assessments.

(F)    At the public hearing, the City Council shall consider any objections or recommendations received and may modify the estimated or final assessments. The City Council shall adopt an ordinance determining and levying the amount of assessment to be charged against each property. It shall specify the interest, penalties and other payment terms and that the assessment constitutes a charge and lien against assessed properties; for a final assessment, it shall specify the period for payment in installments of not less than ten or more than 30 years.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.33 [RESERVED].


34.34 LIEN NOTICE.

Within ten days of City Council adoption of an estimated or final assessment, the City Manager shall mail or deliver personally notice identifying the local improvement for which the assessment is to be made, each lot to be assessed, and the estimated or final assessment for each lot. In addition, for a final assessment the notice shall state that the owner shall have the right to apply to the city for payment of the final assessment in installments and that failure to execute the installment payment agreement within 30 days of the date of entry in the lien docket shall cause the full amount of the assessment to be immediately due and payable. The notice of a final assessment shall include an installment payment agreement.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.35 INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.

The installment payment agreement shall be on a form approved by the city and shall provide:

(A)    The amount of final assessment and a statement of the interest rate and penalties for delinquency.

(B)    A description of the property by lots, blocks, or other convenient description and of the local improvement.

(C)    The time to pay the final assessment in full, including any interest or penalties. There shall be no prepayment penalty.

(D)    The due date for the initial payment and subsequent installments and the terms governing delinquencies, including that installment payments, including interest and penalties, not paid within one year of the due date may result in the entire remaining balance being immediately due and payable and that the city shall have all remedies to enforce the obligation as provided by law, including foreclosure.

(E)    That the applicant acknowledges and agrees to pay the final assessment, including interest and penalties, together with an amount, determined by the City Council, sufficient to pay a proportionate part of the cost of administering the bond assessment program and issuing any bonds, including but not limited to legal, printing and consultant’s fees.

(F)    A waiver of all irregularities or defects whatsoever, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings to cause the local improvement for which the final assessment is levied and in the apportionment of the actual cost of the local improvement.

(G)    Such other terms and conditions as the City Manager deems appropriate. (ORS 223.215)

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.36 LIEN RECORDING AND DOCKET.

(A)    Any estimated assessment shall be a lien against the property to be charged against each lot as provided by the ordinance levying the estimate assessment until the final assessment is entered. It shall be entered into the lien docket as provided below within 30 days of the ordinance levying the estimated assessment.

(B)    After expiration of the time for filing an installment application, the City Manager shall enter into the city lien docket, under separate heads for each local improvement, by name or number, a description of each lot or parcel of land or other property against which the final assessment is made, or which bears or is chargeable for a portion of the actual cost of the local improvement, with the name of the owner and the amount of the unpaid assessment. The entries shall be made as of the date of initial determination and levy of the final assessment. (ORS 223.230)

(C)    The docket shall stand thereafter as a lien docket as for ad valorem property taxes assessed and levied in favor of the local government against each lot or parcel of land or other property, until paid, for the following:

(1)    For the amounts of the unpaid assessments therein docketed, with interest on the installments of the assessments at the rate determined by the City Council; and

(2)    For any additional interest or penalties imposed by the city with respect to any installments of assessments that are not paid when due.

(D)    All unpaid assessments together with accrued and unpaid interest and penalties are a lien on each lot or parcel of land or other property, respectively, in favor of the city, and the lien shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances whatsoever.

(E)    The city shall make the lien record available on hard copy or through an online electronic medium. The City Recorder shall keep all installment applications in a convenient form for examination. Applications for each local improvement shall be kept separate. The Recorder shall enter in a book kept for that purpose, under separate heads for each local improvement, the date of filing of each application, the name of the applicant, a description of the property and the amount of the final assessment as shown in the application. (ORS 223.225 and 223.230)

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.37 UNKNOWN OWNER.

(A)    If the owner of any property is unknown, the property may be assessed to "unknown owner(s)." If the property is correctly described, no final assessment shall be invalidated by a mistake in the name of the owner of the real property assessed or by the omission of the name of the owner or the entry of a name other than that of the true owner. Where the name of the true owner, or the owner of record, of any parcel of real property is given, the final assessment shall not be held invalid on account of any error or irregularity in the description if the description would be sufficient in a deed of conveyance from the owner, or is such that, in a suit to enforce a contract to convey, employing such description in a court of equity would hold it to be good and sufficient. Any description of the property that conforms substantially to the requirements of state law shall be sufficient for all purposes. (ORS 223.387)

(B)    Any mistake, error, omission or failure with respect to the mailing shall not be jurisdictional or invalidate the assessment proceedings, but there shall be no foreclosure or legal action to collect until notice has been given by personal service upon the property owner, or if personal service cannot be had, then by publication once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(C)    Claimed errors in calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the City Manager prior to any payment on account thereof. The City Manager shall check the calculation and report his findings to the City Council. If an error has been made, the City Council shall amend the final assessment ordinance to correct the error. Upon the enactment of an amendment by the City Council, the Finance Director/Recorder shall make the necessary correction in the lien docket and shall send by registered or certified mail to the owner a corrected notice of the assessment.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 658, passed 5 25-70; Am. Ord. 1297, passed 5-12-80; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 6-8-81; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.38 REASSESSMENTS.

Whenever any assessment, deficit or reassessment for any local improvement which has been made by the city has been, or shall be, set aside, annulled or declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by any court having jurisdiction, or when the City Council shall be in doubt as to the validity of such assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment or any part thereof, then the City Council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by state law. (ORS 223.405)

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 658, passed 5 25-70; Am. Ord. 1297, passed 5-12-80; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 6-8-81; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.39 CITY FUNDS.

(A)    The City Council may direct that the city pay a portion of the local improvement if it determines that on account of topographical or physical conditions, unusual or excessive use by the general public or other character of the work involved, or when the Council otherwise believes the situation warrants; provided, that the proportion to be paid by the city represents a reasonable relation between the benefits derived by the property specially assessed and the benefits derived by the city as a whole.

(B)    The City Council may use any available means of financing the improvement, including city funds, federal or state grants in aid, sewer service or other types of services or charges, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or other legal means of finance.

(Ord. 431, passed 8-23-61; Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.40 [RESERVED].


34.41 FINANCING.

(A)    The city may provide for interim or permanent financing through any method it deems appropriate as permitted by law.

(B)    The issuance of notes or bonds to finance local improvements shall conform to the provisions of state law in effect at the time of issuance, except to the extent expressly modified by this subchapter. (ORS 223.235)

(Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.42 PARKING IMPROVEMENTS.

The procedure for establishing motor vehicle parking districts provided for by state law shall be the same as for other improvement districts.

(Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.43 MISCELLANEOUS.

(A)    Rebonding. Rebonding of the original assessment shall be as provided by state law in effect at the time an application for rebonding is submitted with such terms as may be established by the City Council and any applicable ordinances, rules or regulations as provided by the City Council. (ORS 223.750).

(B)    Reinstatement. Reinstatement of delinquent liens before the property affected has been sold for payment thereof shall be governed by state law.

(C)    The provisions of state law concerning acceptance of home owner’s loan corporation bonds and municipal bonds as payments for assessment liens; assessment of public property benefited by improvements; and the inclusion of public roads in sidewalk improvement districts shall be governed by state law.

(Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


34.44 APPORTIONMENT ON PARTITION OR SUBDIVISION.

(A)    The City Council may apportion a final assessment levied by it against a single tract, lot or parcel of real property among all the lots formed from a subsequent land division of that tract, lot or parcel if the subsequent division is in accordance with state law and is consistent with the applicable acknowledged comprehensive plans. The proportionate distribution of a final assessment may be made whenever the final assessment remains wholly or partially unpaid, and full payment or an installment payment is not due.

(B)    The City Council shall apportion a final assessment under this subchapter when requested to do so by any owner, mortgagee or lienholder of a parcel of real property that was formed from the partition or other division of the larger tract of real property against which the final assessment was originally levied or on its own motion. When the deed, mortgage or other instrument evidencing the applicant’s ownership or other interest in the parcel has not been recorded by the county clerk of the county in which the parcel is situated, the City Council shall not apportion the final assessment unless the applicant files a true copy of that deed, mortgage or instrument with the city.

(C)    Apportionment of a final assessment shall be done in accordance with an order or resolution of the City Council. The order or resolution shall describe each parcel of real property affected by the apportionment, the amount of the final assessment levied against each parcel, the owner of each parcel and such additional information as is required to keep a permanent and complete record of the final assessments and the payments thereon. A copy of the order or resolution shall be filed with the Recorder, required to maintain the lien docket for the city, which shall make any necessary changes or entries in the lien docket for the city.

(D)    When a final assessment is being paid in installments, if the final assessment is apportioned among smaller lots under this section, the installments remaining unpaid shall be prorated among those smaller lots so that each lot shall be charged with that percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the percentage of the unpaid final assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment.

(E)    The apportionment shall be based on the methodology for imposing the original final assessment. Notice and hearing on reapportionment shall be provided in substantially the same manner as provided in this subchapter for levying a final assessment. The City Council may impose fees reasonably calculated to reimburse the city for its actual costs in apportioning final assessments. The provisions of this section shall apply to estimated assessments with respect to any property divided into smaller lots prior to the levy of the final assessment.

(Am. Ord. 2276, passed 5-13-19)


CHAPTER 35 Public Contracts

Section

35.01    Short title

35.02    Purpose of Public Contracting Regulations

35.03    Interpretation of public contracting rules

35.04    Application of Public Contracting Regulations

35.05    Public contracts: regulation by City Council

35.06    Public contracts: model rules

35.07    Public contracts: authority of Purchasing Manager

35.08    Public contracts: definitions

35.09    Public contracts: process for approval of special solicitation methods and exemptions

35.10    Public contracts: solicitation methods for classes of contracts

35.11    Public contracts: informal solicitation procedures

35.12    Public contracts: use of brand name specifications for public improvements

35.13    Public contracts: bid, performance and payment bonds

35.14    Public contracts: electronic advertisement of public improvement contracts

35.15    Appeal of debarment or prequalification decision


35.01 SHORT TITLE.

The provisions of this chapter and all rules adopted under this chapter may be cited as the Hermiston Public Contracting Regulations.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.02 PURPOSE OF PUBLIC CONTRACTING REGULATIONS.

It is the policy of the city in adopting the Public Contracting Regulations to utilize public contracting practices and methods that maximize the efficient use of public resources and the purchasing power of public funds by:

(A)    Promoting impartial and open competition;

(B)    Using solicitation materials that are complete and contain a clear statement of contract specifications and requirements; and

(C)    Taking full advantage of evolving procurement methods that suit the contracting needs of the city as they emerge within various industries.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.03 INTERPRETATION OF PUBLIC CONTRACTING RULES.

In furtherance of the purpose of the objectives set forth in this chapter, it is the city’s intent that the Hermiston Public Contracting Regulations be interpreted to authorize the full use of all contracting powers and authorities described in ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C, subject to the provisions of the City Charter.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.04 APPLICATION OF PUBLIC CONTRACTING REGULATIONS.

In accordance with ORS 279A.025, the city’s Public Contracting Regulations and the Oregon Public Contracting Code do not apply to the following classes of contracts.

(A)    Between governments. Contracts between the city and a public body or agency of the State of Oregon or its political subdivisions, or between the city and an agency of the federal government.

(B)    Grants. A grant contract is an agreement under which the city is either a grantee or a grantor of moneys, property or other assistance, including loans, loan guarantees, credit enhancements, gifts, bequests, commodities or other assets, for the purpose of supporting or stimulating a program or activity of the grantee and in which no substantial involvement by the grantor is anticipated in the program or activity other than involvement associated with monitoring compliance with the grant conditions. The making or receiving of a grant is not a public contract subject to the Oregon Public Contracting Code; however, any grant made by the city for the purpose of constructing a public improvement or public works project shall impose conditions on the grantee that ensure that expenditures of the grant to design or construct the public improvement or public works project are made in accordance with the Oregon Public Contracting Code and these regulations.

(C)    Legal witnesses and consultants. Contracts for professional or expert witnesses or consultants to provide services or testimony relating to existing or potential litigation or legal matters in which the city is or may become interested.

(D)    Real property. Acquisitions or disposals of real property or interests in real property.

(E)    Textbooks. Contracts for the procurement or distribution of textbooks.

(F)    Oregon Corrections Enterprises. Procurements from an Oregon corrections enterprises program.

(G)    Finance. Contracts, agreements or other documents entered into, issued or established in connection with:

(1)    The incurring of debt by the city, including any associated contracts, agreements or other documents, regardless of whether the obligations that the contracts, agreements or other documents establish are general, special or limited;

(2)    The making of program loans and similar extensions or advances of funds, aid or assistance by the city to a public or private person for the purpose of carrying out, promoting or sustaining activities or programs authorized by law other than for the construction of public works or public improvements;

(3)    The investment of funds by the city as authorized by law, or

(4)    Banking, money management or other predominantly financial transactions of the city that, by their character, cannot practically be established under the competitive contractor selection procedures, based upon the findings of the Purchasing Manager.

(H)    Employee benefits. Contracts for employee benefit plans as provided in ORS 243.105(1)., 243.125(4)., 243.221, 243.275, 243.291, 243.303 and 243.565.

(I)    Exempt under state laws. Any other public contracting specifically exempted from the Oregon Public Contracting Code by another provision of law.

(J)    Federal law. Except as otherwise expressly provided in ORS 279C.800 to 279C.870, applicable federal statutes and regulations govern when federal funds are involved and the federal statutes or regulations conflict with any provision of the Oregon Public Contracting Code or these regulations, or require additional conditions in public contracts not authorized by the Oregon Public Contracting Code or these regulations.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.05 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: REGULATION BY CITY COUNCIL.

Except as expressly delegated under these regulations, the City Council reserves to itself the exercise of all of the duties and authority of a contract review board and a contracting agency under state law, including, but not limited to, the power and authority to:

(A)    Solicitation methods applicable to contracts. Approve the use of contracting methods and exemptions from contracting methods for a specific contract or certain classes of contracts;

(B)    Brand name specifications. Exempt the use of brand name specifications for public improvement contracts;

(C)    Waiver of performance and payment bonds. Approve the partial or complete waiver of the requirement for the delivery of a performance or payment bond for construction of a public improvement, other than in cases of emergencies;

(D)    Electronic advertisement of public improvement contracts. Authorize the use of electronic advertisements for public improvement contracts in lieu of publication in a newspaper of general circulation;

(E)    Appeals of debarment and prequalification decisions. Hear properly filed appeals of the Purchasing Manager’s determination of debarment, or concerning prequalification;

(F)    Rule making. Adopt contracting rules under ORS 279A.065 and ORS 279A.070 including, without limitation, rules for the procurement, management, disposal and control of goods, services, personal services and public improvements; and

(G)    Award. Award all contracts that exceed the authority of the Purchasing Manager.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.06 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: MODEL RULES.

The model rules adopted by the Attorney General under ORS 279A.065 (Model Rules) are hereby adopted as the public contracting rules for the city, to the extent that the model rules do not conflict with the provisions of this chapter, including any amendments to this chapter. (Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 2237, passed 12-14-15)


35.07 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: AUTHORITY OF PURCHASING MANAGER.

(A)    General authority. The City Manager shall be the Purchasing Manager for the city and is hereby authorized to issue all solicitations and to award all city contracts for which the contract price does not exceed $150,000. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the Purchasing Manager may adopt and amend all solicitation materials, contracts and forms required or permitted to be adopted by contracting agencies under the Oregon Public Contracting Code or otherwise convenient for the city’s contracting needs. The Purchasing Manager shall hear all solicitation and award protests.

(B)    Solicitation preferences. When possible, the Purchasing Manager shall use solicitation documents and evaluation criteria that:

(1)    Give preference to goods and services that have been manufactured or produced in the State of Oregon if price, fitness, availability and quality are otherwise equal; and

(2)    Give preference to goods that are certified to be made from recycled products when such goods are available, can be substituted for non-recycled products without a loss in quality, and the cost of goods made from recycled products is not significantly more than the cost of goods made from non-recycled products.

(C)    Delegation of Purchasing Manager’s authority. Any of the responsibilities or authorities of the Purchasing Manager under this chapter may be delegated and sub-delegated by written directive.

(D)    Mandatory review of rules. Whenever the Oregon State Legislative Assembly enacts laws that cause the Attorney General to modify its model rules, the Purchasing Manager shall review the public contracting regulations, other than the model rules, and recommend to the City Council any modifications required to ensure compliance with statutory changes.(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.08 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: DEFINITIONS

As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

AWARD. The selection of a person to provide goods, services or public improvements under a public contract. The award of a contract is not binding on the city until the contract is executed and delivered by city.

BID. A binding, sealed, written offer to provide goods, services or public improvements for a specified price or prices.

CONCESSION AGREEMENT. A contract that authorizes and requires a private entity or individual to promote or sell, for its own business purposes, specified types of goods or services from real property owned or managed by the city, and under which the concessionaire makes payments to the city based, at least in part, on the concessionaire’s revenues or sales. The term CONCESSION AGREEMENT does not include a mere rental agreement, license or lease for the use of premises.

CONTRACT PRICE. The total amount paid or to be paid under a contract, including any approved alternates, and any fully executed change orders or amendments.

CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD or LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD. The City Council.

COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT. A procurement conducted by or on behalf of one or more contracting agencies.

DEBARMENT. A declaration by the Purchasing Manager or city under ORS 279B.130 or ORS 279C.440 that prohibits a potential contractor from competing for the city’s public contracts for a prescribed period of time.

DISPOSAL. Any arrangement for the transfer of property by the city under which the city relinquishes ownership.

EMERGENCY. Circumstances that create a substantial risk of loss, damage or interruption of services or a substantial threat to property, public health, welfare or safety; and require prompt execution of a contract to remedy the condition.

FINDINGS. The statements of fact that provide justification for a determination. FINDINGS may include, but are not limited to, information regarding operation, budget and financial data; public benefits; cost savings; competition in public contracts; quality and aesthetic considerations, value engineering; specialized expertise needed; public safety; market conditions; technical complexity; availability, performance and funding sources.

GOODS. Any item or combination of supplies, equipment, materials or other personal property, including any tangible, intangible and intellectual property and rights and licenses in relation thereto.

INFORMAL SOLICITATION. A solicitation made in accordance with the city’s public contracting regulations to a limited number of potential contractors, in which the Solicitation Agent attempts to obtain at least three written quotes or proposals.

INVITATION TO BID. A publicly advertised request for competitive sealed bids.

MODEL RULES. The public contracting rules adopted by the Attorney General under ORS 279A.065.

OFFEROR. A person who submits a bid, quote or proposal to enter into a public contract with the city.

OREGON PUBLIC CONTRACTING CODE. ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C.

PERSON. A natural person or any other private or governmental entity, having the legal capacity to enter into a binding contract.

PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACT. A contract with an independent contractor predominantly for services that require special training or certification, skill, technical, creative, professional or communication skills or talents, unique and specialized knowledge, or the exercise of judgment skills, and for which the quality of the service depends on attributes that are unique to the service provider. Such services include, but are not limited to, the services of architects, engineers, land surveyors, attorneys, auditors and other licensed professionals, artists, designers, computer programmers, performers, consultants and property managers. The Purchasing Manager shall have discretion to determine whether additional types of services not specifically mentioned in this paragraph fit within the definition of personal services.

PROPOSAL. A binding offer to provide goods, services or public improvements with the understanding that acceptance will depend on the evaluation of factors other than, or in addition to, price. A PROPOSAL may be made in response to a request for proposals or under an informal solicitation.

PUBLIC CONTRACT. A sale or other disposal, or a purchase, lease, rental or other acquisition, by the city of personal property, services, including personal services, public improvements, public works, minor alterations, or ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a public improvement.

PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. A project for construction, reconstruction or major renovation on real property by or for the city. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT does not include:

(1)    Projects for which no funds of the city are directly or indirectly used, except for participation that is incidental or related primarily to project design or inspection; or

(2)    Emergency work, minor alteration, ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a public improvement.

PURCHASING MANAGER. The City Manager or designee appointed by the City Manager to exercise the authority of the Purchasing Manager under these public contracting regulations.

QUALIFIED POOL. A pool of vendors who are pre-qualified to compete for the award of contracts for certain types of contracts or to provide certain types of services.

QUOTE. A price offer made in response to an informal or qualified pool solicitation to provide goods, services or public improvements.

REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. A publicly advertised request for sealed competitive proposals.

SERVICES. Includes all types of services (including construction labor) other than personal services.

SOLICITATION. An invitation to one or more potential contractors to submit a bid, proposal, quote, statement of qualifications or letter of interest to the city with respect to a proposed project, procurement or other contracting opportunity. The word SOLICITATION also refers to the process by which the city requests, receives and evaluates potential contractors and awards public contracts.

SOLICIATION AGENT. With respect to a particular solicitation, the city official or person designated by the City Manager to conduct the solicitation and make an award.

SOLICITATION DOCUMENTS. All informational materials issued by the city for a solicitation, including, but not limited to advertisements, instructions, submission requirements and schedules, award criteria, contract terms and specifications, and all laws, regulations and documents incorporated by reference.

STANDARDS OF RESPONSIBILITY. The qualifications of eligibility for award of a public contract. An offeror meets the standards of responsibility if the offeror has:

(1)    Available the appropriate financial, material, equipment, facility and personnel resources and expertise, or ability to obtain the resources and expertise, necessary to indicate the capability of the offeror to meet all contractual responsibilities;

(2)    A satisfactory record of performance. The Solicitation Agent shall document the record of performance of an offer or if the Solicitation Agent finds the offeror to be not responsible under this paragraph;

(3)    A satisfactory record of integrity. The Solicitation Agent shall document the record of integrity of an offeror if the Solicitation Agent finds the offeror to be not responsible under this paragraph;

(4)    Qualified legally to contract with the city;

(5)    Supplied all necessary information in connection with the inquiry concerning responsibility. If an offeror fails to promptly supply information requested by the Solicitation Agent concerning responsibility, the Solicitation Agent shall base the determination of responsibility upon any available information or may find the offeror non-responsible; and

(6)    Not been debarred by the city, and, in the case of public improvement contracts, has not been listed by the Construction Contractors Board as a contractor who is not qualified to hold a public improvement contract.

SURPLUS PROPERTY. Personal property owned by the city which is no longer needed for use by the department to which such property has been assigned.(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.09 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: PROCESS FOR APPROVAL OF SPECIAL SOLICITATION METHODS AND EXEMPTIONS.

(A)    Authority of City Council. In its capacity as contract review board for the city, the City Council, upon its own initiative, or upon request of the Purchasing Manager, may create special selection, evaluation and award procedures for, or may exempt from competition, the award of a specific contract or class of contracts as provided in this section.

(B)    Basis for approval. The approval of a special solicitation method or exemption from competition must be based upon a record before the City Council that contains the following:

(1)    The nature of the contract or class of contracts for which the special solicitation or exemption is requested;

(2)    The estimated contract price or cost of the project, if relevant;

(3)    Findings to support the substantial cost savings, enhancement in quality or performance or other public benefit anticipated by the proposed selection method or exemption from competitive solicitation;

(4)    Findings to support the reason that approval of the request would be unlikely to encourage favoritism or diminish competition for the public contract or class of public contracts, or would otherwise substantially promote the public interest in a manner that could not practicably be realized by complying with the solicitation requirements that would otherwise be applicable under these regulations;

(5)    A description of the proposed alternative contracting methods to be employed; and

(6)    The estimated date by which it would be necessary to let the contract(s).

In making a determination regarding a special selection method, the City Council may consider the type, cost, amount of the contract or class of contracts, number of persons available to make offers, and such other factors as it may deem appropriate.

(C)    Hearing.

(1)    The city shall approve the special solicitation or exemption after a public hearing before the City Council following seven days’ notice by publication in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(2)    At the public hearing, the city shall offer an opportunity for any interested party to appear and present comment.

(3)    The City Council will consider the findings and may approve the exemption as proposed or as modified by the City Council after providing an opportunity for public comment.

(D)    Special requirements for public improvement contracts.

(1)    Notification of the public hearing for exemption of a public improvement contract, or class of public improvement contracts, shall be published in a trade newspaper of general statewide circulation at least 14 days prior to the hearing.

(2)    The notice shall state that the public hearing is for the purpose of taking comments on the city’s draft findings for an exemption from the standard solicitation method. At the time of the notice, copies of the draft findings shall be made available to the public.

(E)    Commencement of solicitation prior to approval. A solicitation may be issued prior to the approval of a special exemption under this section; provided, that the closing of the solicitation may not be earlier than five days after the date of the hearing at which the City Council approves the exemption. If the City Council fails to approve a requested exemption, or requires the use of a solicitation procedure other than the procedures described in the issued solicitation documents, the issued solicitation may either be modified by addendum or canceled.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 2237, passed 12-14-15)


35.10 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: SOLICITATION METHODS FOR CLASSES OF CONTRACTS.

The following classes of public contracts and the method(s) that are approved for the award of each of the classes are hereby established by the City Council.

(A)    Purchases from nonprofit agencies for disabled individuals. The city shall give a preference to goods, services and public improvements available from qualified nonprofit agencies for disabled individuals in accordance with the provisions of ORS 279.835 through 279.850.

(B)    Public improvement contracts.

(1)    Any public improvement. Unless otherwise provided in these regulations or approved for a special exemption, public improvement contracts in any amount may be issued only under an invitation to bid.

(2)    Nontransportation public improvements up to $100,000. Public improvement contracts other than contracts for a highway, bridge or other transportation project for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $100,000 may be awarded using an informal solicitation for quotes.

(3)    Transportation public improvements up to $50,000. Contracts for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $50,000 for highways, bridges or other transportation projects may be awarded using an informal solicitation for quotes.

(4)    City-funded privately constructed public improvements. The city may contribute funding to a privately constructed public improvement project without subjecting the project to competitive solicitation requirements if all of the following conditions are met with respect to the entire public improvement project:

(a)    The city’s contribution to the project may not exceed 25% of the total cost of the project;

(b)    The city must comply with all applicable laws concerning the reporting of the project to the Bureau of Labor and Industries as a public works project;

(c)    The general contractor for the project must agree in writing to comply with all applicable laws concerning reporting and payment of prevailing wages for the project;

(d)    The funds contributed to the project may not provide a pecuniary benefit to the owner of the development for which the project is being constructed, other than benefits that are shared by all members of the community;

(e)    The performance of the general contractor and the payment of labor for the project must be secured by performance and payment bonds or other cash-equivalent security that is acceptable to the Purchasing Manager to protect the city against defective performance and claims for payments; and

(f)    The contract for construction of the project must be amended, as necessary, to require the general contractor to maintain adequate workers’ compensation and liability insurance and to protect and provide indemnification to the city for all claims for payment, injury or property damage arising from or related to the construction of the project.

(C)    Personal services contracts.

(1)    Any personal services contract. Personal services contracts in any amount may be awarded under a publicly advertised request for competitive sealed proposals.

(2)    Personal service contracts not exceeding $150,000. Contracts for personal services for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $150,000 may be awarded using an informal solicitation for proposals.

(3)    $75,000 award from qualified pool. Contracts for personal services for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $75,000 may be awarded by direct appointment without competition from a qualified pool.

(4)    Personal service contracts not exceeding $25,000 per year. Contracts for which the Solicitation Agent estimates that payments will not exceed $25,000 in any fiscal year or $150,000 over the full term, including optional renewals, may be awarded under any method deemed in the city’s best interest by the Solicitation Agent, including by direct appointment.

(5)    Personal service contracts for continuation of work. Contracts of not more than $150,000 for the continuation of work by a contractor who performed preliminary studies, analysis or planning for the work under a prior contract may be awarded without competition if the prior contract was awarded under a competitive process and the Solicitation Agent determines that use of the original contractor will significantly reduce the costs of, or risks associated with, the work.

(6)    Selection procedures for architectural, engineering, photogrammetric mapping, transportation planning or land surveying. For public improvement contracts exceeding $100,000, the selection of consultants to provide architectural, engineering, photogrammetric mapping, transportation planning or land surveying services will be on the basis of the consultant’s qualifications for the type of professional service required. Pricing policies and proposals or other pricing information, including the number of hours proposed for the service required, expenses, hourly rates and overhead, may be used to determine consultant compensation only after the contracting agency has selected a candidate pursuant to ORS 279C.100 to 279C.125.

(D)    Hybrid contracts. The following classes of contracts include elements of construction of public improvements as well as personal services and may be awarded under a request for proposals, unless exempt from competitive solicitation.

(1)    Design/build and CM/GC contracts. Contracts for the construction of public improvements using a design/build or construction manager/general contractor construction method shall be awarded under a request for proposals. The determination to construct a project using a design/build or construction manager/general contractor construction method must be approved by the Purchasing Manager or designee, upon application of the Solicitation Agent, in which the Solicitation Agent submits facts that support a finding that the construction of the improvement under the proposed method is likely to result in cost savings, higher quality, reduced errors, or other benefits to the city.

(2)    Energy savings performance contracts. Unless the contract qualifies for award under another classification in this section, contractors for energy savings performance contracts shall be selected under a request for proposals in accordance with applicable public contracting regulations adopted under § 35.06.

(E)    Contracts for goods and services.

(1)    Any procurement. The procurement of goods or services, or goods and services in any amount may be made under either an invitation to bid or a request for proposals.

(2)    Procurement up to $150,000. The procurement of goods or services, or goods and services, for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $150,000 may be made under an informal solicitation for either quotes or proposals.

(F)    Contracts subject to award at Solicitation Agent’s discretion. The following classes of contracts may be awarded in any manner which the Solicitation Agent deems appropriate to the city’s needs, including by direct appointment or purchase. Except where otherwise provided, the Solicitation Agent shall make a record of the method of award.

(1)    Advertising. Contracts for the placing of notice or advertisements in any medium.

(2)    Amendments. Contract amendments shall not be considered to be separate contracts if made in accordance with the public contracting regulations.

(3)    Animals. Contracts for the purchase of animals.

(4)    Contracts up to $5,000. Contracts of any type for which the contract price does not exceed $5,000 without a record of the method of award.

(5)    Copyrighted materials; library materials. Contracts for the acquisition of materials entitled to copyright, including, but not limited to, works of art and design, literature and music, or materials even if not entitled to copyright, purchased for use as library lending materials.

(6)    Equipment repair. Contracts for equipment repair or overhauling, provided the service or parts required are unknown and the cost cannot be determined without extensive preliminary dismantling or testing.

(7)    Government regulated items. Contracts for the purchase of items for which prices or selection of suppliers are regulated by a governmental authority.

(8)    Insurance. Insurance and service contracts as provided for under ORS 414.115, 414.125, 414.135 and 414.145.

(9)    Non-owned property. Contracts or arrangements for the sale or other disposal of abandoned property or other personal property not owned by the city.

(10)    Sole source contracts. Contracts for goods or services which are available from a single source may be awarded without competition.

(11)    Specialty goods for resale. Contracts for the purchase of specialty goods by the city for resale to consumers.

(12)    Sponsor agreements. Sponsorship agreements, under which the city receives a gift or donation in exchange for recognition of the donor.

(13)    Structures. Contracts for the disposal of structures located on city-owned property.

(14)    Renewals. Contracts that are being renewed in accordance with their terms are not considered to be newly issued contracts and are not subject to competitive procurement procedures.

(15)    Temporary extensions or renewals. Contracts for a single period of one year or less, for the temporary extension or renewal of an expiring and non-renewable, or recently expired, contract, other than a contract for public improvements.

(16)    Temporary use of city-owned property. The city may negotiate and enter into a license, permit or other contract for the temporary use of city-owned property without using a competitive selection process if:

(a)    The contract results from an unsolicited proposal to the city based on the unique attributes of the property or the unique needs of the proposer;

(b)    The proposed use of the property is consistent with the city’s use of the property and the public interest; and

(c)    The city reserves the right to terminate the contract without penalty, in the event that the city determines that the contract is no longer consistent with the city’s present or planned use of the property or the public interest.

(17)    Used property. A Solicitation Agent, for procurement up to $20,000, and the Purchasing Manager, for procurement in excess of $20,000, may contract for the purchase of used property by negotiation if such property is suitable for the city’s needs and can be purchased for a lower cost than substantially similarly new property. For this purpose, the cost of used property will be based upon the life-cycle cost of the property over the period for which the property will be used by the city. The Purchasing Manager shall record the findings that support the purchase.

(18)    Utilities. Contracts for the purchase of steam, power, heat, water, telecommunications services, and other utilities.

(G)    Contracts required by emergency circumstances.

(1)    In general. When an official with authority to enter into a contract on behalf of the city determines that immediate execution of a contract within the official’s authority is necessary to prevent substantial damage or injury to persons or property, the official may execute the contract without competitive selection and award or City Council approval, but, where time permits, the official shall attempt to use competitive price and quality evaluation before selecting an emergency contractor.

(2)    Reporting. An official who enters into an emergency contract shall, as soon as possible, in light of the emergency circumstances: (a) document the nature of the emergency; the method used for selection of the particular contractor and the reason why the selection method was deemed in the best interest of the city and the public, and (b) notify the City Council of the facts and circumstances surrounding the emergency execution of the contract.

(3)    Emergency public improvement contracts. A public improvement contract may only be awarded under emergency circumstances if the Purchasing Agent has made a written declaration of emergency. Where the time delay needed to obtain a payment or performance bond for the contract could result in injury or substantial property damage, the Purchasing Agent may waive the requirement for all or a portion of required performance and payment bonds.

(H)    Federal purchasing programs. Goods and services may be purchased without competitive procedures under a local government purchasing program administered by the United States General Services Administration ("GSA") as provided in this division.

(1)    The procurement must be made in accordance with procedures established by GSA for procurement by local governments, and under purchase orders or contracts submitted to and approved by the Purchasing Agent. The Solicitation Agent shall provide the Purchasing Manager with a copy of the letter, memorandum or other documentation from GSA establishing permission to the city to purchase under the federal program.

(2)    The price of the goods or services must be established under price agreements between the federally approved vendor and GSA.

(3)    The price of the goods or services must be less than the price at which such goods or services are available under state or local cooperative purchasing programs that are available to the city.

(I)    Cooperative procurement contracts. Cooperative procurement may be made without competitive solicitation as provided in the Oregon Public Contracting Code.

(J)    Surplus property.

(1)    General methods. Surplus property may be disposed of by any of the following methods upon a determination by the Solicitation Agent that the method of disposal is in the best interest of the city. Factors that may be considered by the Solicitation Agent include costs of sale, administrative costs, and public benefits to the city. The Solicitation Agent shall maintain a record of the reason for the disposal method selected, and the manner of disposal, including the name of the person to whom the surplus property was transferred.

(a)    Governments. Without competition, by transfer or sale to another city department or public agency.

(b)    Auction. By publicly advertised auction to the highest bidder.

(c)    Bids. By publicly advertised invitation to bid.

(d)    Liquidation sale. By liquidation sale using a commercially recognized third-party liquidator selected in accordance with rules for the award of personal services contracts.

(e)    Fixed price sale. The Solicitation Agent may establish a selling price based upon an independent appraisal or published schedule of values generally accepted by the insurance industry, schedule and advertise a sale date, and sell to the first buyer meeting the sales terms.

(f)    Trade-in. By trade-in, in conjunction with acquisition of other price-based items under a competitive solicitation. The solicitation shall require the offer to state the total value assigned to the surplus property to be traded.

(g)    Donation. By donation to any organization operating within or providing a service to residents of the city which is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.

(2)    Disposal of property with minimal value. Surplus property which has a value of less than $500, or for which the costs of sale are likely to exceed sale proceeds, may be disposed of by any means determined to be cost-effective, including by disposal as waste. The official making the disposal shall make a record of the value of the item and the manner of disposal.

(3)    Personal-use items. An item (or indivisible set) of specialized and personal use, other than police officers’ handguns, with a current value of less than $100 may be sold to the employee or retired or terminated employee for whose use it was purchased. These items may be sold for fair market value without bid and by a process deemed most efficient by the Purchasing Manager.

(4)    Police officers’ handguns. Upon honorable retirement from service with the city, a police officer may purchase the handgun that the officer was using at the time of retirement. The purchase price shall be the fair market value of the handgun as determined by an independent appraisal performed by a qualified weapons appraiser. An officer electing to exercise this option shall notify the city at least 30 days prior to the officer’s expected retirement date and request an appraisal of the handgun. Upon receipt of payment of the appraisal fee from the officer, the Purchasing Manager shall arrange for the appraisal. A copy of the completed appraisal shall be provided to the officer, who shall have up to 30 days from the date of retirement to purchase the handgun for the appraised fair market value.

(5)    Restriction on sale to city employees. City employees shall not be restricted from competing, as members of the public, for the purchase of publicly sold surplus property, but shall not be permitted to offer to purchase property to be sold to the first qualifying bidder until at least three days after the first date on which notice of the sale is first publicly advertised.

(6)    Conveyance to purchaser. Upon the consummation of a sale of surplus personal property, the city shall make, execute and deliver a bill of sale signed on behalf of the city, conveying the property in question to the purchaser and delivering possession, or the right to take possession, of the property to the purchaser.

(K)    Concession agreements.

(1)    General. No part of a concession agreement shall contain or constitute a waiver of any generally applicable rules, code provisions or requirements of the city concerning regulation, registration, licensing, inspection, or permit requirements for any construction, rental or business activity.

(2)    Classes of contracts eligible for award without competition. The following concession agreements may be awarded by any method deemed appropriate by the Solicitation Agent, including without limitation, by direct appointment, private negotiation, from a qualified pool, or using a competitive process.

(a)    Contracts under $5,000. Contracts under which the Solicitation Agent estimates that receipts by the city will not exceed $5,000 in any fiscal year and $50,000 in the aggregate.

(b)    Single event concessions. Concessions to sell or promote food, beverages, merchandise or services at a single public event shall be awarded based on any method determined by the Purchasing Manager to provide a fair opportunity to all persons desiring to operate a concession, but in which the promotion of the public interest and success of the event shall be of predominant importance.

(3)    Competitive award. Concession agreements solicited by the city for the use of designated public premises for a term greater than a single event shall be awarded as follows:

(a)    Small concessions. For concession agreements for which the concessionare’s projected annual gross revenues are estimated to be $500,000 or less, the Purchasing Manager has discretion to use either an informal solicitation or formal request for proposals process applicable to contracts for personal services. If the proposals received indicate a probability that the concessionaire’s annual gross revenues will exceed $500,000, the Solicitation Agent may, but shall not be required to, reissue the solicitation as a request for proposals.

(b)    Major concessions. Concession agreements for which the concessionaire’s projected annual gross revenues under the contract are estimated to exceed $500,000 annually shall be awarded using a request for proposals.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 2129, passed 1-22-07; Am. Ord. 2237, passed 12-14-15)


35.11 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: INFORMAL SOLICITATION PROCEDURES

The city may use the following procedure for informal solicitations in lieu of the procedures set forth in the model rules.

(A)    Informally solicited quotes and proposals.

(1)    Solicitation of offers. When authorized by these regulations, an informal solicitation may be made by general or limited advertisement to a certain group of vendors, by direct inquiry to persons selected by the Solicitation Agent, or in any other manner which the Solicitation Agent deems suitable for obtaining competitive quotes or proposals. The Solicitation Agent shall deliver or otherwise make available to potential offerors, a written scope of work, a description of how quotes or proposals are to be submitted and description of the criteria for award.

(2)    Award. The Solicitation Agent shall attempt to obtain a minimum of three written quotes or proposals before making an award. If the award is made solely on the basis of price, the Solicitation Agent shall award the contract to the responsible offeror that submits the lowest responsive quote. If the award is based on criteria other than, or in addition to, price, the Solicitation Agent shall award the contract to the responsible offeror that will best serve the interest of the city, based on the criteria for award.

(3)    Records. A written record of all persons solicited and offers received shall be maintained. If three offers cannot be obtained, a lesser number will suffice, provided that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes.

(B)    Qualified pools.

(1)    General. To create a qualified pool, the Purchasing Manager may invite prospective contractors to submit their qualifications to the city for inclusion as participants in a pool of contractors qualified to provide certain types of goods, services, or projects including personal services, and public improvements.

(2)    Advertisement. The invitation to participate in a qualified pool shall be advertised in the manner provided for advertisements of invitations to bid and requests for proposals by publication in at least one newspaper of general statewide circulation. If qualification will be for a term that exceeds one year or allows open entry on a continuous basis, the invitation to participate in the pool must be re-published at least once per year and shall be posted at the city’s main office and on its website.

(3)    Contents of solicitation. Requests for participation in a qualified pool shall describe the scope of goods or services or projects for which the pool will be maintained, and the minimum qualifications for participation in the pool, which may include, but shall not be limited to qualifications related to financial stability, contracts with manufacturers or distributors, certification as an emerging small business, insurance, licensure, education, training, experience and demonstrated skills of key personnel, access to equipment, and other relevant qualifications that are important to the contracting needs of the city.

(4)    Contract. The operation of each qualified pool may be governed by the provisions of a pool contract to which the city and all pool participants are parties. The contract shall contain all terms required by the city, including, without limitation, terms related to price, performance, business registration or licensure, continuing education, insurance, and requirements for the submission, on an annual or other periodic basis, of evidence of continuing qualification. The qualified pool contract shall describe the selection procedures that the city may use to issue contract job orders. The selection procedures shall be objective and open to all pool participants and afford all participants the opportunity to compete for or receive job awards. Unless expressly provided in the contract, participation in a qualified pool will not entitle a participant to the award of any city contract.

(5)    Use of qualified pools. Subject to the provisions of these regulations concerning methods of solicitation for classes of contracts, the Solicitation Agent shall award all contracts for goods or services of the type for which a qualified pool is created from among the pool’s participants, unless the Solicitation Agent determines that best interests of the city require solicitation by public advertisement, in which case, pool participants shall be notified of the solicitation and invited to submit competitive proposals.

(6)    Amendment and termination. The Purchasing Manager may discontinue a qualified pool at any time, or may change the requirements for eligibility as a participant in the pool at any time, by giving notice to all participants in the qualified pool.

(7)    Protest of failure to qualify. The Purchasing Manager shall notify any applicant who fails to qualify for participation in a pool that it may appeal a qualified pool decision to the City Council in the manner described in § 35.15.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.12 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: USE OF BRAND NAME SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.

(A)    In general. Specifications for contracts shall not expressly or implicitly require any product by one brand name or mark, nor the product of one particular manufacturer or seller, except for the following reasons:

(1)    It is unlikely that such exemption will encourage favoritism in the awarding of public improvement contracts or substantially diminish competition for public improvement contracts; or

(2)    The specification of a product by brand name or mark, or the product of a particular manufacturer or seller, would result in substantial cost savings to the city; or

(3)    There is only one manufacturer or seller of the product of the quality required; or

(4)    Efficient utilization of existing equipment, systems or supplies requires the acquisition of compatible equipment or supplies.

(B)    Authority of Purchasing Manager. The Purchasing Manager shall have authority to determine whether an exemption for the use of a specific brand name specification should be granted by recording findings that support the exemption based on the provisions of division (A).

(C)    Brand name or equivalent. Nothing in this section prohibits the city from using a "brand name or equivalent" specification, from specifying one or more comparable products as examples of the quality, performance, functionality or other characteristics of the product needed by the city, or from establishing a qualified product list.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.13 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: BID, PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS.

(A)    Solicitation Agent may require bonds. The Solicitation Agent may require bid security and a good and sufficient performance and payment bond even though the contract is of a class that is exempt from the requirement.

(B)    Bid security. Except as otherwise exempted, the solicitations for all contracts that include the construction of a public improvement and for which the estimated contract price will exceed $75,000 shall require bid security. Bid security for a request for proposal may be based on the city’s estimated contract price.

(C)    Performance bonds.

(1)    General. Except as provided in these regulations, all public contracts are exempt from the requirement for the furnishing of a performance bond.

(2)    Contracts involving public improvements. Prior to executing a contract for more than $50,000 that includes the construction of a public improvement, the contractor must deliver a performance bond in an amount equal to the full contract price conditioned on the faithful performance of the contract in accordance with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. The performance bond must be solely for the protection of the city and any public agency that is providing funding for the project for which the contract was awarded.

(3)    Cash-in-lieu. The Purchasing Manager or city may permit the successful offeror to submit a cashier’s check or certified check in lieu of all or a portion of the required performance bond.

(D)    Payment bonds.

(1)    General. Except as provided in these regulations, all public contracts are exempt from the requirement for the furnishing of a payment bond.

(2)    Contracts involving public improvements. Prior to executing a contract for more than $50,000 that includes the construction of a public improvement, the contractor must deliver a payment bond equal to the full contract price, solely for the protection of claimants under ORS 279C.600.

(E)    Design/build contracts. If the public improvement contract is with a single person to provide both design and construction of a public improvement, the obligation of the performance bond for the faithful performance of the contract must also be for the preparation and completion of the design and related services covered under the contract. Notwithstanding when a cause of action, claim or demand accrues or arises, the surety is not liable after final completion of the contract, or longer if provided for in the contract, for damages of any nature, economic or otherwise and including corrective work, attributable to the design aspect of a design-build project, or for the costs of design revisions needed to implement corrective work.

(F)    Surety; obligation. Each performance bond and each payment bond must be executed solely by a surety company or companies holding a certificate of authority to transact surety business in Oregon. The bonds may not constitute the surety obligation of an individual or individuals. The performance and payment bonds must be payable to the city or to the public agency or agencies for whose benefit the bond is issued, as specified in the solicitation documents, and shall be in a form approved by the Purchasing Manager.

(G)    Emergencies. In cases of emergency, or when the interest or property of the city probably would suffer material injury by delay or other cause, the requirement of furnishing a good and sufficient performance bond and a good and sufficient payment bond for the faithful performance of any public improvement contract may be excused, if a declaration of such emergency is made in accordance with the provisions of § 35.10(G) unless the City Council requires otherwise.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 2237, passed 12-14-15)


35.14 PUBLIC CONTRACTS: ELECTRONIC ADVERTISEMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTS.

In lieu of publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city metropolitan area, the advertisement for an invitation to bid or request for proposals for a contract involving a public improvement may be published electronically by posting on the city’s website, provided that the following conditions are met:

(A)    The placement of the advertisement is on a location within the website that is maintained on a regular basis for the posting of information concerning solicitations for projects of the type for which the invitation to bid or request for proposals is issued; and

(B)    The Solicitation Agent determines that the use of electronic publication will be at least as effective in encouraging meaningful competition as publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city metropolitan area and will provide costs savings for the city, or that the use of electronic publication will be more effective than publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city metropolitan area in encouraging meaningful competition.

(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


35.15 APPEAL OF DEBARMENT OR PREQUALIFICATION DECISION.

(A)    Right to hearing. Any person who has been debarred from competing for city contracts or for whom prequalification has been denied, revoked or revised may appeal the city’s decision to the City Council as provided in this section.

(B)    Filing of appeal. The person must file a written notice of appeal with the city’s Purchasing Manager within three business days after the prospective contractor’s receipt of notice of the determination of debarment, or denial of prequalification.

(C)    Notification of City Council. Immediately upon receipt of such notice of appeal, the Purchasing Manager shall notify the City Council of the appeal.

(D)    Hearing. The procedure for appeal from a debarment or denial, revocation or revision of prequalification shall be as follows:

(1)    Promptly upon receipt of notice of appeal, the city shall notify the appellant of the time and place of the hearing;

(2)    The City Council shall conduct the hearing and decide the appeal within 30 days after receiving notice of the appeal from the Purchasing Manager; and

(3)    At the hearing, the City Council shall consider de novo the notice of debarment, or the notice of denial, revocation or revision of prequalification, the standards of responsibility upon which the decision on prequalification was based, or the reasons listed for debarment, and any evidence provided by the parties.

(E)    Decision. The City Council shall set forth in writing the reasons for the decision.

(F)    Costs. The City Council may allocate the City Council’s costs for the hearing between the appellant and the city. The allocation shall be based upon facts found by the City Council and stated in the City Council’s decision that, in the City Council’s opinion, warrant such allocation of costs. If the City Council does not allocate costs, the costs shall be paid as by the appellant, if the decision is upheld, or by the city, if the decision is overturned.

(G)    Judicial review. The decision of the City Council may be reviewed only upon a petition filed in the Umatilla County Circuit Court within 15 days after the date of the City Council’s decision.(Ord. 2104, passed 3-28-05)


CHAPTER 36 Employer-Employee Relations

Section

General Provisions

36.01    Title

36.02    Purpose

36.03    Definitions

Consultation Procedures

36.15    Scope of consultation

36.16    Consultation process

36.17    Employee Representation Unit determination

36.18    Representation election procedure

36.19    Duration of certification

36.20    Affirmation procedure

36.21    Impasse procedure

36.22    Time off for employee representatives

36.23    Availability and use of data

36.24    Employee rights

36.25    City rights

36.26    Restrictions

36.27    Grievances

36.28    Construction

Employee Organizations

36.40    Conduct of business

36.41    Use of city facilities

36.42    Use of city bulletin boards

36.43    Peaceful performance of city services

GENERAL PROVISIONS


36.01 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as the City of Hermiston Employer Employee Relations Ordinance.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.02 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for the orderly administration of employer employee relations in city government, the formal recognition of employee organizations, and the resolution of disputes regarding wages and related economic benefits.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.03 DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

APPROPRIATE UNIT. A unit determined pursuant to § 36.17 of this chapter, excluding confidential and management employees as herein defined.

CITY. The city of Hermiston and, where appropriate herein, the City Council or any authorized management employee as herein defined.

CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Hermiston.

CITY REPRESENTATIVE. The City Manager, or alternate or alternates as may be selected by him, together with another person or persons as the City Council may designate. The City Council may authorize the City Manager to designate another person or persons on their behalf.

CONSULTATION IN GOOD FAITH. The mutual obligation of the city representative and employee representative personally to meet at reasonable times and to communicate in good faith verbally or in writing in an attempt to reach agreement on those matters within the scope of consultation.

DAY. A calendar day.

EMPLOYEE. Any employee who is appointed to a full time or part time permanent city position.

EMPLOYEE, CONFIDENTIAL. Any employee who is privy to decisions of city management affecting employer employee relations. CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEES shall be designated by the City Manager.

EMPLOYEE, MANAGEMENT. Any employee having significant responsibilities for formulating and administering city policies and programs, including but not limited to the City Manager and department heads; and any employee having authority to exercise independent judgment to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward or discipline other employees, or having the responsibility to direct them, or to adjust grievances, or effectively to recommend action if in connection with the foregoing, and the exercise of authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature but requires the use of independent judgment. MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEES shall be designated by the City Manager.

EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION. Any organization which has in its membership employees of the city and which has as one of its primary purposes representing employees in their employment relations with the city.

EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION, CERTIFIED. An employee organization which has been certified as the majority representative of employees in an appropriate unit in accordance with the provisions of §§ 36.17 through 36.20.

EMPLOYEE REPRESENTATIVE. The employee or employees representing a certified employee organization for purposes of the consultation process provided in this chapter.

EMPLOYER EMPLOYEE RELATIONS. The relationship between the city and its employees and their employee organizations or, when used in a general sense, the relationship between city management and employees or employee organizations.

FACT-FINDER. The FACT-FINDER, FACT-FINDING COMMITTEE, or FACT-FINDING BODY selected pursuant to § 36.21.

FACT-FINDING. Identifying the major issues in a particular dispute; reviewing the positions of the parties; investigating and reporting of the facts by one or more impartial fact finders; and making recommendations for settlement.

GRIEVANCE. A dispute concerning the interpretation of the rules and regulations governing personnel policies and practices of the city affecting the employee, or of the practical consequences of a "city rights" decision on wages and related economic benefits. An impasse is not a GRIEVANCE.

IMPASSE. A deadlock in the annual discussions between the city representative and employee representative over any matters within the scope of consultation as defined in § 36.15 of this chapter.

MEDIATION. The effort of an impartial third person or persons, functioning as intermediaries, to assist the parties in reaching a voluntary resolution of an impasse through interpretation, suggestion and advice.

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING. A written memorandum incorporating matters on which agreement is reached through the consultation process and approved by the City Council.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)

CONSULTATION PROCEDURES


36.15 SCOPE OF CONSULTATION.

The scope of consultation between the city representative and employee representative shall include all matters relating to employee wages and related economic benefits. Employee rights as defined in § 36.24 and city rights as defined in § 36.25 of this chapter are excluded from the scope of consultation and not subject to the consultation process provided in this chapter.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.16 CONSULTATION PROCESS.

The purpose of this section is to provide procedures for the consultation process.

(A)    A meeting of all employee representatives and the city representative shall be held no later than October 1 of each year to review the consultation procedures and to discuss matters within the scope of consultation and the data relating to the matters that the employee representatives desire to have available during the consultation process. The city representative shall make reasonable efforts to obtain data and shall present it to the employee representative by November 15 of each year.

(B)    All matters within the scope of consultation which employee representatives might propose shall be submitted in writing to the city representative by December 1 of each year. All matters which the city might propose shall be submitted in writing by the city representative to the appropriate employee representatives by January 15 of each year. No proposal may be considered that will affect the ensuing year’s budget unless the same was submitted by December 1, in the case of the employee representative, and by January 15, in the case of the city representative.

(C)    An initial meeting to discuss the written proposals shall be held within ten days after the submission of the city representative’s proposals, but in no event later than January 15 of each year. Matters of city wide concern shall be discussed in joint meetings between the city representative and the employee representatives of all the certified employee organizations. "Matters of city wide concern" are those matters requiring major budgetary financing or having an impact on city employees generally, as determined by the City Manager.

(D)    Subsequent consultation sessions shall be arranged by mutual agreement of the city representative and the employee representative.

(E)    Upon completion of consultations, a "memorandum of understanding" shall be prepared by the City Manager and signed by the City Manager and the employee representative. The signed memorandum shall be forwarded to the City Council for its acceptance, rejection, or modification and acceptance.

(F)    Any time limit provided in this section may be extended by mutual agreement of the city representative and the employee representatives.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.17 EMPLOYEE REPRESENTATION UNIT DETERMINATION.

(A)    Any employee organization desiring to represent a group of employees in consultations held in accordance with this chapter may petition the City Council for a representation election. A representation petition shall be in writing and shall specify:

(1)    The name and address of the organization;

(2)    The principal officers of the organization;

(3)    The person and address to whom all communications to the organization concerning the election shall be sent;

(4)    That membership in the organization is not denied because of race, sex, color, religious creed, national origin or ancestry, or political affiliation; and

(5)    A description of the unit proposed by the organization to be appropriate and within which the election is sought. The description shall include a listing of the classification titles of the positions in the proposed appropriate unit.

(B)    The representation petition shall be supported by the signatures of at least 50% of the employees in the proposed appropriate unit. The signatures shall be based upon the representation petition, and the petition shall bear the date that the signatures were obtained. All employee signatures must have been placed upon the representation petition within 60 days immediately preceding submission of the petition.

(C)    Upon filing of the representation petition, the Finance Director/Recorder shall post within the work area of the proposed appropriate unit a notice describing the proposed unit, that a representation election has been requested, and naming the employee organization petitioning for representation.

(D)    The City Council shall refer the representation petition to the City Manager for examination and verification. The City Manager shall examine the petition and determine whether valid signatures of the required 50% of the employees in the proposed appropriate unit are on the petition. In the event that the City Manager finds that the petition lacks the required 50%, he shall so notify the City Council and the petitioning employee organization. The petition shall be dismissed forthwith if not previously withdrawn by the employee organization.

(E)    The City Manager shall make the final determination as to what employees, if any, in the proposed appropriate unit shall be considered management or confidential employees. If that determination affects the representation petition, then the employee organization shall be notified, and it may amend its petition. The verification of the representation petition shall be forwarded to the City Council immediately.

(F)    After receiving the representation petition and after the City Manager has notified the City Council that the petition meets the requirements of this section, the City Council shall then determine whether the petitioner is a bona fide employee organization, whether the unit within which the election is sought is an appropriate unit, and any other questions relating to the subject matter. In determining whether the proposed unit is an appropriate unit, the City Council shall use the following criteria to assist them in its determination:

(1)    The community interest of employees;

(2)    The history of employee representation in the unit, among other employees of the city, and in similar employment;

(3)    The effect of the unit on the efficient operation of the city and upon sound employee relations;

(4)    The extent to which employees have common skills, working conditions, job duties, or similar educational requirements;

(5)    The effect on the city’s classification structure of dividing a single classification among two or more units.

(G)    The City Council shall obtain and consider written reports and recommendations of the City Manager which shall take into consideration views of all concerned departments and offices, and the effect on the city. Affected employee organizations may also submit their views in writing concerning the proposed unit, which views shall be considered by the City Council. If the City Council determines that it is in the best interest of the parties, it may schedule a hearing so that all parties may have an opportunity to present evidence or argument in support of their position.

(H)    If the City Council determines that the unit is appropriate, then it shall direct the Finance Director/Recorder to schedule a secret ballot election within the unit in accordance with the provisions of § 36.18. If the City Council determines that the proposed unit is inappropriate, it shall so notify the affected parties. Upon receipt of notification, the petitioner may amend its petition, in which event the applicable procedures of this section shall apply.

(I)    If an employee organization other than the one filing the original petition for representation desires to represent the same unit and wishes to be on the same election ballot, it shall file a petition meeting the requirements of this section within 15 days of the posting of notice by the Finance Director/Recorder under division (C); provided, the petition need be supported by only 40% of the employees in the unit.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.18 REPRESENTATION ELECTION PROCEDURE.

(A)    (1)    Upon receiving the City Council’s order to hold a representation election, the Finance Director/Recorder shall schedule an election within 30 days and shall post a notice of the election in the work area of the appropriate unit 15 days prior to the election.

(2)    The notice shall include:

(a)    A description of the appropriate unit;

(b)    The name of the employee organization or organizations which are candidates for election;

(c)    A list of the employees eligible to vote, the date the election is to be held; and

(d)    The procedure to be followed.

(3)    Only employees within the appropriate unit shall be eligible to vote in the election. Voting shall be by secret ballot and shall provide an opportunity to vote for any of the candidates on the ballot or for "no representation." Absentee ballots may be used in connection with representation elections in the form and manner as may be prescribed by the Finance Director/Recorder.

(B)    An employee organization shall be certified by the Finance Director/Recorder as the representative of the appropriate unit following an election if the organization has received the vote of a majority of all the employees in the appropriate unit for which the election is held.

(C)    (1)    Each party may be represented at the polling place by one observer. Observers may challenge votes. When a voter’s eligibility is called into question, the ruling shall be temporarily reserved. The ballot will be marked as "challenged," together with the reason for the challenge.

(2)    The Finance Director/Recorder may also challenge anyone whose name is not on the eligibility list. When all ballots are in, the Finance Director/Recorder shall tally the ballots. The official observers may be present when the tally is made. Unless the challenged ballots are sufficient in number to affect the results of the election, they will not be considered further. If challenged ballots are sufficient in number to affect the results of the election, an investigation shall be made by the City Manager as to the validity of each challenge.

(3)    The results of the election shall be certified by the Finance Director/Recorder to the parties.

(D)    At least one year shall elapse following an election by which an organization has been certified as the majority representative or by which the employees have chosen "no representation" before a petition for representation and certification may be filed covering substantially the same group of employees. At least three months shall elapse before a petition may be filed if neither "no representation" nor an organization receives a majority vote as required by division (B).

(E)    Election costs shall be shared equally by the city and the employee organizations whose names appear on the ballot.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.19 DURATION OF CERTIFICATION

When an employee organization has been certified as the majority representative of an appropriate unit, certification shall remain in effect for one year from the date thereof. After one year the organization is subject to the affirmation procedures provided in § 36.20.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.20 AFFIRMATION PROCEDURE

(A)    A petition, alleging that a certified employee organization is no longer the majority representative of employees in an appropriate unit, may be filed with the Finance Director/Recorder by an individual employee, a group of employees or their representatives, or an employee organization.

(B)    The petition may be filed at any time after completion of the certified employee organization’s first year of certification; provided, however, the City Council may prescribe additional restrictions on the time of filing a petition during the terms, if any, of approved memorandums of understanding.

(C)    The affirmation petition shall be in a form substantially similar to the form prescribed for petitions under the provisions of § 36.17 supported by signatures of at least 50% of the employees represented by the certified employee organization and indicating that they do not desire to be represented by the currently certified employee organization. The affirmation petition may be accompanied by a petition for certification.

(D)    If the City Manager determines that petition requirements have been met, the Finance Director/Recorder shall arrange for an election which shall be held in substantial accord with the election provisions of § 36.18 to determine whether the certification of the currently certified organization should be affirmed. The organization shall be decertified if it fails to receive the affirmative vote of a majority of the employees in the appropriate unit currently represented by the organization.

(E)    An affirmation election may be held concurrently with a representation election where the City Council considers it appropriate to do so, in which event a combined ballot may be used.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.21 IMPASSE PROCEDURE

(A)    In the event that the city representative and the employee representative are unable to agree on the terms of a "memorandum of understanding" by February 15 of each year, then the City Council, upon petition of either party, may request mediation services as provided by the state of Oregon’s Public Employee Relations Board or by some other mutually agreed upon third party. If both parties agree, mediation services may be waived and the matters in dispute submitted directly to the fact finding process or directly to the City Council for final determination after a hearing on the merits of the dispute.

(B)    If both parties waive mediation, or if the City Council fails to request mediation services, or if the impasse procedure in division (A) is not successful by March 1 of each year, a three person fact finding committee shall be formed as follows:

(1)    The city representative and the employee representative each shall submit names of three persons within three days.

(2)    The city representative shall, within one day, remove one name from the employee representative’s list; and then the employee representative shall, within one day, remove one name from the city representative’s list. After each party has removed a total of two names in this alternating fashion, the remaining two names shall become members of the fact finding committee, and they shall mutually agree upon a third member who shall serve as chairperson.

(3)    If after three days following their selection the two members of the fact finding committee cannot mutually agree upon the third member, they shall obtain a list of three members of the American Arbitration Association who reside in Oregon or another list as is mutually acceptable to the two members. The designate of the city representative shall have two days to remove one name, and the designate of the employee representative shall have one additional day to remove one of the two remaining names. The remaining person shall become the third member and chairperson of the fact finding committee.

(C)    If the City Council and both parties agree, one of the following may be substituted in lieu of the fact finding committee:

(1)    The mediator may be requested by the City Council to serve as sole fact finder.

(2)    The American Arbitration Association may be requested by the City Council to provide fact finding services.

(3)    The Public Employee Relations Board may be requested by the City Council to provide the city with a list of seven persons from its list of fact finders. Upon receipt of the list, the city representative shall remove one name, and then the list shall be sent to the employee representative and he shall remove one name. After each party has removed a total of two names in this alternating fashion, the remaining three names shall become the fact finding body.

(D)    If both parties agree, fact finding procedures may be waived and the matters in dispute submitted directly to the City Council for final determination after a hearing on the merits of the dispute.

(E)    After the fact finder has obtained enough information from the parties in the controversy, he shall then, based on the background he has on the issue and any other additional information, present a written statement of facts and his recommendations for resolving the dispute to the parties involved within 15 days after his selection.

(F)    If the parties involved in the dispute are unable to reach agreement within five days of receipt of the fact finder’s recommendations, the fact finder shall forward his recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall conduct a hearing within 15 days from the date of filing the recommendations to allow the city representative or the employee representatives an opportunity to present their positions with respect to the fact finder’s recommendations. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a final determination.

(G)    After the City Council makes the decision, the affected parties shall incorporate that decision into the "memorandum of understanding" to be submitted to the City Council for its approval.

(H)    Any time limit provided in this section may be extended by mutual agreement of both parties.

(I)    The expenses of mediation and fact finding shall be shared equally by the parties. The city shall furnish meeting space when requested for the proceedings.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.22 TIME OFF FOR EMPLOYEE REPRESENTATIVES.

(A)    Reasonable time off without loss of pay shall be limited to not more than three employees serving as authorized representatives of certified employee organizations when formally meeting during regular working hours with the city representative on matters within the scope of consultation. Only those employees whose active participation is necessary in the conduct of meetings shall be authorized paid time off.

(B)    No employee representative shall leave his duty or work station or assignment for purposes of the employee organization without specific approval of the department head or other authorized city management official. Any meeting on city time is subject to scheduling by the City Manager in a manner consistent with operating needs and working schedules.

(C)    Nothing provided herein, however, shall limit or restrict the City Manager from scheduling meetings before or after regular duty or work hours under appropriate circumstances.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.23 AVAILABILITY AND USE OF DATA.

(A)    The city will make available to certified employee organizations nonconfidential information pertaining to employer employee relations as is contained in the public records of the city. The information shall be made available during regular office hours in accordance with applicable city rules and regulations. Information which shall be made available to certified employee organizations includes regularly published date covering subjects under discussion. Data collected on a promise to keep its source confidential may be made available in statistical summaries but shall not be made available in form as to disclose the source.

(B)    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to require disclosure of records that are:

(1)    Records pertaining to pending litigation to which the city is a party, or to claims or appeals which have not been settled;

(2)    Personnel, medical or similar files, the disclosure of which would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy; and

(3)    Working papers or memoranda which are not retained in the ordinary course of business or any records where the public interest served by not making the record available clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosure of the record.

(C)    To facilitate meaningful consultations, the city representative and employee representatives may agree to use certain common sources of information, such as salary surveys of private and public employers. Mutually agreed upon data collected by either party shall be made available to the other. All data used shall conform to the salary policy and other similar policies adopted by the City Council.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.24 EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.

Employees of the city shall have the right to form, join and participate in the activities of employee organizations of their own choosing pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of representation on matters of employee relations other than those excluded herein. City employees also shall have the right to refuse to join or participate in the activities of any employee organization and shall have the right to represent themselves individually in their employment relations with the city. No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced or discriminated against by the city or by any employee organization because of his exercise of these rights.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.25 CITY RIGHTS.

(A)    Responsibility for management of the city and direction of its work force is vested in the City Manager and his department heads. In order to fulfill this responsibility the rights of the city include, but are not limited to, the exclusive right to:

(1)    Determine the mission of its constituent departments, commissions and boards;

(2)    Set standards of services;

(3)    Determine the procedures and standards of selection for employment and promotion;

(4)    Direct its employees;

(5)    Take disciplinary action;

(6)    Relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons;

(7)    Maintain the efficiency of governmental operations;

(8)    Determine the methods, means and personnel by which government operations are to be conducted, including the right to contract out for goods and services;

(9)    Determine the content of job classifications;

(10)    Take all necessary action to carry out its mission in emergencies; and

(11)    Exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and the technology of performing its work.

(B)    The city retains all rights, powers and privileges not expressly specified in division (A) above and not included in § 36.24.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.26 RESTRICTIONS.

(A)    Confidential and management employees, as defined and designated pursuant to § 36.03, who choose to remain or to become members of an employee organization, shall not:

(1)    Serve as officers of the employee organization;

(2)    Serve on any committee of the employee organization which deals with matters within the scope of consultation; or

(3)    Serve as a representative of the employee organization before the City Council.

(B)    Confidential and management employees shall not:

(1)    Be included in any appropriate unit determined pursuant to § 36.17; or

(2)    Become a member of or serve as an officer or representative of any certified employee organization.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.27 GRIEVANCES.

All grievances shall be processed in accordance with the applicable adopted personnel rules and regulations of the city.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.28 CONSTRUCTION.

(A)    It is hereby declared that the subject of city employer employee relations as set forth in this chapter is a matter of local concern, that the provisions herein are adopted pursuant to the authority of the Charter of the city, and that the provisions herein are exclusive and supersede and take precedence over any state statute now or hereafter enacted relating to city employer/employee relations, employee consultation or collective bargaining for city employees.

(B)    The rights, powers and authority of the City Council in all matters, including the right to maintain any legal action, shall not be modified or restricted by this chapter.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)

EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS


36.40 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.

(A)    Reasonable time off without loss of pay and access to employee work locations shall be granted officers of employee organizations and their officially designated representatives for the purpose of processing grievances or contacting members of the organization concerning business within the scope of representation.

(B)    Officers or representatives shall not enter any work location without the consent of the department head. Access shall be restricted so as not to interfere with the normal operations of the department or with established safety or security requirements.

(C)    Solicitation of membership and activities concerned with the internal management of an employee organization such as collecting dues, holding membership meetings, campaigning for office, conducting elections and distributing literature shall not be conducted during regular city working hours.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.41 USE OF CITY FACILITIES.

Employee organizations may use, in accordance with established rules applicable to other groups within the community, city facilities during non work hours for meeting of city employees, provided space is available. Requests for use of facilities not available to the public generally shall be in writing, state the purpose or purposes of the meeting and be approved by the City Manager. The city reserves the right to assess reasonable charges for the use of facilities.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.42 USE OF CITY BULLETIN BOARDS

Employee organizations may use portions of city bulletin boards under the following conditions:

(A)    All materials must be dated and must identify the organization. In the event that posted materials, in the opinion of the department head, interfere with the proper functioning of the department, the department head shall bring the matter to the attention of the City Manager. The City Manager may, after discussing the matter with the representative of the employee organization, cause the material to be removed.

(B)    The city reserves the right to determine where bulletin boards shall be placed and what portion of them are to be allowed to employee organizations materials.

(C)    An employee organization that does not abide by these rules will forfeit its right to have materials posted on city bulletin boards.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


36.43 PEACEFUL PERFORMANCE OF CITY SERVICES.

In order that the vital performance of city services can be maintained, no employee shall strike or recognize a picket line of a labor organization while in the performance of his official duties. The following shall apply:

(A)    Participation by any employee in a strike or work stoppage is unlawful and shall subject the employee to disciplinary action, up to and including discharge.

(B)    No employee organization, its representatives or members shall engage in a strike or work stoppage of any kind.

(C)    If a certified employee organization, its representatives or members engage in a strike or work stoppage of any kind, in addition to any other lawful remedies or disciplinary actions, the City Council may suspend or revoke the recognition or certification granted to employee organizations and prohibit the use of bulletin boards, prohibit the use of city facilities and prohibit access to former work or duty stations by the organization.

(D)    As used in this section, STRIKE or WORK STOPPAGE means the concerted failure to report for duty, the wilful absence from one’s position, the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in whole or in part from the full, faithful performance of the duties of employment for the purpose of influencing or coercing a change in the conditions of compensation, or the rights, privileges or obligations of employment.

(E)    The city may petition the appropriate courts for an injunction or other appropriate relief if a strike, work stoppage or recognition of a picket line in violation of this section is occurring or is about to occur. The city may also hire new permanent or temporary employees or transfer other city employees to perform the services and duties of those employees engaged in a strike or work stoppage in violation of this section.

(Ord. 867, passed 5-12-75)


Chapter 37 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Section

37.01    Findings

37.02    Powers

37.03    Corporate Name


37.01 FINDINGS.

Based on findings contained in the Town Center Urban Renewal District Feasibility Study for the proposed Hermiston Urban Renewal Plan attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A the City Council declares that blighted areas, as defined by ORS 457.010(1), exist within the city and that there is need for an Urban Renewal Agency to function within the city.

(Ord. 2200, passed 5-20-13)


37.02 POWERS.

The City Council further elects, pursuant to ORS 457.045(3), that all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted to and vested in an Urban Renewal Agency shall be exercised by and vested in the City Council itself; provided, however, that any act of the City Council acting as the Urban Renewal Agency shall be and shall be considered the act of the Urban Renewal Agency only and not of the City Council.

(Ord. 2200, passed 5-20-13)


37.03 CORPORATE NAME.

The corporate name of the Urban Renewal Agency activated by this chapter shall be, and the agency shall be known as, the Urban Renewal Agency of the City of Hermiston.

(Ord. 2200, passed 5-20-13)


TITLE V Public Works

Chapter

50.    GARBAGE

51.    SEWERS

52.    WATER

53.    ENERGY


CHAPTER 50 Garbage

Section

General Provisions

50.01    Short title

50.02    Purpose, policy and scope

50.03    Definitions

Regulations

50.15    Activities and practices regulated

50.16    Practices prohibited without a franchise

50.17    Public responsibility as to waste disposal and containers

50.18    Ownership of recyclable materials

Franchise Provisions

50.30    Grant of franchise and term of franchise

50.31    Responsibility of franchisee

50.32    Suspension, modification or revocation of franchise

50.33    Interruption of franchisee’s service

50.34    Termination of service by franchisee

50.35    Binding arbitration

50.36    Amendments

Administration

50.50    Rates

50.51    Billing, collection and franchise fee

50.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


50.01 SHORT TITLE

This chapter shall be known as the Solid Waste Management Ordinance and may also be so cited and pleaded and shall be cited herein as "this chapter."

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)


50.02 PURPOSE, POLICY AND SCOPE

It is declared to be the public policy of the city to regulate solid waste management to:

(A)    Ensure safe, economical and comprehensive solid waste service;

(B)    Ensure rates that are just and reasonable and adequate to provide necessary public service;

(C)    Prohibit rate preferences and any other practice that might be discriminatory; and

(D)    Provide for technologically and economically feasible recycling and resource recovery by and through the franchisee.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94


50.03 DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY. The City of Hermiston. Where the city limits are extended, the CITY shall include extended geographic boundaries.

COMPENSATION. Includes:

(1)    Any type of consideration paid for service including, but not limited to, rent, the proceeds from resource recovery, any direct or indirect provision for the payment of money, goods, services or benefits by tenants, lessees, occupants or similarly situated persons;

(2)    The exchange of service between persons; and

(3)    The flow of consideration from a person owning, possessing or generating solid waste to another person who provides services or from a person providing services to another person owning, possessing or generating solid waste.

COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Hermiston.

FRANCHISEE. Sanitary Disposal, Inc. to whom a franchise is granted by the City Council pursuant to Ordinance 1851. The franchise shall grant exclusive rights to provide service and solid waste management service for compensation.

GROSS RECEIPTS. All revenue received from providing solid waste management service under this chapter.

PERSON. Any individual, public or private corporation, industry, co-partnership, association, cooperative, firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity whatsoever.

RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Any material or group of materials that can be collected and sold for recycling at a net cost equal to or less than the cost of collection and disposal of the same material.

RESOURCE RECOVERY. The process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid waste, including energy recovery, material recovery, recycling and reuse of solid waste.

SERVICE. The collection, transportation, storage, transfer, disposal of or the resource recovery from solid waste.

SOLID WASTE. All putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, waste paper, cardboard, grass clippings, compost, tires, equipment and furniture; sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge; commercial, industrial, demolition and construction wastes, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof; discarded home or industrial appliances; manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, dead animals, infectious waste as defined in ORS 459.005, and other wastes; but the term does not include:

(1)    Hazardous waste as defined in ORS 466.005.

(2)    Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as the materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of fowls or animals.

(3)    Beverage containers, subject to reuse or refund provisions, contained in ORS 459A.700 through 459A.740.

SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT. The prevention or reduction of solid waste; management of the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing and final disposal of solid waste; or resource recovery from solid waste; and facilities necessary or convenient to the activities.

WASTE. Material that is no longer usable or wanted by the source of the material, which material is to be utilized or disposed of by another person. For the purpose of this paragraph, "utilized" means the productive use of wastes through recycling, reuse, salvage, resource recovery, energy recovery or landfilling for reclamation, habilitation or rehabilitation of land.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)

REGULATIONS


50.15 ACTIVITIES AND PRACTICES REGULATED.

A) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person other than the franchise holder under the provisions of §50.30 below to provide solid waste management service in the city for compensation.

(B)    Nothing in this franchise shall:

(1)    Prohibit a federal or state agency that collects, stores, transports or disposes of waste, solid waste or recyclable materials, or those who contract with the agencies to perform the service, but only insofar as the service is performed by or for the federal or state agency;

(2)    Prohibit any person in the city from hauling his own waste, solid waste or recyclable materials in a lawful manner; provided, however, that no person will be permitted to haul the waste, solid waste or recyclable material for any other person or firm;

(3)    Prohibit a generator of source separated recyclable material from selling or exchanging material to any person for fair market value for recycling or reuse;

(4)    Prohibit any person from transporting, disposing of or resource recovering, sewage sludge, septic pumpings or cesspool pumpings;

(5)    Prohibit any person licensed as a motor vehicle wrecker from collecting, transporting, disposing of or utilizing motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts;

(6)    Prohibit any person transporting solid waste through the city that is not collected within the city;

(7)    Prohibit a contractor registered under ORS Chapter 701 from hauling waste created in connection with the demolition, construction or remodeling of a building or structure or in connection with land clearing and development.The waste shall be hauled in equipment owned by the contractor and operated by the contractor’s employees;

(8)    Prohibit the collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards by private charitable organizations regularly engaged in the business or activity and not engaged in the regular business of collection of putrescible solid waste;

(9)    Prohibit a non-profit charitable, benevolent or civic organization from collecting recyclable materials provided that the collection is not a regular or periodic business of the organization.The organizations shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter;

(10)    Prohibit a person from transporting or disposing of waste that is produced as an incidental part of the regular carrying on of the business of janitorial service, gardening or landscaping service, or rendering.(These sources do not include the collection, transportation or disposal of accumulated or stored wastes generated or produced by other persons.); and

(11)    Require franchisee to store, collect, transport, dispose of or resource recover any hazardous waste as defined by or pursuant to ORS Chapter 466; provided, however, that franchisee may engage in a separate business of handling the wastes separate and apart from this franchise and chapter.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)Penalty, see § 50.99


50.16 PRACTICES PROHIBITED WITHOUT A FRANCHISE.

Unless exempted by §50.15 or franchised pursuant to this chapter, no person shall:

(A)    Solicit for service customers;

(B)    Advertise the providing of service; or

(C)    Transport solid waste other than his own.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94 Penalty, see § 50.99)


50.17 PUBLIC RESPONSIBILITY AS TO WASTE DISPOSAL AND CONTAINERS.

In addition to and not in lieu of compliance with ORS Chapter 459 and other applicable laws and regulations:

(A)    Customers shall take appropriate actions to ensure that hazardous materials, chemicals, paint, corrosive materials, infectious waste or hot ashes are not put into a can, cart, container or drop box.When materials or customer abuse, fire or vandalism causes excessive wear or damage to a cart, container or drop box, the cost of repair or replacement may be charged to the customer.

(B)    No unauthorized person shall place materials in or remove materials from a solid waste collection container without permission of the owner of the container.For the purpose of this section, the franchisee is the "owner" of containers supplied by franchisee.Persons to whom the franchisee supplies containers shall be authorized persons within the meaning of this section.

(C)    No unauthorized person shall remove solid waste placed out for collection and resource recovery.

(D)    Unless permitted by the franchisee, no person shall install or use any container over 32 gallons in capacity for pickup by franchisee other than those supplied by franchisee.The purpose of this division is to insure safe equipment, sizes and weights, and facilitate franchisee utilizing the most efficient collection equipment and methods.

(E)    The franchisee is not required to service an underground container unless the person responsible for it places the container above ground prior to the time for collection.

(F)    Each customer shall provide safe access to the solid waste container or wastes without risk or hazard to franchisee’s employees, the public or franchisee.

(G)    No container designed for mechanical pickup shall exceed safe loading weights or volumes as established by the franchisee to protect service workers, the customer, the public and the collection equipment.

(H)    No container designed for manual pickup shall exceed 32 gallons in size or 60 pounds in weight when loaded and 18 pounds when empty. The containers shall be made of metal or be solid, fireproof, rodent proof and not be subject to cracking or splitting, and have proper handholds and bails. Containers must be kept in good condition by customer.

(I)    Customers using mechanically emptied containers furnished by franchisee shall provide a smooth, level, hard-surfaced area approved by the franchisee for the container.

(J)    Unless special service or service equipment is provided by the franchisee for handling unconfined waste, materials such as rubbish and refuse, brush, leaves, tree cuttings and other debris for manual pickup and collection shall be in securely tied bundles or in boxes, sacks or other receptacles, and solid waste so bundled, tied or contained shall not exceed 60 pounds in weight.

(K)    Where a customer requires an unusual volume of service or a special type of container requiring substantial investment in equipment, the franchisee may require a contract with the customer as necessary to finance and assure amortization of the equipment.The purpose of this provision is to assure that the equipment does not become a charge against other rate payers who are not benefitted. In no event shall the contract be in effect longer than this chapter.

(L)    Stationary compacting devices for solid wastes shall comply with federal and state safety standards and provide adequate protection to the user and franchisee.

(M)    Any vehicle used by a person to transport solid waste shall be so loaded and operated as to prevent the wastes from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping from the vehicle onto any public right-of-way or lands adjacent.

(N)    No person shall block access to any container or drop box or roll off box supplied by franchisee.

(O)    Every person who generates or produces solid waste shall have removed all putrescible solid waste at least every seven days.More frequent removal may be required where a facility or service involves the public health.All solid waste shall be removed in sufficient frequency as to prevent health hazards or pollution.

(P)    All putrescible materials shall be stored in manually emptied containers supplied by the generator or producer or in mechanically emptied containers or drop boxes supplied by the franchisee.When manually or mechanically emptied containers are used, they shall be covered except during loading and emptying.When drop boxes are used, all putrescible materials shall be placed in plastic bags and tied.

(Q)    The producer or generator of solid waste shall clean containers and shall keep the area around the container free of accumulated solid waste or wastes. The franchisee shall provide maintenance as required to containers supplied by franchisee.For containers supplied by customer, plastic liners are recommended but not required.

(R)    Approved disposal methods shall be as follows:

(1)    No person shall burn, dump, bury, collect, remove or in any other manner dispose of solid waste upon any street, alley, public place or private property within the city except as provided in this chapter.

(2)    Wastepaper, boxes, rubbish and debris, brush, leaves, grass, wood and cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens (but excepting paper, cardboard or wood containers in commercial quantities) may be burned on private property only if the method of burning is approved by the city and is done in accordance with Oregon Department of Environmental Quality rules and regulations.

(S)    All putrescible solid waste must be drained of excess liquids and wrapped.

(T)    Ashes will be taken only if placed in a plastic bag and tied.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)Penalty, see § 50.99


50.18 OWNERSHIP OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.

All recyclable materials located, placed or deposited in a container, drop box or receptacle intended to be collected by the franchisee shall belong to the franchisee.It shall be unlawful for any person other than the franchisee to remove recyclable material from the receptacles, and any person removing materials in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties defined in § 50.99.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94) Penalty, see § 50.99

FRANCHISE PROVISIONS


50.30 GRANT OF FRANCHISE AND TERM OF FRANCHISE.

There is hereby granted to Sanitary Disposal, Inc., an Oregon corporation, the exclusive right, franchise and privilege of using the streets of the city to provide solid waste management service for commercial, industrial and residential establishments within the city. The rights, privileges and franchise herein granted shall begin on August 9, 1994, and shall be considered as a continuing five-year franchise. That is, beginning January 1 of each year, the franchise will be considered renewed for an additional five-year term, unless at least 30 days prior to January 1 of any year either party shall notify the other party in writing of intent to terminate further renewals of the franchise. Upon the giving of notice of termination, the franchisee shall have a franchise which will terminate five years from the date of the notice of termination of renewals. The Council may later extend the term or reinstate continuing renewals upon mutual agreement with the franchisee. Nothing in this section restricts the Council from suspending, modifying or revoking the franchise for cause pursuant to §50.32 of this chapter. The franchise may be transferred only upon approval of the City Council. The sale of shares, merger, consolidation, reorganization or restructuring in which the current shareholders are no longer the principal owners and managers shall be treated as a transfer of interest requiring approval.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)


50.31 RESPONSIBILITY OF FRANCHISEE.

(A)    The franchisee shall provide collection service to any resident of the city as long as the resident pays for the service.

(B)    The franchisee shall make available solid waste management service as defined in §50.01 of this chapter to customers in the city not less than once per week.

(C)    The franchisee shall use proper and suitable equipment for the hauling, removal and transportation of solid waste. All equipment for transporting solid waste on public roadways within the city shall be covered, and all equipment for handling the waste material shall be equipped with a metal body, water tight and drip proof to the greatest extent practicable. All equipment shall be kept clean at all times, and sufficient equipment shall be kept on hand to properly and adequately remove all solid waste, subject to the terms of this chapter.

(D)    Lids shall be replaced on all receptacles by the collector after emptying the receptacle.

(E)    The franchisee shall use a disposal facility site that is approved by the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and the city.

(F)    The franchisee shall, without charge to the city, pick up, carry away and dispose of any and all waste materials placed by the city in suitable containers which hold solid waste generated by the city. It is understood, however, that the franchisee may impose reasonable charges to the city for extraordinary disposal activities such as the removal of demolition materials.

(G)    The franchisee may subcontract with others to provide a portion of the service where the franchisee does not have the necessary equipment or service capability. A subcontract shall not relieve the franchisee of total responsibility for providing and maintaining service and from compliance with this chapter. Franchisee shall provide written notice to the city of its intention to subcontract any portion of the service and receive city approval prior to entering into an agreement. The subcontractor shall comply with all provisions of this chapter.

(H)    The franchisee, in conjunction with the city, shall develop and implement an "opportunity to recycle" program that meets the mandated state recycling program requirements.

(I)    The franchisee shall permit inspection by the city of the franchisee’s facilities, equipment and personnel at reasonable times. The franchisee shall keep proper books and records covering his solid waste collection, removal, disposal and recycling operations, which books and records shall be open to inspection by the city at reasonable times.

(J)    The franchisee shall comply with all laws relating to solid waste management service.

(K)    The franchisee shall submit a certificate of public liability insurance with a 30 day notice of cancellation clause, acceptable to the city, which will cover its business operation including each vehicle operated by the franchisee. The insurance coverage shall be in amounts not less than the minimum requirements of the Oregon Tort Claims Act as now enacted or hereafter amended. The insurance shall indemnify and save the city against liability or damage which may arise or occur from an injury to persons or property as a result of the franchisee’s operation of the solid waste business. The city shall be named as an additional insured.

(L)    The franchise granted under this chapter shall be conditioned upon the franchisee indemnifying and saving the city against any liability or damage which may arise or occur to the city of from any injury to persons or property as a result of the franchise holder’s operations under this chapter.

(M)    The franchisee shall provide a performance bond in the amount of $5,000, with a surety licensed to do business in the state of Oregon, conditioned upon the full and faithful performance of this agreement and franchise and this chapter. In the event that the Council finds that the franchisee has adequate experience and otherwise meets the requirements to guarantee service, it may waive, by resolution, all or part of the bond requirements.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94) Penalty, see § 50.99


50.32 SUSPENSION, MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.

(A)    Failure to provide necessary service or otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter after written notice and a reasonable opportunity to comply shall be grounds for modification, suspension or revocation of the franchise.

(B)    After written notice from the Council that the grounds exist, the franchisee shall have 20 days from the date of mailing of the notice in which to comply or request a public hearing before the Council.

(C)    At the public hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons shall have an opportunity to present oral, written or documentary evidence to the Council.

(D)    If the franchisee fails to comply within the time specified or if the Council hearing is held, with the order of the Council entered upon the basis of findings at the public hearing, the Council may suspend, modify or revoke the franchise or make the action contingent upon continued noncompliance.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)


50.33 INTERRUPTION OF FRANCHISEE’S SERVICE.

The franchisee agrees, as a condition of this franchise, that whenever the City Council finds that the failure of service or threatened failure of service would result in creation of an immediate and serious health hazard or serious public nuisance, the City Council may, after a minimum of 24 hours actual notice to the franchisee and a public hearing if the franchisee requests it, provide or authorize another person to temporarily provide the service or to use and operate the land, facilities and equipment of the franchisee to provide emergency service. If a public hearing is requested by the franchisee, it may be held immediately by the City Council after compliance with the minimum notice requirements for the meetings established by the Oregon Public Meetings Law. The City Council shall return any seized property and business upon abatement of the actual or threatened interruption of service and after payment to the city for any net cost incurred in the operation of the solid waste service.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)


50.34 TERMINATION OF SERVICE BY FRANCHISEE.

The franchisee shall not terminate service to all or a portion of the customers unless:

(A)    The street or road access is blocked, and there is no alternate route and provided that the franchisee shall restore service not later than 24 hours after street or road access is opened;

(B)    As determined by the franchisee, excessive weather conditions render providing service unduly hazardous to persons providing service or to the public or termination is caused by accidents or casualties caused by an act of God, a public enemy or a vandal, or road access is blocked;

(C)    A customer has not paid for provided service after a regular billing and after a written notice to the customer, which notice shall be sent not less than 15 days after the first regular billing;

(D)    Ninety days written notice is given to the City Council and to affected customers, and written approval is obtained from the City Council; or

(E)    The customer does not comply with the service standards of §50.17 of this chapter.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)


50.35 BINDING ARBITRATION.

In the event that an irreconcilable difference arises between the city and franchisee on their respective duties and responsibilities under the franchise or ordinance, an arbitration board shall be chosen, consisting of three persons, one chosen by the city, one by the franchisee and one chosen by the two appointed arbiters who must be approved by both the city and the franchisee. The arbiters shall choose a time, date and place within 30 days of appointment of the last arbiter, to hear both sides of the dispute and promptly render a decision that is binding on both the city and the franchisee. Where good cause is shown and recorded in the minutes, the time for decision may be extended as absolutely necessary. Procedure chosen may be that of the American Arbitration Association or that specified in ORS Chapter 36 for court supervised arbitration. Costs shall be split equally between the city and franchisee unless the arbitrators make an award of costs including, without limitation, arbiters’ time.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)


50.36 AMENDMENTS.

The city or the franchisee may propose amendments to this franchise. Proposed amendments shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the city and the franchisee. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendments. Franchisee shall be given at least 30 days written notice of the hearing. The City Council may, after public hearing, adopt the amendments. The franchise shall be amended upon acceptance of the amendments by franchisee.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)

ADMINISTRATION


50.50 RATES.

Any person who receives solid waste management service from the franchisee shall be responsible for payment of service. The rates to be charged to all persons by the franchisee shall be reasonable and uniform, taking into consideration the cost of performing the service rendered by the franchisee, the anticipated increase in the cost of providing this service, the necessity that the franchisee have a reasonable operating margin, and rates and fees charged in other and similar municipalities.The rates may be changed by resolution during the term of the franchise if approved by the City Council. The rates shall be on file at the Finance Director/Recorder’s office for public inspection.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94)


50.51 BILLING, COLLECTION AND FRANCHISE FEE.

The city shall do the billing and collecting of solid waste service fees and shall retain 13.5% of the gross collections in payment of two and one-half percent franchise fee and 11% for billing and collection service, and pay the balance to Sanitary Disposal, Inc. The percentage shall be reviewed and may be changed at any time when the franchisee submits a request for rate review.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 2-10-97; Am. Ord. 2241, passed 5-9-16)


50.99 PENALTY.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter penalized as provided in §10.99 commits a Class A violation. Franchise holders shall be subject to the penalties provided herein for the violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1851, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


CHAPTER 51 Sewers

Section

General Provisions

51.001    Definitions

51.002    Depositing objectionable wastes

51.003    Privy vaults and the like; connection to public sewer required

51.004    Private sewage disposal

51.005    Tampering with sewer service equipment

51.006    Sewer main construction

Public Sewer Use

51.020    Unpolluted discharges

51.021    Prohibited discharges

51.022    Restricted substances and wastes

51.023    Actions available to city administration

51.024    Grease, oil and sand interceptors

51.025    Preliminary treatment facilities to be maintained by owner

51.026    Control manholes

51.027    Measurements, tests and analyses

51.028    Special agreements

Connections

51.040    Permit required; application

51.041    Fees

51.042    Costs and expenses to be borne by owner

51.043    Separate building sewer for each building; old building sewers

51.044    Specifications

51.045    Elevation of sewer

51.046    Connection of surface runoff or groundwater

51.047    Inspection

51.048    Excavations

Rates, Charges and Billing

51.060    Users charges system

51.061    Wastewater characteristics

51.062    Classification of users; non-metered users

51.063    Records

51.064    [Reserved]

51.065    Establishment of user charges

51.066    New users and vacancies

51.067    Mobile home, trailer park, multiple dwelling or multiple commercial vacancies

51.068    Water consumption

51.069    Disposal of on-site wastes

51.070    Inclusion in user rates

51.071    Responsibility for payment

51.072    Billing procedures

51.073    Delinquencies

51.074    Sewer service refused to customer with outstanding amounts owed

51.075    Appeals

51.076    Industrial cost recovery

Industrial Wastewater Provisions

51.090    Objectives

51.091    Abbreviations

51.091    Definitions

51.092    General sewer use conditions

51.093    Industrial wastewater permits

51.094    Responsibility of permit holder

51.095    Reporting requirements

51.096    Administrative and judicial enforcement

51.097    Additional provisions concerning industrial users

Administration and Enforcement

51.110    Powers and authority of inspectors

51.111    Notice of violation

51.112    Liability for damage

51.113    Discontinuance of service for violation

51.999    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


51.001 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Other terms contained in this chapter shall have the definitions attributed in the city’s general ordinances. Terms for land, parcels, rights-of-way shall be further defined as necessary by the Oregon Revised Statutes.

BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20⋅C., expressed in milligrams per liter.

BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewers, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building walls.

BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.

CHANGE IN USE. Changes defined in development, and shall include conversion from residential to any other use including multifamily uses, and shall include an increase or change in the sewage strength, pH, character, or potential discharge of hazardous substances.

CITY. The city of Hermiston, Oregon, and shall consist of the City Manager or his designated representative unless specifically referred to the City Council in this chapter.

COLLECTION SYSTEM. The system of public sewers to be operated by the city designed for the collection of sanitary sewage.

COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.

COMMERCIAL INDEPENDENT DISCHARGE. Any business or industry which possesses an independent licensed and permitted wastewater discharge system. Any classification must maintain independent facilities with approval of appropriate regulatory agencies and provide discharge of domestic waste to the public treatment works.

COMMERCIAL USER. Any premises used for commercial or business purposes which is not an industry as defined in this chapter.

DEVELOPMENT. The conversion or change in character of occupancy or use of a building which would place the structure in a different building group as defined in the Uniform Building Code; the erection of a new structure; the demolishing of existing buildings for the conversion of property to a differing use; the creation of gasoline pumps, drive-up windows, traffic islands or similar alterations which channelize, alter or increase the traffic volume or pattern on adjacent roadways. DEVELOPMENT, for purposes of this chapter, shall not mean interior remodeling, repairs, maintenance of improvements, to any existing structure which does not increase the volume of the structure. Specifically exempted under this chapter are building facades, roof or exterior wall repair or replacement, heating, ventilating or electrical alterations, or activities similar in character.

DEVELOPMENT SITE. An area consisting of a parcel or tract of land specifically identified by a person, as the land to be altered or developed. All required area to meet parking standards and similar requirements for a particular development shall be included in the term; however, the total property ownership of the proponent will not be considered in the site if it is not necessary to the development.

DOMESTIC WASTE. Any wastewater emanating from dwellings or from domestic activities which are performed outside the home in lieu of a home activity directly by or for private citizens.

DWELLING UNIT. Any housing unit with sanitary and kitchen facilities designed to accommodate one or more residents, multiple housing units, mobile homes and trailer spaces, but excluding commercial or transient housing units such as hotel and motel units and retirement homes with ten or more units under one roof, containing therein a dining room facility regularly open a minimum of six days per week and designed for the use of the residents and their guests. Independent laundry facilities serving multi-family, mobile homes and trailer units shall be considered a dwelling unit for billing purposes.

FEE IN LIEU OF ASSESSMENT. A charge payable upon the connection to the sewage works or the development of property.

GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

INDUSTRIAL USER.

(1)    Any non-governmental, non-residential user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1971, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions:

(a)    Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;

(b)    Mining;

(c)    Manufacturing;

(d)    Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services; and

(e)    Services.

(2)    In determining the amount of a user’s discharge for purposes of industrial cost recovery, the grantee may exclude domestic wastes or discharges from sanitary conveniences.

INDUSTRIAL WASTE. That portion of the wastewater emanating from an industrial user which is not domestic waste or waste from sanitary conveniences.

MAY is permissive.

NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All activities, goods and services which are necessary to maintain the proper capacity and performance of the treatment works for which the works were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE shall include replacement as defined hereinafter.

PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.

pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than a half-inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.

PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.

PUBLIC TREATMENT WORKS. A treatment works owned and operated by a public authority.

REPLACEMENT. Acquisition and installation of equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works were designed and constructed.

SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.

SERVICE AREA. All the area served by the treatment works and for which there is one uniform user charge system.

SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with the ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.

SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. An arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

SHALL is mandatory.

SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.

STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface, waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

USER. The person who is responsible for the payment of the sewer system charges.

USER CHARGE. The periodic charges levied on all users of the public treatment works and shall, at a minimum, cover each user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance.

WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.002 DEPOSITING OBJECTIONABLE WASTES.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.

(B)    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this subchapter.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.003 PRIVY VAULTS AND THE LIKE; CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.

(A)    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.

(B)    The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer in the city are hereby required at their expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line.

(C)    Should sewage be discharging to natural outlets, the ground surface, or into domestic water supplies, connection may be required within five working days of notification to connect. The required connections shall pay all fees and charges contained herein.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.004 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.

(A)    Where a public sanitary sewer is not within 300 feet, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the requirements of the applicable regulatory agencies.

(B)    Upon connection to a public sewer disposal system shall clean, abandon, and eliminate the private sewage system in accordance with applicable regulations.

(C)    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.005 TAMPERING WITH SEWER SERVICE EQUIPMENT.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of criminal mischief.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.006 SEWER MAIN CONSTRUCTION.

(A)    The wastewater utility may cause the provision of wastewater service terminated when necessary for repair, connection, extension and other times as shall be necessary to maintain and extend the utility.

(B)    The minimum size of wastewater mains required to serve any part of the city shall be eight inches. Any developer or subdivider shall install the necessary wastewater system and all appurtenant work at its sole expense. Should a development require wastewater mains in excess of eight inches, the City Manager, or his/her designee, will make the final decision on the size of the mains to be installed by the developer or subdivider. The actual size of public sewers required for subdivision or development shall be determined by the city administration based on design flows for maximum consumption. If the City Manager or his/her designee requires the developer to install wastewater lines in excess of eight inches in order to provide for future wastewater capacity, the City Manager, or his/her designee, may negotiate a reimbursement agreement with the developer or subdivider for the balance between the developer’s or subdivider’s actual cost for materials of eight inch wastewater mains and the size required by the city, subject to budget fund availability. Only the cost for increases in materials is reimbursable.

(C)    All public sewers required to serve a subdivision or development shall be installed by the individual initiating development or subdivision. Detailed plans and specifications in accordance with standards promulgated by the city shall be formally approved by the city and no construction shall commence until approval is granted in writing and a preconstruction conference is held with the individual, and contractors involved in construction, and the city.

(D)    All public sewer extensions shall be made to the farthest point of land upon which a development or subdivision is to occupy so far as it is technically and geographically feasible.

(E)    When any person constructs a public sewer through undeveloped or underdeveloped areas to serve his property or constructs on the perimeter of his property, the entire cost of the public sewers shall be paid by the person. The person may request an agreement with the city for reimbursement when service connections are made to the main. Agreements shall provide for a construction charge per front foot and, if so collected by the city, shall be paid to the original installer as provided in the reimbursement agreement.

(F)    An individual’s right to reimbursement through agreements shall not exceed ten years from the date of the completion of construction of the covered improvements. All payments to the original installer shall ease at the expiration of the agreement. A construction charge as provided herein may be collected by the city subsequent to the expiration of the agreement. Any fees so charged shall be credited to the utility fund exclusively for the improvement of production or distribution facilities of the city. This section shall not affect those agreements in place at the time of adoption of this chapter.

(G)    The city may construct any public sewer necessary for the utility system. Upon construction, the city may, by resolution, establish the reimbursement fees for any sewer works constructed. Any fee will be collected upon connection to the system in accordance with this chapter.

(H)    All public sewers shall be dedicated to the city upon formal acceptance by the city administration on behalf of the city. In no case shall any public sewer connected to the city system be held in any ownership other than that of the city. The installer of the public sewers shall guarantee the installation for one year from and after the date of acceptance by the city.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91; Am. Ord. 2028, passed 12-11-00)

PUBLIC SEWER USE


51.020 UNPOLLUTED DISCHARGES.

(A)    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.

(B)    Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to the sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city administration. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city and applicable regulatory agencies to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.021 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

(A)    Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;

(B)    Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanide in excess of two mg/l or CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;

(C)    Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; or

(D)    Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of the size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.; either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.022 RESTRICTED SUBSTANCES AND WASTES.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city administration that the wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city administration will give consideration to the factors as to quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:

(A)    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150⋅F (65⋅C).

(B)    Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150⋅F (0 and 65⋅C)

(C)    Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city administration.

(D)    Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.

(E)    Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to the degree that any material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceed the limits established by the city administration for the materials.

(F)    Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city administration as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction of the discharge to the receiving waters.

(G)    Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city administration compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.

(H)    Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.

(I)    Materials which exert or cause:

(1)    Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not limited to fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).

(2)    Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).

(3)    Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.

(4)    Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.

(J)    Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.023 ACTIONS AVAILABLE TO CITY ADMINISTRATION.

(A)    If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in §51.022 of this chapter, and which in the judgment of the city administration may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city administration may:

(1)    Reject the wastes;

(2)    Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;

(3)    Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or

(4)    Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of §51.076 of this chapter.

(B)    If the city administration permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city administration and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.024 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.

(A)    A grease interceptor shall be installed on all building sewers for all commercial and multiple dwelling unit users. Any conversion to commercial or multiple dwelling use shall be required to install a grease interceptor. The requirement for a grease interceptor may be waived by the city administration when a written request is filed indicating all of the following:

(1)    The waste stream from the commercial establishment meets the terms of domestic waste defined in this chapter; and

(2)    No kitchen facilities for public service, or service to more than ten residents or dwelling units as defined herein.

(B)    Oil and sand interceptors shall be required when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city administration and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The city administration shall make the final determination of the requirements.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.025 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES TO BE MAINTAINED BY OWNER.

Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.026 CONTROL MANHOLES.

When required by the city administration, the user of the sewage system from any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the administration. The manhole shall be installed by the user at the user’s expense and shall be maintained by the user so as to be safe and accessible at all times.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.027 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.

(A)    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards or unacceptable constituents.

(B)    The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.028 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.

No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)

CONNECTIONS


51.040 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.

(A)    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining all required permits and paying all applicable fees.

(B)    Any person developing property or seeking to connect to the sewage works, shall submit an application on the prescribed form, including all required information. A fee prescribed by resolution of the Council for classes of connection, inspection, construction reimbursement charges, fees in lieu of assessment, or similar required payments shall be made at the time of application. Persons developing or connecting property previously connected to the public treatment works without change in use, shall not be subject to the fees provided herein. Change in use shall be as defined in §51.001 of this chapter.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.041 FEES.

(A)    Fees established for any person developing or connecting to a public sewer shall include:

(1)    Connection and inspection fee. The direct charge levied by the city for the connection to the sewage treatment works. Fees, classifications, and amounts shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

(2)    Construction reimbursement. A direct fee established by resolution to reimburse the construction cost of a public sewer as provided in this chapter.

(3)    Fee in lieu of assessment. A fee required for persons connecting or developing adjacent to a public sewer which was constructed at the expense of the utility rate payers and for which the benefiting property was not assessed at the time of installation, and are not subject to construction reimbursement as provided herein. No fee in lieu of assessment shall be levied in addition to a construction reimbursement fee.

(B)    Fee in lieu of assessment and construction reimbursement paid in accordance with the following:

(1)    Where developing properties have multiple frontages, the fee shall be charged to the longest available frontage, regardless of possible point of connection. The records of the city shall reflect the charge.

(2)    Where private contractors have installed facilities at their own cost, the fees shall be paid to the city for payment to the private contractor as established by the terms of a reimbursement agreement, otherwise the fee shall be paid to the city or deposit in the utility fund.

(3)    The city may require new facilities to be constructed to serve developing properties. Actual cost of construction for the new public sewer will be utilized as an offset to or actual waiving of construction reimbursement or fees in lieu of assessment based upon the actual construction cost of public sewer required. No construction offset for fees may be transferred to any other person or property. Any balance of construction reimbursement or payment in lieu of assessment fees due after allowing for construction offset, shall be paid by the person developing or connecting.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.042 COSTS AND EXPENSES TO BE BORNE BY OWNER.

All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the person causing the connection. The person causing the connection shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.043 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING: OLD BUILDING SEWERS.

(A)    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.

(B)    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test, by the city administration, to meet all requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.044 SPECIFICATIONS.

(A)    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to other applicable rules and regulations of the city.

(B)    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. Building sewer connections shall be allowed into a manhole, a line fitting specifically designed for building sewers, or with a tapping saddle approved by the city administration.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.045 ELEVATION OF SEWER.

Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.046 CONNECTION OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER.

No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area way drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.047 INSPECTION.

The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city administration when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.048 EXCAVATIONS.

All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city, and any other permits required by the general ordinances of the city.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999

RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING


51.060 USERS CHARGES SYSTEM.

User charges shall be levied on all users of the public treatment works which shall cover the cost of operation and maintenance, debt service and other administrative costs of treatment works. The user charge system shall distribute these costs in proportion to each user’s contribution to the wastewater loading of the treatment works.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.061 WASTEWATER CHARACTERISTICS.

Since the only wastewater characteristic which influences costs of operation and maintenance in the Hermiston Treatment Works is volume, a flow charge shall be established so that all costs associated with this treatment works shall be distributed in proportion to each user’s volumetric contribution to the waste stream.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.062 CLASSIFICATION OF USERS: NON-METERED USERS.

(A)    Classification of users. Certain users shall be grouped into classes of users discharging approximately the same volume of wastewater and shall be levied a flat charge which is calculated from the flow charge by applying the average volume for that class.

(B)    Nonmetered users. Those users who are not in one of the user classes with assigned average flow volumes and whose water consumption or wastewater discharge is not metered shall be assigned an approximate wastewater and shall be billed on the flow charge according to this assigned volume.

(C)    Appeal. Should any user believe that he has been incorrectly assigned to a particular user class or should any user believe that a portion of his metered flow is not discharged into the sewerage system, that user may apply for review of his user charge as provided in this chapter.

(D)    Reassignment of a user. Should the city determine that a user is incorrectly assigned to a user class, they shall reassign a more appropriate user class to that user and shall notify that user of the reassignment.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.063 RECORDS.

Records of all assigned rates and any assigned wastewater volumes to user and user classes shall be kept on file with the city and shall be open for public inspection.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.064 [RESERVED].


51.065 ESTABLISHMENT OF USER CHARGES.

The sewer user charges are hereby established as follows:

(A)    Sewer user service charges established. The City Council shall establish the charges by resolution. The charges, except as hereinafter set forth, are established for all dwelling units and motel units at a uniform rate and all property other than the above-described dwelling units and motel units shall be based upon the quantity of water reaching the premises from the city water system, private water system or from private sources of supply, including water from the ground of the premises or elsewhere.

(B)    Dwelling units. The rate of sewer user service charge against each and every dwelling unit (any housing unit with sanitary and kitchen facilities designed to accommodate one or more residents, multiple housing units, mobile homes and trailer spaces, but excluding commercial (transient) housing units such as hotel and motel units, and retirement homes with ten or more units under one roof, containing therein a dining room facility regularly open a minimum of six days per week, primarily for the use of the residents and their guests), shall be established by resolution. Independent laundry facilities serving multifamily, mobile homes and trailer units shall be considered a dwelling unit for billing purposes.

(C)    Motel units. The rate of sewer user service charge against each and every motel unit (and motel unit used for transient housing) shall be established by resolution.

(D)    Commercial independent discharge. As defined in §51.001, users of this class must operate and maintain independent wastewater disposal facilities which are currently licensed by the state for the disposal of wastewater. During all times when approved and licensed wastewater facilities are operable, the rate for discharge to the public treatment works will be based on the actual metered flow of discharge, or will be based on the calculated discharge of each employee per shift per day, in accordance with the resolution of the City Council.

(1)    Metered users of this class will provide access to city personnel to read the meter in each billing period.

(2)    Metered users of this class will provide an annual calibration and certification of the metering device from an individual certified for verification.

(3)    Non-metered users of this class shall provide a verified employee count and total hours worked during the billing period. The city will establish the date for the submittal with each user. Employee information must be expressed in total employees per shift per day.

(4)    In the event that independent discharge facilities are not operating, or for any other reason the total discharge of a user in this class is provided to the public treatment works, user rates will be calculated in accord with the commercial account category, or in the event that the discharge exceeds 25,000 gallons per day, an industrial cost recovery rate will be applied in accord with this chapter.

(5)    Should users of this class not provide access to the waste meter, verification of meter accuracy, or employment information as required, the user shall be billed at the commercial rate.

(E)    Commercial users. All users and user groups not specifically defined herein shall be considered commercial for purposes of this user rate. The rate of sewer user service charge shall be on the basis of water consumption through both public and private water supplies. The base charge shall apply on the basis of each water supply meter and each un-metered water supply line.

(1)    Average billing method.

(a)    Any user of this group may qualify upon written request for a winter average billing method if, water consumption from public or private water supply is 50% higher in the months of May, June, July, and August than the winter time average in the months of November, December, January and February, and all additional consumption is not returned to the public treatment works.

(b)    If the user qualifies for a winter average billing method, the average consumption will be used to bill the months of March through October and actual consumption in November through February. The winter average will be annually updated to the most recent continuous use in the winter months, and this updated average used to bill the ensuing eight month period.

(2)    Special billing method. Any commercial user which utilizes delivered water as an integral part of a produced product, shall be billed based upon a waste meter, or in the same manner as provided for commercial independent discharge accounts.

(3)    Multiple commercial accounts. When more than one independent business is within a single structure, the commercial rate and number of commercial minimum charges applicable to the account shall be based upon the number of independent sanitary facilities provided in the structure. The charge shall be equal to the sum of commercial unit charges times the commercial unit minimum rate, plus a charge on water consumption which exceeds the allowance per commercial unit.

(F)    Combined dwelling units and others. Where both dwelling units and motel units are combined on the same water supply, the charges shall be at the dwelling unit rate plus the motel unit rate. Where both dwelling units and commercial occupancies are combined on the same water supply, the charges shall be at the dwelling unit rate required with an additional charge based on water consumption. Consumption charges will be calculated allowing a reduction in total consumption equal to the gallons allowed in the base rate of consumption per dwelling unit. The charge shall be equal to the sum of the dwelling units increased by one unit, all charged at the dwelling rate, plus a charge on that water consumption which exceeds the allowance per dwelling unit. The lowest charge shall be equal to the number of dwelling units increased by one unit and charged at the dwelling unit rate.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.066 NEW USERS AND VACANCIES.

The sewer user charge shall begin on the date of connection to the system based on the used categories in this code. Once the sewer user charge has commenced, no credit shall be given to any commercial or single dwelling unit account unless it can be demonstrated that all water sources to that property have been discontinued. If the date upon which the user charge is commenced or altered does not fall on the first day of a billing period, the rates shall be apportionately prorated.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.067 MOBILE HOME, TRAILER PARK, MULTIPLE DWELLING OR MULTIPLE COMMERCIAL VACANCIES.

Sewer use charges as described in the resolution adopting user rates shall be billed for each unit, unless the owner or manager thereof provides a specific listing of vacant units within a structure on the date prescribed by the city. If proof of vacancies is provided, sewage use shall be calculated based on the occupied units times the applicable rate per unit, however, in no event will the number of units billed be less than one unless it can be demonstrated that all water sources to the structure have been discontinued. Failure to provide a listing of occupied units on the prescribed date will cause the billing to the user to be based on the total number of dwelling units times the dwelling unit rate.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.068 WATER CONSUMPTION.

For the user classes billed on a consumption basis, all water supply shall be considered, whether public or private. In the event water meters are not in place, inoperative, or for some reason cannot be read, all consumption will be based on the estimated water consumed. Where estimations must be made for multiple billing periods, the user shall be allowed a consumption base allocation equivalent to the amount estimated, and all actual consumption billed at the appropriate rate. In the event estimated consumption exceeds actual consumption, the user will be credited with any amounts paid in excess of actual consumption. Where no meter exists, bills will be as provided in this subchapter.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.069 DISPOSAL OF ON-SITE WASTES.

(A)    On-site disposal waste. Charges for dumping on-site disposal wastes at the city’s sewage treatment plant shall be based on the measured gallonage deposited. These charges shall cover costs of operation and maintenance of the treatment plant and any appropriate local capital costs allocable to the treatment of these wastes and shall be in accord with the resolution of the City Council adopting rates for this class of use.

(B)    Hours. Hours for acceptance and locations for disposal of on-site wastes shall be established by the city. No waste will be accepted for disposal at any other time or location.

(C)    Samples. Prior to depositing, a sample of waste proposed to be deposited shall be taken. If there is no biological activity in the waste, or if any constituent of the waste is identified which violates the provisions of this chapter for deposit in public sewers, the waste will be rejected.

(D)    Restrictions. The city may establish maximum volume and strength restrictions on deposited waste. Any restrictions shall be promulgated in writing to the depositors of the waste.

(E)    Violations. Any waste deposited which violates the terms of this subchapter, shall be removed by the city with all costs of personnel, equipment, and damages assessed to the depositor.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.070 INCLUSION IN USER RATES.

Sewer user charges and other fees and assessments shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. User charges shall, at a minimum, provide sufficient revenue to meet the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement, and financing of the treatment works. Charge system shall be designed in accord with this chapter to provide a proportional distribution of costs based on the total waste loading of the system.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.071 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT.

The user of the sewage system shall be responsible for payment of the sewer user charge.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.072 BILLING PROCEDURES.

(A)    The users of the sewerage system shall be billed on a monthly basis for services after rendered in accordance with the rate schedule.

(B)    The date of the billing shall be in accordance with the monthly cycle billing.

(C)    Notice of billing, delinquencies, and all other required information shall be deemed to have been given by the city to property owners when notices are placed in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed as shown in the utility records. Failure of owner to provide address change information will not cause notice to be defective. Notice of termination of sewer service may also be made by hand delivery or posting at the consumer’s place of use.

(D)    Sewer user charges shall be due and payable to the city no later than ten days after the date of billing.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91; Am. Ord. 1926, passed 4-14-97)


51.073 DELINQUENCIES.

(A)    All bills unpaid ten days after date of issuance shall be considered delinquent and additional charge of 5% shall be made on the gross amount of the billing and notification by mail shall be given to the consumer at the address of the premises being served that the bill, with the 5% delinquency charge, shall be paid within ten days.

(B)    In the event of failure to pay sewer charges after they have become delinquent, the city shall have the right to remove or close sewer connections and to enter upon the property for accomplishing the purposes. The expense of discontinuance, removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring service, shall be a debt to the city and shall be paid by the user. The city may use the sewer user deposit to pay the debt.

(C)    Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including delinquent charges and the expense of removal, closing and restoration, shall have been paid.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.074 SEWER SERVICE REFUSED TO CUSTOMER WITH OUTSTANDING AMOUNTS OWED.

No user may receive sewer service at any location if the user has outstanding unpaid bills at any other location until all outstanding amounts owed by that user are paid in full.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.075 APPEALS.

(A)    Any sewer user who feels his user charge is unjust and inequitable as applied to his premises within the intent of the foregoing provisions may make written application to the city requesting a review of his user charge. The written request shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow and/or strength of his wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the measurements or estimates were made.

(B)    Review of the request shall be made by the City Council and the city administration and shall determine if it is substantiated or not, including recommending further study of the matter.

(C)    If the request is determined to be substantiated, the user charges for that user shall be recomputed based on the approved revised flow and/or strength data and the new charges thus recomputed shall be applicable retroactively up to six months, as applicable.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.076 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.

(A)    All industrial users shall be required to pay that portion of the federal assistance grant under PL 92-500 allocable to the treatment of waste from the users.

(B)    The system for industrial cost recovery shall be implemented and maintained according to the following requirements:

(1)    Each year during the industrial cost recovery period, each industrial user of the treatment works shall pay its share of the total federal grant amount divided by the recovery period.

(2)    The industrial cost recovery period shall be equal to 30 years or the useful life of the treatment works, whichever is less.

(3)    Payments shall be made by industrial users no less often than annually. The first payment by an industrial user shall be made not later than one year after the user begins use of the treatment works.

(4)    An industrial user’s share shall be based on all factors which significantly influence the cost of the treatment works, such as strength, volume and flow rate characteristics. As a minimum, an industry’s share shall be based on its flow versus treatment works capacity except in unusual cases.

(5)    An industrial user’s share shall be adjusted when there is a substantial change in the strength, volume or flow rate characteristics of user’s wastes, or if there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works.

(6)    An industrial user’s share shall not include any portion of the federal grant amount allocable to unused or unreserved capacity.

(7)    An industrial user’s share shall include any firm commitment to the city of increased use by the user.

(8)    An industrial user’s share shall not include an interest component.

(C)    This requirement applies only to those features of wastewater treatment and transportation facilities which have been constructed with federal assistance administered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under PL 92-500.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)

INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PROVISIONS


51.090 OBJECTIVES.

(A)    The objectives of this subchapter are:

(1)    To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city sanitary sewerage systems which will interfere with the operation of the system;

(2)    To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city sanitary sewerage system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere otherwise will be incompatible with the system;

(3)    To ensure that the quality of the city’s wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at level which allows its beneficial reuse;

(4)    To protect the city and city personnel who may come into contact with sewage, biosolids and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public;

(5)    To preserve the hydraulic capacity of the city’s wastewater system;

(6)    To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the city’s wastewater system; and

(7)    To ensure the city is able to comply with its NPDES permits conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements and any federal or state laws which the city’s wastewater system subject to.

(B)    This subchapter provides for the regulation of discharges to the city wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain industrial users, through establishment of general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures and requires user reporting.

(C)    This subchapter shall apply to all activities within the boundaries of the city, and to activities and persons outside the city who cause or permit a discharge, direct or indirect, to the city’s sanitary sewerage systems.

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97)


51.091 ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.

(A)    Abbreviations. The following are a list of abbreviations that may appear in the document and be relative to the USEPA National Pretreatment Program:

	CFR	Code of Federal Regulations

	LC50	Lethal concentration of 50% of the test organisms

	l	Liter

	MGD	Million gallons per day

	mg/l	Milligrams per liter

	RCRA	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act

	SIC	Standard industrial classification number issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget

	SWDA	Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.)

	TSS	Total suspended solids

	TTO	Total toxic organic

	USC	United States Code

(B)    Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If this section expressly provides a different definition than ordinances or resolutions of the city, this section shall prevail. Certain terms are listed with reference to a specific statute or rule, which definitions are incorporated by reference.

ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) amended.

AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. The meaning and scope of 40 CFR 403.5(a)(2).

APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. For any specified pollutant, city prohibitive discharge standards, specific limitations on discharge, state pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards, whichever standard is more stringent.

APPROVAL AUTHORITY. Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).

AS AMENDED. The latest version of a statute, rule, or ordinance in effect on the date this subchapter is adopted. Citation of any statute or rule shall be deemed to be to the amended version.

AS APPROVED BY THE CITY. The written approval by an authorized employee of the city, according to the provisions of this subchapter and other applicable standards, and based upon a written request by a user or permittee.

AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF A USER. If the industrial user is a corporation, AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:

(1)    The president, secretary or a vice president of the corporation in charge of principal business function or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or

(2)    The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

(a)    If the industrial user is a partnership, association or sole proprietorship, AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or the proprietor.

(b)    If the individual user is representing federal, state or local governments, or an agent thereof, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a director or highest official, appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility.

(c)    The individuals described in the divisions above may designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE of the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters for the company, and the authorization is submitted to the city.

BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20⋅C., expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter or mg/l).

BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received the discharge from soil;, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewers, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building walls.

BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.

BYPASS. The intentional diversion of one or more waste streams or processes from any portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility.

CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. Any regulations containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with Sections 307 (b) and (c) of 33 U.S.C. 1317 which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-47 incorporated herein by reference.

CHANGE IN USE. Changes defined in development, and shall include conversion from residential to any other use including multi-family uses, and shall include an increase to change in the sewage strength, pH, character or potential discharge of hazardous substances.

CITY. The City of Hermiston, Oregon, and shall consist of the City Manager or designated representative unless specifically referred to the City Council in the subchapter.

CLARIFIER. An interceptor for oil and grease with sedimentation provision.

COLLECTION SYSTEM. The system of public sewers to be operated by the city and designed for the collection of sanitary sewage.

COLOR. The optical density at the visual wave-length of maximum absorption relative to distilled water. 100% transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.

COMMERCIAL. All buildings or structures which are not defined for the purposes of these sections as residential or industrial in keeping with the city’s zoning and building code provisions.

COMMERCIAL USER. Any premises used for commercial business purposes that are not an industry as defined in this subchapter.

COMMERCIAL INDEPENDENT DISCHARGE. Any business or industry that possesses an independent licensed and permitted wastewater discharge system. Any classification must maintain independent facilities with approval of appropriate regulatory agencies and provide discharge of domestic waste to the public treatment works.

COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on either an increment of flow or time.

CONTROL AUTHORITY. The City of Hermiston, Oregon, or city.

COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use to which the only pollutant added heat, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, non-contact cooling water or refrigeration.

CUSTOMER. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group or owner, who receives utility services from the city such as water and sewer.

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY (DEQ). Where appropriate, the term may be used as a designation for the Director of the Department or other duly authorized official of the Department.

DEVELOPMENT. The conversion or change in character of occupancy or use a building which would place the structure in a different building group as defined in the Uniform Building Code; the erection of a new structure; the demolishing of existing building for the conversion of property to a differing use; the creation of gasoline pumps, drive-up windows, traffic islands or similar alterations which channelize, alter or increase the traffic volume or pattern on adjacent roadways. DEVELOPMENT, for purposes of this subchapter, shall not mean interior remodeling, repairs or maintenance of improvements to any existing structure that does not increase the volume of the structure. Specifically, exempted under the subchapter are building facades, roof or exterior wall repair or replacement, heating, ventilating or electrical alterations or activities similar in character.

DEVELOPMENT SITE. An area consisting of a parcel or tract of land specifically identified by a person, as the land to be altered or developed. All required area to meet parking standards and similar requirements for a particular development shall be included in the tern however, the total property ownership of the proponent will not be considered on the site, if is not necessary to the development.

DISCHARGE. The DISCHARGE or the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307 (b), (c) or (d), of the Act.

DOMESTIC or SANITARY WASTE. The liquid and water-borne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes, free from industrial wastes and of the character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the city wastewater system or by means of a private sewage disposal system.

DWELLING UNITS. Any housing unit with sanitary and kitchen facilities design to accommodate one or more residents, multiple housing units, mobile homes and trail, spaces, but excluding commercial or transient housing units such as a hotel and motel units and retirement homes with ten or more units under one roof, containing therein a dining room facility regularly open a minimum of six days per week and designed for the use of the residents and their guests. Independent laundry facilities serving multi-family, mobile homes and trailer units shall be considered a Dwelling Unit.

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (USEPA or EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.Where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of the agency.

EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307 (b) and (c) of 33 U.S.C. 1317 of the Act which will be applicable to the source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.

GARBAGE. All refuse and solid wastes, including ashes, rubbish in cans, debris generally; dead animals, street cleanings and industrial wastes and things ordinarily and customarily dumped; solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, dispensing of food; and from the handling, storage and sale of produce, but not including sewage and body waste.

GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.

GREASE. Animal- or vegetable-derived oil or GREASE.

INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGES. The meaning of 40 CFR 403.3(g).

INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person which is a source of indirect discharge which also has the same meaning as defined in 40 CFR Part 403.3 (h).

INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. Any non-domestic wastewater originating from a non-residential source.

INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed so as to adjust, separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from sewage and to permit normal sewage liquid wastes to discharge from the user’s premises into the public sewer system.

INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharge from other sources both:

(1)    Inhibits or disrupts the municipal wastewater system, its treatment processes operations, or its solids handling processes; use or disposal; and

(2)    Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the NPDES permit (including an increase in magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations of permit issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations); Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), (including Title H, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act, as defined in 40 CFR 403.3 (i).

LOCAL LIMITS/SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS. Enforceable local requirements developed by POTW’s to address federal standards as well as state and local regulations.

MEDICAL WASTES. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproduct pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.

NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, PRETREATMENT STANDARD, or STANDARD. The meaning of 40 CFR Sec. 403.30 (j).

NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, 40 CFR 403.5, DEQ or by the city which prohibits the discharge of certain types or characteristics of wastewater.These prohibitions can be general or specific.

NEW SOURCE.

(1)    Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under Section 307 (c) of the Act which will be applicable to the source, if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with this section provided that:

(a)    The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located;

(b)    The building, structure, facility or installation completely replaces the process production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

(c)    The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site in determining whether there are substantially independent factors as the extent to which a new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.

(2)    Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not create a new building, structure facility or installation meeting the criteria of the divisions above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.

(3)    Construction of a NEW SOURCE as defined under this division has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(a)    Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

1.    Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or

2.    Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of NEW SOURCE facilities or equipment;

(b)    Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities equipment that is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this division.

NON-DOMESTIC POLLUTANTS (INDUSTRIAL). Any substances other than human waste and household gray water (shower, dish washing operations, etc.)

NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). Permit program of USEPA.

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M). All activities, goods and services which are necessary to maintain the proper capacity and performance of the treatment works for which works were designed and constructed. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE shall include replacement as defined hereinafter.

OTHER WASTES. Include wastes other than human waste, but are not limited to ashes, cinders, industrial sludges, sand, mud, straw, insoluble shavings, metal, glass, rag feathers, tar, creosote, waste antifreeze, plastics, wood, animal paunch contents, offal, blood, bones, meat trimmings and wastes, fish or fowl heads, entrails, trimmings and wastes, lard, tallow, baking dough, chemicals, paint residues, cannery waste bulk solids, hair and fleshing or plastic or paper dishes, cups or food or beverage containers, whether whole or ground.

OWNER. The person(s) who may hold title to or lease the property for which was service has or will be provided.

PASS THROUGH. The occurrence of an indirect discharge which exits the POTW into water of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).

PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.

pH. The logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of the hydrogen ion expressed in grams per liter of solution, indicating the acidity or alkalinity of the solution.

POLLUTANT. Any substance discharged into the system that, if discharged directly, would alter the quality of the water of the state to a degree which unreasonably affects the water for beneficial use.

PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing the pollutants into the municipal wastewater system.The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes or by other means.

PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT. Any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than national pretreatment standards, imposed on an industrial user.

PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain types or characteristics of wastewater as established by EPA, DEQ and/or the Director.

PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than a half-inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.

PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer, either sanitary or storm, in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.

PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORK (POTW). A "treatment works" as defined Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned by the state or municipality.The definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment works.

RECEIVING STREAM or WATER OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.

REPLACEMENT. Acquisition and installation of equipment, accessories appurtenances that are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works were designed and constructed.

SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

SERVICE AREAS. The area served by the treatment works and for which there is no uniform user charge system.

SEWAGE. Water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with the ground, surface, storm or other waters as may be present.

SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

SHALL. Is mandatory; "May" is permissive.

SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Except as provided in division (3) below, the term SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER means:

(1)    All industrial users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N;

(2)    Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiling blow-down wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather, hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as by the Control Authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12 (a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8 (f)(6)); and

(3)    Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in division (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Control Authority (as defined in 40 CFR 403.12 (a)) may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition receive from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8 (f)(6), determine that the industrial user is not a significant user.

SLUGLOAD. Any pollutant including BOD and COD, released in a non-routine, episodic, non-customary batch discharge at a flow rate or concentration which has the potential to cause a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions in §51.092.

STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries stone and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial waste, other than unpolluted cooling waters.

STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.

SUSPENDED SOLIDS or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial wastes.

TOXIC POLLUTANTS or POLLUTANTS. Those substances listed in 40 CFR Part 122, Appendix D, which is expressly incorporated herein, and any other substance(s) which, either singly or by interaction, may injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process; may constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or may exceed any limitation adopted as a Categorical Pretreatment Standard.

UPSET. An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in this regulation, or limitation of a discharge permit, due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance or careless improper operation thereof.

USEPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.

USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city wastewater collection system and treatment facility. USER is also defined as the person who is responsible for the payment of the sewer system charge.

USER CHARGE. The periodic charges levied on all users of the public treatment works, and shall, at a minimum, cover each user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance.

WASTE. Wastewater and all other WASTE substances, liquid, solid or gaseous WASTE resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development recovery or processing of natural resources.

WASTEWATER. Waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer.

WASTEWATER SYSTEM or SYSTEM or CITY WASTEWATER SYSTEM or CITY SYSTEM. All city treatment works; all city sewers, pipes, and other conveyances discharging thereat and all devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.This shall include any portion of the system owned and maintained by a city.

WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuous or intermittently.

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97)


51.092 GENERAL SEWER USE CONDITIONS.

(A)    General discharge prohibitions.

(1)    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, road runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.

(2)    Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to the sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the City Administration. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city and applicable regulatory agencies to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.

(3)    No Industrial User (IU) shall discharge, cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general and specific prohibitions apply to all IUs of the city’s wastewater system whether or not the user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

(B)    Specific discharge prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes into the system:

(1)    Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the facilities or operations of the city. This prohibition include waste streams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140⋅F or 6⋅C, using the test method specified in 40 CFR 261.21; or any waste stream which two consecutive readings on an explosive hazard meter, at the point discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), are more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.

(2)    The flammable or explosive substances including, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, hexane, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehyde peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.

(3)    Solids (greater than 1/2-inch in any dimension) or viscous substances (including but not limited to petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater system including, but not limited to: animal and vegetable-based fats, wax, grease or oils, emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32⋅F and 150⋅F (0⋅C and 65⋅C).

(4)    Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, personnel of the city system, unless the city approves the waste in variance because special conditions in the system, but in no case shall the pH be less than 5.0.

(5)    (a)    Any wastewater containing pollutants or other wastes in sufficient quantity (flow concentration including, but not limited to BOD, COD, etc.), either singly or by interaction, to pass through or interfere with any wastewater treatment or solids handling and utilization process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed any limitations adopted as categorical pretreatment standards.

(b)    A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified in the "Toxic Pollutant List" set forth in 40 CFR Part 122, Appendix D.

(c)    All toxic pollutants shall be deemed to be prohibited or regulated substances for purposes of this subchapter.

(6)    Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which either singly or by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair. No discharge shall result in toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the collection or treatment system in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems.

(7)    Any substance which may cause the system’s effluent or treatment residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process or any substance which may cause the system to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state standards applicable to the solids management methods being used.

(8)    Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.

(9)    Any substance discharged in such a strength as to potentially cause the city system to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits.

(10)    Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city.

(11)    Any substances identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261, except specifically authorized by the city.

(12)    Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in any city treatment plant resulting in interference; but in no case, wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW (measured at the nearest downstream manhole) which exceeds 104⋅F or 40⋅C.

(13)    Any slugload.

(14)    Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water, rainwater, groundwater, surface drainage, roof drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds or pool (except filter backwash water from swimming pools and to reject water) unless prior written approval has been obtained from the city.

(15)    Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes (except those included in "Oregon Regulations for the Control of Radiation," OAR 333-22-150, of the half-life or concentration as to exceed limits established by the city or any applicable state or federal regulations.

(16)    Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plants effluent thereby violating the city NPDES permit.

(17)    Materials which exert or cause:

(a)    Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not limited to fullers, earth, lime substrate and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);

(b)    Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);

(c)    Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD) or chlorine requirements in the quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; and/or

(d)    Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.

(18)    Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.

(19)    Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in a manner so that these wastes could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system.

(C)    Dilution. No user shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way, for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this subchapter or its discharge permit or in lieu of proper disposal of any material as solid waste. The city may impose mass limitations on dischargers that in its judgment appear to be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements of this section, or in cases where the imposition of mass limitations is otherwise deemed appropriate by the city.

(D)    More stringent limitations. The city retains the right to amend this subchapter to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the city system when deemed necessary.

(E)    Categorical pretreatment standards. IU’s subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.

(F)    State requirements. Users are required to comply with applicable state pretreatment standards and requirements set out in OAR Chapter 340. These standards and requirements are incorporated herein.

(G)    Specific pollutant limitations and local limitations. In addition to categorical pretreatment standards referenced in other portions of this subchapter, no SIU shall discharge wastewater containing pollutants into the system in excess of limitations specified in its wastewater discharge permit or other limits established by the city. The city may establish and revise from time to time standards for specific restricted substances. These standards shall be developed in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.5 and shall implement the objectives of this subchapter. Standards established in accordance with this section will be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of Section 307(d) of the Act. Wherever a discharger is subject to both categorical pretreatment standards and a local limit for a give pollutant, the more stringent shall apply.

(H)    Mass limitations. The city may issue mass limitations for dischargers in addition to or in place of concentration-based limitations.

(I)    Grease interceptor. A grease interceptor shall be installed on all building sewers for all commercial and multiple dwelling unit users. Any conversion to commercial or multiple dwelling use may be required to install a grease interceptor. The requirement for a grease interceptor may be waived by the city administration when a written request is filed indicating all of the following:

(1)    The waste stream from the commercial establishment meets the terms of domestic waste defined in this subchapter; and

(2)    No kitchen facilities for public service or service to more than ten residents or dwelling units as defined herein.

(J)    Oil and sand interceptors. Oil and sand interceptors shall be required when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city administration and shall be located as to be ready and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The city administration shall be the final determination of the requirements.

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97) Penalty, see §51.999


51.093 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PERMITS.

(A)    Discharge requirements.

(1)    When requested by the city, an IU discharging or proposing to discharge industrial or commercial wastewater into any public sewer to the city system shall first apply for an industrial wastewater discharge permit, hereafter called "discharge permit" from the city.

(2)    This discharge permit is required in addition to the commercial connection permit required for sanitary/domestic discharge.

(3)    It is a violation of this subchapter for any IU to discharge non-domestic wastewater into the system if an application has been requested and a permit has not be issued.

(B)    Application for discharge permit. Application for a discharge permit shall to made to the city on a city-approved format. Unless a specific exemption is granted in writing by the city, no discharge of non-domestic wastewater from the facility shall be allowed nor shall a permit be issued unless all conditions and provisions of this subchapter are met. A new application shall be required whenever federal categorical standards apply to a discharge, or when an SIU proposes a substantial change in its discharge. An application shall include a "baseline monitoring report" described in §51.094 (D), where applicable.

(C)    Application time frame. Proposed new IUs shall apply for a discharge permit at least 90 days prior to the date that the discharge is proposed to commence. Additional data, information and drawings may be requested before a discharge permit is issued. The permit applicant shall promptly provide all requested information to the city.

(D)    Hazardous waste compliance. Any industrial user who commences discharging after August 23, 1990, shall provide written notification in accordance with 40 CFR 403.120 of the discharge of any substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261.

(E)    Certification. All applications, reports and information submitted to the City shall be signed and certified in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(l). Any reports required in this subchapter and any other documents required to be submitted to the city or maintained by the industrial user shall be subject to applicable civil and criminal provisions of the city’s rules and regulations, state law relating to fraud and false statements. In addition, the industrial user shall be subject to:

(1)    The provisions of 18 USC Section 1001 relating to the fraud and false statements;

(2)    The provisions of Sections 309(c)(4) of the Clean Water Act, governing false statements; and

(3)    The provision of Section 309(c)(6) of the Act regarding responsible corporate officers.

(F)    Application/permit evaluation period. The city will evaluate the application and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete permit application, the city will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied.

(G)    Application/permit rejection. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the city’s sewer system, which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in other sections of this subchapter, and which in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the system, or which otherwise create a hazard to life, worker safety or constitute a public nuisance, the city may take any of the following actions:

(1)    Reject the wastes;

(2)    Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition prior to discharging to the system;

(3)    Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or

(4)    Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not converted by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of §51.096 of this chapter.

(H)    Compliance schedules. The city may require compliance schedules in any permit to ensure that the appropriate technology is installed in a time period acceptable to the city.

(I)    Permit contents. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain at a minimum the conditions of 40 CFR 403.8 (f)(1)(iii)(A)-(E). In addition, permits may contain the following:

(1)    Fees and charges to be paid upon initial permit issuance;

(2)    Limits on average and maximum rates and time of discharge and requirements for flow regulations and equalization;

(3)    Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facility compatible with facilities of the city;

(4)    Compliance schedules;

(5)    Requirements for submission of special technical reports or discharge reports where the same differ from those prescribed by this subchapter; and

(6)    An effective date and expiration date of the permit.

(J)    Right of revision or permit modification. The city reserves the right to amend any wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder in order to assure compliance by the city with applicable laws and regulations. Upon promulgation, a new federal categorical standard for a particular industrial subcategory, if more stringent than the limits established under the city’s current rules and regulations, will supersede the local standard. Permits will be modified as soon as possible subsequent to a change in the federal requirements. The city shall notify the user of any proposed changes in its permit prior to the effective date of the change.

(K)    Permit duration and property interest acquired. All wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for an initial period not to exceed five years as determined by the city. All permits are subject to amendment, revocation, suspension or termination as provided in these rules. No user acquires any property interest by virtue of permit approval. Continued approval is expressly contingent upon compliance with all applicable federal, state and location requirements.

(L)    Limitations on permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to specific user for a specific operation and are not assignable to another user or transferable to an other person or location without the prior written approval of the city. If a permitted industry facility is sold, the seller shall provide a copy of the existing discharge permit to the new owner or operator.

(M)    Wastewater discharge permit revocation. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for any of the following reasons:

(1)    Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

(2)    Falsifying self-monitoring reports or other required reports;

(3)    Tampering with monitoring equipment or sample;

(4)    Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises or records;

(5)    Failure to meet effluent limitations;

(6)    Failure to pay fines, penalties or sewer service charges;

(7)    Failure to meet compliance schedules;

(8)    Failure to complete a wastewater survey;

(9)    Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; or

(10)    Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of the permit or the subchapter.

(N)    Voiding permits. Permits shall be voided upon non-use or cessation of operations for a period of two years or longer, transfer of business ownership or upon issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit replacing a previous permit.

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97) Penalty, see §51.999


51.094 RESPONSIBILITY OF PERMIT HOLDER.

(A)    Sampling facilities. When required by the city, the IU shall provide and operate at the users expense, a monitoring facility, together with necessary meters and other appurtenances to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of each industrial sewer discharge to the city. The monitoring facility shall be approved by the city prior to being installed. When possible the sampling site shall be located outside the building or structure, on the user’s premises and be easily accessible from a public road, street, parking lot or paved area. The user shall maintain safe access to the sampling site at all times.

(1)    There shall be ample room in or near the facility to allow for accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the permit holder, as directed in the city-approved permit.

(2)    All sampling facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. The sampling facility may be revised, but the city must approve these revisions. All sampling facility plans must be submitted to and approved by the city prior to construction, regardless of whether or not the standard details are used. Construction shall be completed within 60 days of city approval or within ten days of receipt of permit by the permit holder, except as otherwise approved by the city.

(B)    Operation and maintenance. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, the owner, at his expense, shall maintain then continuously in satisfactory and effective operation.

(C)    Plans review.

(1)    All plans for pretreatment facilities, interceptors, etc., required pursuant to these rules shall be approved by the city prior to implementation. Approval of pretreatment facilities, interceptors, etc., by the city, does not relieve the owner of the responsibility to install and operate equipment necessary to perform the required function and to meet all permit requirements.

(2)    The permit holder shall maintain records of all pretreatment facilities which reflect routine maintenance check dates, calibration, cleaning, waste removal dates, manifests of wastes removed from the site and the means of disposal of accumulated wastes.

(3)    Approval by the city of plans under this section does not represent assurance that the facilities will meet a discharge permit.

(D)    Control of discharge. It shall be the responsibility of the user to control the discharge into the city sewerage system or any private or side sewer which drains into the city’s system so as to comply with this subchapter and the requirements of any applicable wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter. Notwithstanding an permit conditions, the city may (after notification to the user) order that any discharge which may appear to present an imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of persons be immediately and effectively halted from entering the collection system.

(E)    IU facility inspections. The city may inspect the facilities of any IU to determine compliance with the requirements of city rules and regulations. The user shall allow the city or its representatives to enter upon the premises of the user at all reasonable hours and without prior notification by the city, for the purposes of inspection, sampling, and records examination and copying. The city shall have the right to set upon the user’s property the devices as at necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operation:

(1)    Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification personnel from the city, state, and USEPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.

(2)    The city, state, and USEPA shall have the right to set up or require installation of, on the industrial user’s property, the devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, and/or metering of the user’s operations.

(3)    The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment, as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at the industrial user’s expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy.

(4)    Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing the access shall be borne by the industrial user.

(5)    Unreasonable delay in allowing city personnel access to the industrial user’s premises shall be a violation of this subchapter.

(F)    Sampling requirements. Except as otherwise expressly stated in a permit, sampling shall be performed according to this division. If an IU subject to self-monitoring and reporting requirements as set forth in their city discharge permit, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required in the discharge permit, using the procedures prescribed in 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4), the results of this monitoring shall be included in the IU’s reports.

(1)    SIUs shall submit to the city at least once every six months or a otherwise specified by the city, a description of the nature, concentration and flow of the pollutants required to be reported to the city. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136.

(2)    The IU shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of the operations.

(3)    A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, a 24-hour composite sample must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques when feasible. The city may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any IU that demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is unfeasible. In the case samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this would provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.

(4)    The IU shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this division. Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exists or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the IU shall measure the flows at concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit and supporting data shall be submitted to the city.

(5)    Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the USEPA Administrator determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling at analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other persons approved by the USEPA Administrator. This sampling and analysis may, upon approval by the city may be performed by the city in lieu of the industrial user.

(G)    Special agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, buy the industrial concern.

(H)    Records retention. All users subject to this subchapter shall retain and preserve for less than three years, all records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis made by or in behalf of a user in connection with its discharge. All records shall be subject to review by the city. The retention period may be extended beyond three years of the request of the city. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of an enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.

(I)    Wastewater permit renewals. SIUs may be required to apply for permit renewals within 90 days prior to the expiration date in the existing wastewater permit.

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97) Penalty, see §51.999


51.095 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

(A)    General requirements.

(1)    All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of wastewater to which reference is made in this section shall be in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136 or alternate protocols approved by EPA Region 10 Administrator or NPDES permit- specific basis and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon testing of suitable samples taken at the control manhole.

(2)    IUs may be required to submit test results from samples of their wastewater discharged or other appropriate information requested by the city on a routine and continuing basis for any or of the following reasons:

(a)    To comply with the terms and provisions of 40 CFR Part 403.12;

(b)    If requested by any applicable state or local public agencies;

(c)    If required to determine monthly sewer service charges as described by applicable city ordinance;

(d)    If deemed necessary by the city for the proper treatment, analysis or control wastewater discharges. The IU shall bear the costs of any tests and reports. The city shall have the right to enforce the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12. When deemed necessary by the city, an IU may be required to obtain, install, operate and maintain an automatic sampler and/or analyzer to monitor its industrial waste discharges; or

(e)    If required by the discharge permit.

(B)    User’s responsibility. It is the IU’s responsibility to keep informed of all state and federal wastewater analysis and reporting requirements. Any failure to do so shall not excuse the permit holder from compliance with the requirements.

(C)    Discharge reports. Discharge reports shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow, the nature and concentration of pollutants, and production and mass where require by the city.

(D)    Baseline monitoring report.

(1)    Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6 (a)(4), whichever is later, existing users currently discharging to or proposing to discharge to the city shall submit to the city a report containing the information listed in division (E) below.

(2)    At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, including existing users which have changed their operation or processes so as to become new sources, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in division (E). A new source shall also report the method it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards, and give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.

(E)    Information required. The information required by this section includes:

(1)    Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners;

(2)    Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility;

(3)    Description of operation. The user shall submit a brief description of the natural average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by the industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated processes;

(4)    Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).

(5)    Measurement of pollutants.

(a)    The industrial user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standard applicable to each process;

(b)    In addition, the IU shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in 40 CFR Part 136, or an city approved equal; and

(c)    A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. All other pollutants will be measured by composite samples obtained through flow proportional sampling technique. If flow proportional composite sampling is unfeasible samples may be obtained through time proportional sampling techniques or through four grab samples if the user proves the samples will be representative of the discharge.

(F)    Report on compliance with categorical deadlines. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater in the sewer system, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the waste stream, as required by division (D) above.

(1)    For IUs subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long term production rate. For all other IUs subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutants discharge per unit of production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the IU’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period.

(2)    This report shall also contain the average and maximum daily flows for the process waste streams, and whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on consistent basis. If they are not being met on a consistent basis, the report shall identify what additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance is necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance. This report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional.

(G)    Schedule of compliance. If the industrial user is required to install additional pretreatment or provide additional operation and maintenance, he or she will be required to submit a schedule.

(1)    The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of milestone dates for commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operations of additional operation and maintenance or pretreatment (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary, plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). No increment of progress shall exceed nine months.

(2)    The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the city including, at a minimum whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on the date and if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the, schedule established. This progress report shall be submitted no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress reports to the city.

(3)    If compliance milestone dates are not met or reports not submitted when due, the city may take appropriate enforcement action for lack of satisfactory progress toward compliance. (See §51.096.) Schedules of compliance may be inserted into an IU’s discharge permit, as provided in division (G).

(H)    Periodic compliance reports. Any IU subject to categorical pretreatment standards, or subject to sampling, testing and reporting schedules set out in the user’s permit shall submit to the city all reports required indicating the nature of the effluent discharged since the last reporting period.

(1)    The report shall include, but is not limited to, a record of the concentrations (and mass limited in the permit) of the limited pollutants that were measured and a record of all pH and flow measurements that were taken.

(2)    If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements listed above monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.

(I)    Reporting of violation/resampling requirement. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis an submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of violation.

(J)    Slugload reporting.

(1)    Dischargers shall notify the city immediately upon occurrence of a "slug" or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this subchapter. The notification shall include the location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, corrective action and steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact.

(2)    Any discharger who discharges a "slug(s)" of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city under state or federal law, and may also incur monetary penalties by the city.

(K)    Change in discharge. The IU shall report to the city any changes, permanent or temporary to the permittee’s premises or operations that may result in change of the quality or volume of the wastewater discharge.

(1)    Changes in the discharge involving the introduction of a waste stream(s) not included in or covered by the discharge permit application shall be considered a new discharge requiring completion of an application as described under §51.093. Any reporting shall not be deemed to exonerate the permittee from liability for violations of the subchapter.

(2)    All industrial users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any proposed anticipated change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p).

(L)    Notification of significant production change.

(1)    In accordance with 40 CFR 403.6 (c)(7), any IU operating under a city permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based standard shall notify the city with two business days after the IU has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month.

(2)    Any IU not notifying the city of anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long-term average production rate.

(M)    Industrial user hazardous waste reporting. Industrial users shall notify the city (POTW), the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other).

(N)    TTO reporting. Those industries which are required by EPA to eliminate and/or reduce the levels of toxic organics (TTO’s) discharged into the sewer system must follow the federal effluent guidelines for that industry.

(O)    Certification of all reports. All reports submitted by significant industrial user shall include the certification statement defined in 40 CFR 403.6 (a)(2)(ii), and signed by the appropriate official as designated in 40 CFR 403.12(l).

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97) Penalty, see §51.999


51.096 ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT.

(A)    Industrial user violation process. If the city determines that a violation has occurred or is taking place, a representative of the city shall make a reasonable effort to notify the user of the violation. All violations including the first violation shall receive a written notice of violation, and may also incur a monetary penalty.

(1)    All written notices of violations shall describe the violation and any potential penalty (monetary or additional pretreatment). The written notice may further require that response to the violation be submitted to the city within a ten day time period.

(2)    If a written notice of violation requires submittal of a response, the response shall include an explanation of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of future violations, and specific corrective or preventive action submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take emergency action without first issuing a notice of violation.

(B)    Violation.

(1)    A violation of limitations established under §51.092 of this subchapter, any applicable federal, state or city pretreatment standards, or specific requirements of a discharge permit shall constitute a violation of this subchapter and shall be cause for enforcement action by the city, including but not limited to levying of administrative penalties described in this section, regardless of the intent of the user. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense for purposes of computing the applicable penalty.

(2)    Whenever the city finds that any IU has violated or is violating this subchapter, wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the city shall cause to be served upon the IU a written notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be delivered to the user’s premises or be sent by regular mail to the address of the permit holder on record with the city. It may be sent together with the industrial user’s monthly billing notice.

(C)    Permit parameters.

(1)    For the maximum daily allowable concentration, if the concentration of any single sample (whether grab or a sample within a series) exceeds the limitations, a violation will have occurred;

(2)    For the monthly average allowable concentration, if the average of all sample(s) (grab or composite) taken exceeds the limitation, a violation will have occurred. One sample collected may constitute a monthly average violation.

(D)    Additional violation parameters. Included, but are not limited to the following:

(1)    For noncompliance with any special reporting requirements established by permit, written request of the city, or as specified by general federal pretreatment standards (40 CFR 403.12);

(2)    Pollutants prohibited in §51.092 are discharged into the system;

(3)    Failure to apply for and obtain a permit prior to discharge of industrial wastewater in the system.

(E)    IU notifying city of violation. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicating a violation, the industrial user shall notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also re-sample and report the results within 30 days of becoming away of violation pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(g)(2). Re-sampling must continue until it is evident the discharge is within compliance.

(F)    Affirmative defense. The city does not recognize the "affirmative action" defense defined in the federal regulations.

(G)    Consent orders. The city may enter into consent orders, assurance of volunteer compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the IU responsible for the noncompliance. Orders will include specific action to be taken by the IU to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders and upon issuance, orders shall be judicial enforceable.

(H)    Show cause hearing.

(1)    The city may order any IU which causes or contributes violation(s) of this subchapter, wastewater permits or orders issued hereunder or any other, pretreatment requirement, to appear before the city and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the IU specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and an order that the IU show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken.

(2)    The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered mail (return receiving requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. The notice may be served on any authorized representative of the IU. Whether or not the IU appears as notified, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date.

(I)    Compliance orders.

(1)    When the city finds that an IU has violated or continues to violate the subchapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, an order may be issued to the IU responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specific time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, device or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer.

(2)    In addition to compliance orders, the city may require additional self-monitoring for at least 90 days after consistent compliance has been achieved, after which time the self-monitoring conditions in the discharge permit shall control.

(J)    Significant noncompliance. Significant noncompliance is deemed to have occurred if a violation meets one or more of the following criteria:

(1)    Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same polluted parameter;

(2)    Technical review criteria (TRC) violations are defined here as those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC. (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

(3)    Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the city determines has caused alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);

(4)    Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the city’s exercise of its emergency authority, as defined in 40 CFR 403.8 (f)(1)(vi)(B), to halt or prevent a discharge;

(5)    Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance;

(6)    Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports (BMR), 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

(7)    Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and

(8)    Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation and implementation of the local pretreatment program.

(K)    Publication of significant violators. A list of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance (as defined above) during the 12 previous months, shall be annually published by the city in the largest daily newspaper, published in the municipality in which the city is located, summarizing the enforcement actions taken against users during the previous 12 months.

(L)    Other penalties.

(1)    If the violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time determined by the city, or as specified in a consent order or compliance order, or if there appears to be indications of repetition of the violation, a notice of civil penalties may be issued as described in the applicable city ordinance. The city may seek or assess a specific fine violation not to exceed $1,000 per day per violation of pretreatment standards and may impose an applicable compliance schedule. Compliance schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond any applicable federal deadlines.

(2)    Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the city may, in its discretion and at any time, impose discharge permit limitations penalties/charges or seek civil and criminal penalties pursuant to applicable city ordinance.

(M)    Cease and desist orders. When the city finds that an industrial user has violated or continued to violate this subchapter, any permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the city may issue an order to the industrial user directing it to cease and desist all violations and directing the user to:

(1)    Immediately comply with all requirements; or

(2)    Take appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

(N)    Administrative appeals of enforcement actions.

(1)    An industrial user desiring to dispute any fine, penalty or other administrative enforcement action under this subchapter must, within ten days of receipt of notice of any action, file a written request for review with the City Council and the city administration.

(2)    The request for review shall state any facts and mitigating circumstances which the IU wishes to be considered. Upon receipt of a request for review, the Council and city administration shall review the requests and any other information available. They shall render a written decision within 15 working days of receipt. The Council or city administration may sustain, reduce or eliminate any fine, and may modify any enforcement action upon a finding that:

(a)    The original action of the city in imposing a fine or other enforcement action was based upon a substantial error of fact, which shall be stated;

(b)    The original action of the city was based upon improper application of city ordinance or regulations to the facts, in which case the correct application shall be stated; or

(c)    The user has presented mitigating facts or circumstances to the city which would justify modification of the original order.

(3)    If the Council or city administration finds that the facts and application of this subchapter were correct, and mitigating circumstances do not justify modifying the original action, that shall sustain that action.

(O)    Emergency suspensions. The city may suspend the wastewater permit of an industrial user, whenever suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, interferes with the operation of the municipal wastewater system or which present or may present an endangerment to the environment.

(1)    Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of an industrial user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city may take steps as it deems necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent minimize damage to the system, its receiving stream, or to any person. The city shall allow the industrial user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, and no repetition is likely, unless termination proceedings set forth in §51.096 are initiated against the user.

(2)    An industrial user which causes or permits any discharge presenting immediate endangerment to the public or the environment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the city prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing discussed elsewhere in this subchapter.

(P)    Termination of permit.

(1)    In addition to all other penalties and remedies in the subchapter, the city may terminate the permit of any industrial user. Violations of the conditions of this subchapter, wastewater permits or orders issued hereunder is subject to permit termination. Justification for permit termination include, but are not limited to the following:

(a)    Violation of permit conditions;

(b)    Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

(c)    Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; and

(d)    Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.

(2)    Prior to terminating a permit, the city shall notify the permittee of its proposed termination. A show cause opportunity under other sections identified in this subchapter will be offered.

(Q)    Judicial enforcement remedies.

(1)    Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirements, the city, may petition the courts for the issuance of temporary or permanent injunction, as may be appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater permit, order or other requirement imposed by this subchapter on activities of the industrial user.

(2)    Other action as may be appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. The court shall grant an injunction without requiring a showing of a lack of an adequate remedy at law.

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97) Penalty, see §51.999


51.097 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING INDUSTRIAL USERS.

(A)    Miscellaneous information. The city may request at any time reports, data or information from any user to ensure compliance with all applicable laws by the city and the user. The user shall promptly provide the city with any reports, data or information requested.

(B)    Inspection warrants. Judges and magistrates authorized to issue search warrants may upon application of the city, issue an inspection warrant pursuant to this section. The warrant shall be allowed whenever the city has requested of the property owner or his/her agent access to any premises to ascertain information necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter and the request has been denied. Information necessary to carry out these provisions shall include, but not be limited to, verification of owner-supplied data.

(C)    Confidential information.

(1)    Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state laws.

(2)    Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2,302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.

(3)    When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user finishing a report that the information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose a trade secret or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this subchapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, and enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.

(D)    Pretreatment charges and fees. The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program which may include:

(1)    Fees for permit applications including the cost of processing applications;

(2)    Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including the cost of reviewing, monitoring reports submitted by the industrial user;

(3)    Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;

(4)    Fees for filing appeals;

(5)    Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this subchapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city.

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97) Penalty, see §51.999

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


51.110 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.

(A)    The city administration or other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city administration or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers of waterways or facilities for waste treatment.

(B)    While performing the necessary work on private properties, as defined in this chapter the city administration or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company; and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.

(C)    The city administration or other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91) Penalty, see §51.999


51.111 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.

Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except provisions on protection from damage, and except for the provisions of §§51.090 through 51.097, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.112 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of the violation.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.113 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATION.

The city may discontinue service for failure to observe all terms of this chapter. Any costs incurred for discontinuation will be paid by the user in accord with this chapter.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91)


51.999 PENALTY.

(A)    Any person who shall continue any violation of the provisions of §§51.002 through 51.076 beyond the time limit provided in §51.111 commits a Class A violation. Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

(Ord. 1737, passed 6-24-91; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(B)    Any user which is found to have violated any provision of §§51.090 through 51.097, permits and orders issued thereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement commits a Class A violation shall be fined in an amount designated by the city, if not specified, up to $1,000 may be assessed per violation. Fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. Fines assessed may take into consideration, the magnitude of the violation and the willingness of the industrial user to return to compliance. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines may be assessed for each business day during the period of violation.

(1)    Assessments may be added to the user’s next scheduled sewer service charge and the city shall have other collection remedies as may be available for other service charge fees.

(2)    Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties together with interest therefrom shall constitute a lien against the individual user’s property, and may constitute cause for revocation of the industrial user’s discharge permit. If an industrial user fails to file a timely and complete request to review enforcement action, the user shall be deemed to have consented to pay the fine assessed and to comply with all other terms of the enforcement action.

(C)    Any industrial user which has violated or continues to violate §§51.090 through 51.097, any order or permit thereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty allowed under the laws of the state, but not less than $1,000 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each business day during the period of this violation.

(1)    The city may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expense associated with enforcement activities including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.

(2)    In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, co-effective actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of the user and any other factors as justice requires.

(3)    Where appropriate, the city may accept mitigation projects in lieu of the payment of civil penalties where the project provides a valuable service to the city and the industrial user’s expense in undertaking the project is at least 150% of the civil penalty.

(D)    Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provisions of §§51.090 through 51.097, any orders or permits issued thereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to a specific fine violation not to exceed $1,000.

(1)    Any industrial user who knowingly makes any false statement, representations, or certification in any application, record report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to §§51.090 through 51.097 or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurately any monitoring device or method required under this subchapter shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to a specific fine violation not to exceed $1,000.

(2)    In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be punishable by a specific fine not to exceed $3,000 per violation per day.

(Ord. 1941, passed 11-24-97; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


CHAPTER 52 Water

Section

General Water Service Provisions

52.01    Definitions

52.02    Consent of users; service to be furnished only to premises in compliance with rules

52.03    Applications for water service, account set-up fee

52.04    Water to be metered; installation of meters and street service lines

52.05    Water meters

52.06    Applications for special service; requirements

52.07    Consumer deposits

52.08    Water service charges

52.09    Billing; delinquency

52.10    Use of fire hydrants; unauthorized use of waterworks system

52.11    Service refused to premises with conditions leading to contamination

52.12    Shut-off water not to be turned on by unauthorized persons

52.13    Unlawful acts

52.14    No resale or distribution of water

52.15    Construction of water mains

Water Shortage Emergency

52.25    Purpose and intent

52.26    Definitions

52.27    Application of provisions

52.28    First level of curtailment

52.29    Second level of curtailment

52.30    Enforcement

52.31    Variances

52.32    Provisions controlling

52.99    Penalty

GENERAL WATER SERVICE PROVISIONS


52.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CLASSIFICATION OF ACCOUNTS. The accounts of all consumers shall be classified by the Water Department as follows:

(1)    COMMERCIAL. Water service to apartment and boarding houses, hotels, offices, office buildings, retail and wholesale commercial establishments, laundries, private schools and colleges, private hospitals and other like premises where water is not used primarily for industrial purposes.

(2)    INDUSTRIAL. Water service to manufacturing and industrial consumers, including aircraft and metal product manufacturers, public utilities, stockyards, packing houses, grain elevators, bottling works, food processors and similar enterprises. On premises where manufacturing is the principal business, all services shall be classified as INDUSTRIAL.

(3)    MISCELLANEOUS. Water service for building and construction purposes to parties other than the city; for water sold at the pumping station; water service to circuses and other uses where the connection is of a temporary nature.

(4)    MUNICIPAL. Water service for MUNICIPAL and other public purposes other than public fire protection including usage for sewer and street flushing, street and sidewalk construction when done by the city; parks; schools; churches and Municipal buildings; county, state and federal agencies and departments.

(5)    RESIDENTIAL. Water service to private residences of one family or more than one family when each is supplied through a separate meter.

CONSUMER. Any person, firm or corporation furnished water by the Water Department.

CONSUMER SERVICE LINE. A supply pipe installed, maintained and owned by the consumer extending from the outlet side of the meter to the premises served.

CROSS CONNECTION. A connection direct or indirect, with water mains or street service lines leading to any other source of water or source of possible contamination.

MASTER METER. One meter measuring the water furnished to serve two or more premises.

METER. A mechanical device which measures and records the quantity of water furnished to the consumers.

METER SETTING. A box, vault or tile, with coverings, containing a meter and connecting appurtenances.

PREMISES.

(1)    A building or group of buildings occupied by a family unit or business entity and used for residential, business or commercial purposes;

(2)    A building or group of buildings used and operated as a hospital, educational or religious institutions;

(3)    A separate dwelling unit within a structure designated for multi-family occupancy;

(4)    A building containing areas and spaces separately rented to tenants;

(5)    A single tract of land upon which areas are rented for occupancy by mobile homes used for residential purposes;

(6)    A tract of land used for park, a playground or recreational purposes; or

(7)    Any other structure or structures, public or private, the use or occupancy of which requires water and water service.

SPECIAL SERVICE. Any water service that involves the installation of facilities and equipment other than designated as standard service which involves a use of water other than for normal residential, commercial or industrial purposes.

STANDARD SERVICE. Facilities normally installed for residential, commercial or industrial usage not requiring special or unusual methods of installation, construction and engineering.

STREET SERVICE LINE. A pipe with appurtenances connected to a water main for the purpose of controlling the flow of water and extending from the water main to the inlet side of the meter.

WATER MAIN. A water pipe owned by the city under the control of its Water Department to which street service lines may be connected.

WATER DEPARTMENT. An administrative unit consisting of city personnel headed by a Superintendent of Waterworks designated by the City Manager to conduct all operations in connection with the supplying and furnishing of water and water service by the city to consumers in the city and environs pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61)


52.02 CONSENT OF USERS; SERVICE TO BE FURNISHED ONLY TO PREMISES IN COMPLIANCE WITH RULES.

(A)    Every person, firm or corporation using water from a city’s waterworks system shall thereby be deemed to have consented and agreed to the terms and provisions of this subchapter and to have acknowledged the right of the Water Department to discontinue water services without notice in the event of failure of the consumer to make timely payment of all rates and charges herein below fixed and established or to otherwise comply with the terms and provisions hereof.

(B)    Water service will be furnished only to premises complying with the applicable plumbing and sanitary codes and regulations of the city and state.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61)


52.03 APPLICATIONS FOR WATER SERVICE, ACCOUNT SET-UP FEE.

(A)    Requests for water service shall be made at the office of the Finance Director/Recorder by or on behalf of the person, firm or corporation requesting water and/or water service. Persons requesting water and/or water service will be bound by the terms of this subchapter and all rules and regulations as may be adopted by the City Council in implementation of this subchapter. A non refundable account set up fee is due at the time of requesting water service. The account set up fee covers administrative costs including, but not limited to: setting up an account, reading the meter, verifying that water is on and other related matters. The amount and duration of the account set up fee will be and is set by resolution of the City Council from time-to-time.

(B)    If the application is for water service to premises not previously served, the following requirements shall be met:

(1)    Where water mains exist adjacent to the property to be served and upon submission to the Water Department of information as to the location and nature of the premises to be served with water, the applicant will be furnished with information as to the proposed location of the meter setting. If the customer’s service line has been installed prior to the application for service, it shall be the applicant’s responsibility to clearly mark the location thereof. The Water Department shall have sole jurisdiction, however, to determine the location of the street service line, and the feasibility of a connection to the customer’s service line. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility at his own expense to run his service line from the premises being served to the meter setting at or near the curb line. Service pipes and connections from the water main to and including the meter setting shall be placed within the line of the public right of way and shall be installed at the consumer’s expense by the Water Department. The City Manager or his designee shall determine a reasonable installation charge based on the actual average cost. All installation charges are payable in advance.

(2)    Where water mains adjacent to the consumer’s property have been installed under a construction reimbursement agreement as provided herein, the customer shall pay the construction charge established per front foot of property abutting the line in addition to all other charges prescribed.

(3)    Where water mains adjacent to the consumer’s property have been installed by the Water Department without assessment of the costs to the benefiting property, the consumer shall pay a construction charge to the city for exclusive credit to the utility fund as prescribed by resolution of the City Council. The charges shall be in addition to all other charges.

(4)    The applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and any leakage in the piping from the meter to place of use. Installation of the consumer’s service lines shall be done by the consumer personally or by a licensed plumber in accordance with city design and specifications and in accordance with the building and plumbing codes of the city. Installation shall avoid cross connections. Upon notification of the Water Department that a cross connection exists, service shall be refused until the same is eliminated to the satisfaction of the Water Department and/or the City Plumbing Inspector.

(5)    The Water Department shall determine the size of the meter to be installed, based upon information furnished by the applicant. Any change in meter size requested by a consumer after the initial meter installation shall be granted insofar as is reasonable, but the entire cost shall be borne by the consumer. In cases of dispute as to meter size, the Water Department shall have sole jurisdiction.

(6)    The size of the street service line shall be determined by the Water Department based upon information furnished by the applicant. However, in no case shall the street service line be the same size or any greater size than the water main to which it is connected. Any change in size or location of the street service line after the original installation shall be done at the consumer’s expense. Installation charges cover all cost of excavation, installation, connecting and resurfacing from the water main to the point where the meter is installed, including the meter box and the meter. Where service lines must be run a distance greater than 40 feet, the customer shall pay all costs incident to the excess footage.

(a)    Installation and maintenance. The installation and maintenance of service connections shall be performed only by the duly authorized employees of the Water Department.

(b)    Meters. Meters shall be installed at the customer’s end of the service connection and shall be owned by the Water Department and installed at the applicant’s expense.

(c)    Care of meter. It shall be the duty of the property owner or his agent to keep the meter box free of debris and to take all reasonable precautions to protect the meter from freezing. If the property owner or his agent shall neglect or refuse to protect the meter from freezing, he shall be charged with the cost of repairing any damage which may result from neglect or refusal.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1653, passed 3 14-88; Am. Ord. 1736, passed 6-24-91; Am. Ord. 1913, passed 11-25-96; Am. Ord. 2160, passed 8-10-09)


52.04 WATER TO BE METERED; INSTALLATION OF METERS AND STREET SERVICE LINES.

(A)    All water furnished to consumers shall be metered, except in cases where the Superintendent of Waterworks shall determine that the nature of a particular usage necessitates a measurement by other means.

(B)    The installation of meters and street service lines shall be in accordance with the following specifications and requirements:

(1)    One and only one street service line, meter setting, and meter shall be installed for each premise. Additional meters, meter settings, street service lines and other appurtenances may be installed as approved by the Superintendent of Waterworks, and all additional costs shall be borne by the applicant.

(2)    Street service lines shall be at right angles to the water main and street service lines shall not be installed unless sufficient footage of water main exists adjacent to the premises requesting service to allow meter setting installation free of obstructions such as fences, trees, driveways, culverts, and mail boxes.

(3)    The Water Department shall permit no master metering of water. Each and every unit, business, or place of business shall be on a separate service and meter excluding service to transient occupancy such as hotel, motel, recreational vehicle park and "hotel" as defined by the transient room tax ordinance. Where water is now supplied through one service to one or more separately owned premises through pipes previously installed, the Superintendent of Waterworks may, at his discretion, refuse to furnish water until separate services are provided. However, if the owner of premises whereon more than one unit or business is receiving water through a single meter and approval for same is granted by the Superintendent of Waterworks, service may be continued under the following conditions:

(a)    The minimum charge for the service shall be determined by multiplying the established minimum charge for the meter size installed in the service by the number of dwellings, units or businesses served through the single meter;

(b)    For the purpose of calculating the charge for water used through the meter the established rate structure shall be revised as follows: the number of gallons in each bracket of the established rate structure shall be increased by multiplying that number of gallons by the number of dwellings, units or businesses served through the single meter.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1972, passed 10-12-98)

Cross-reference:

Transient room tax, see Chapter 112


52.05 WATER METERS.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to open, interfere with, injure, deface or in any way impair the working of any water meter. It shall also be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized representative of the Water Department, to remove any meter from its setting.

(B)    No meter shall be installed or water used through a new consumer’s service line until approval therefor has been obtained from the office of the City Plumbing Inspector.

(C)    All meters now in service and hereinafter installed shall remain the sole property of the Water Department. Meters shall be installed only in public ways and it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct access thereto by the Water Department.

(D)    The Water Department shall have the right at any time to test meters but if the testing is not in pursuance of request of consumer, it shall be without charge.

(E)    Whenever the Water Department finds a meter to be inoperative, an adjustment of charges for the preceding billing period shall be made by averaging the water used for the corresponding billing period of the three prior years, or, if the records are not extant, from the best other method practicable.

(F)    Whenever the Water Department shall find a meter not measuring accurately according to the standards of the American Water Works Association, an adjustment of charges for the preceding billing period shall be made.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1560, passed 2-25-85) Penalty, see § 52.99


52.06 APPLICATIONS FOR SPECIAL SERVICE; REQUIREMENTS.

Applications for special service shall be made in writing in the same manner as required for standard service and shall, in addition, conform to the following requirements:

(A)    Applications for private fire service connections shall have attached a sketch showing pipes, valves, hydrants, tanks, openings and appurtenances contemplated. The sketch shall be submitted on a scale of one inch equals 50 feet. The applicant shall be required to pay the entire cost of the installation, including the connection to the main and necessary appurtenances. All new private fire service connections with the exception of the so-called "dry type" may be metered. All materials shall be approved by the Water Department, and all fire service lines must be provided with a suitable gate valve outside the building at or near the property line. The valve installed at the water main shall be under the exclusive control of the Water Department. All fire service lines shall be used exclusively for extinguishment of fires and no connection from any other use may be attached thereto. The size of fire service connections shall in no case be smaller than four inches and in no case attached or tapped to a water main of less than six inches. In the event a main extension is required for private fire service connection, the costs of same shall be borne by the applicant.

(B)    All miscellaneous special service shall be installed and maintained at the sole cost of the applicant and an advance of the estimated costs of installation shall be required as a condition precedent to the granting of the application. The billing for the service shall be determined by the Water Superintendent.

(C)    Any customer requiring pressures higher than normally maintained in the system, or abnormal quantities of water for fire protection or other special purposes, shall provide additional pumping and storage facilities within his or her property and shall also pay for the additional expense to the city in providing additional transmission mains or other facilities required to provide the special service, either through rates or through contributions to the construction of additional facilities.

(D)    Service of a special nature will be rendered only at the option of the city and under conditions which will not interfere with normal service to other customers.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61) Penalty, see § 52.99


52.07 CONSUMER DEPOSITS.

(A)    A separate account of each consumer deposit shall be made showing the date on which the deposit is received, the name of the depositor, and the amount thereof. The city shall pay to the consumer making the deposit (and to consumers who have made deposits prior to the enactment of this subchapter) interest at a rate as established by resolution of the City Council, the interest to be credited on the first day of January succeeding the deposit and on the first day of January thereafter, and shall be payable at the Finance Director/Recorder’s office in the City Hall, in cash, on demand of the depositor. Any interest credited shall be subject to call and payment at any time, but shall not draw interest.

(B)    Upon discontinuance of service the deposit shall be returned to the consumer together with unpaid interest on the same provided all bills for water, repairs, or other services rendered have been paid by the consumer and the consumer surrenders the original deposit receipt.

(C)    The advance deposit, together with the interest due thereon, may be applied to the payment of any accrued bills, or bills due on discontinuance of service.

(D)    Deposits received from consumers as security for the payment of service which remain uncollected for a period of two years after the discontinuance of service to the consumer may be transferred to the waterworks fund. The deposit money may be invested from time to time by the city.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1560, passed 2-25-85)


52.08 WATER SERVICE CHARGES.

(A)    Miscellaneous charges.

(1)    When water service shall have been terminated for any cause other than temporary discontinuance in the manner provided below, the consumer shall be charged a sum of money as established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of shutting off water service, and in the event the service is reinstated, shall be charged an additional amount as established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of reinstating the service.

(2)    If a consumer requests inspection and testing of a meter, a sum of money as established by resolution of the City Council as a testing fee shall be paid. If upon examination and test conducted in the presence of the consumer or his or her representative the meter is found to be inaccurate according to the standards of the American Water Works Association, a meter will be substituted and the water bill for the preceding billing period shall be adjusted.

(3)    Any consumer desiring to discontinue temporarily the use of water must make application therefor at the office of the Finance Director/Recorder not less than two days prior to the date on which the service is desired to be discontinued, and after the effective date of the discontinuance all charges for water and water service shall cease for the period during which the service shall be shut off, provided that the period of discontinuance shall not be less than 30 days.

(B)    All water bills rendered in accordance with the regular schedule of meter rates are due and payable when rendered and must be paid at the City Hall on or before ten days thereafter.

(C)    This governing body retains continuing jurisdiction and authority to change from time to time the schedules of rates and charges and the regulations herein provided as changes shall be determined expedient and necessary.

(D)    Charges for water used shall be as established by the City Council by resolution.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1560, passed 2-25-85)


52.09 BILLING; DELINQUENCY.

(A)    All bills for water and water services shall be rendered monthly at the same time that bills for sewage services rendered by the sanitary sewage treatment plant and system of the city are rendered; provided, however, that bills for miscellaneous accounts shall be rendered at times as shall be determined by the Superintendent of Waterworks in each separate instance. The officers or employees of the city charged with the duty of preparing bills for water and water service shall calculate the amount thereof and shall add the same to the amount of any bills presented to the consumer for sewage service, and the bills shall be collected as a combined bill for water and sewage service furnished the consumer.

(B)    All water bills shall be paid at the City Hall in the city or at other places as may be designated by the City Manager. All bills unpaid ten days after date of issuance shall be considered delinquent and an additional charge of 5% shall be made on the gross amount of the billing and notification by mail shall be given to the consumer at the address of the premises being served that the bill, with the 5% delinquency charge, shall be paid within ten days or water service to the property will be disconnected and a disconnection charge in an amount of money established by resolution of the City Council will be assessed. Notification of termination of water service may be made by mail or hand delivery or posting at the consumer’s place of use. If the bill not be paid within the period of ten days, water service to the property shall be disconnected and the service to the delinquent consumer shall remain disconnected until the consumer shall pay the full amount of all water and sewer bills, including the delinquency charge and also the disconnection charge and a reconnection charge in amounts of money as established by resolution of the City Council. It shall be the duty of the representative of the city at the time in charge of the collection of water bills to notify the Superintendent of Waterworks of all delinquencies in the payment of monthly bills and the Superintendent shall proceed immediately to disconnect the water service to any consumer who is in arrears for the period herein before specified.

(C)    Water service may also be shut off to any consumer by the Water Department without notice if the consumer shall tamper or in any way interfere with any meter, connections, service pipes, valves or other appurtenances belonging to the city or for any violation by a consumer of the terms of this or any other applicable ordinance of the city or the statutes of the state relating to the waterworks system.

(D)    In instances where the public health, safety or welfare so requires, the Water Department shall have the right to shut off the flow of water in its mains without notice but will endeavor insofar as possible to notify consumers affected of the intention to so interrupt the service. Interruption of service under the conditions shall not give rise to any claim on the part of any consumer against the Water Department of the city.

(E)    The Water Department does not guarantee to maintain any specific water pressure for its service and no complaint concerning the pressure shall give any right of claim against the city or the Water Department.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1560, passed 2-25-85; Am. Ord. 1926, passed 4-14-97)


52.10 USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS; UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATERWORKS SYSTEM.

(A)    Water necessary for municipal uses, such as the flushing of streets and sewers, street sweepers and dust control may be obtained from fire hydrants by authorized employees of the city. The use of water shall not be construed to include or authorize its use in connection with paving, sewer or other construction of public improvements performed by private contractors.

(B)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use water from any part of the waterworks system of the city without proper permit or other authority therefor from the Water Department. It shall further be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than an authorized representative of the city, to shut off or turn on water from any part of the city’s waterworks system, including fire hydrants; provided, however, that nothing in this section contained shall be construed as prohibiting plumbers duly licensed under the ordinances of the city from turning on or shutting off water service if such is necessary in the course of the work in which they are engaged.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61) Penalty, see § 52.99


52.11 SERVICE REFUSED TO PREMISES WITH CONDITIONS LEADING TO CONTAMINATION.

The Water Department may refuse to deliver water to any premises whereon any condition exists which might lead to the contamination of the public water supply and may continue to refuse the delivery of water to any premises until the condition is remedied.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61)


52.12 SHUT-OFF WATER NOT TO BE TURNED ON BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.

After the water has been shut off by the city, if it should be turned on by any person but the Water Superintendent or a person authorized by him, the meter will be removed, and it will not be replaced until the cost of removing and replacing the meter in addition to all charges and arrearages due have been paid.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61) Penalty, see § 52.99


52.13 UNLAWFUL ACTS.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation not authorized by the city to do, commit or assist in committing any of the following things or acts in the city:

(A)    To open or close any fire hydrant or stopcock connected with the waterworks system of the city, or lift or remove the cover of any gate, valve or shutoff thereof;

(B)    To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure or wantonly force open any gate, or door, or in any way whatsoever destroy, injure, or deface any part of any reservoir, standpipe, tank, building or buildings, or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs, or fixtures or property appertaining to the waterworks system;

(C)    To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps on any elevated water storage tank, reservoir, or standpipe of the waterworks system;

(D)    To place any telegraph, telephone, electric light pole, or any obstruction whatsoever within three feet of any fire hydrant;

(E)    To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for himself or others from private connections on premises contrary to the city regulations or ordinances;

(F)    To interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant, pipe, cock, valve, or other apparatus pertaining to the waterworks system, or to turn on or off the water in any street hydrant or other public water fixture or to hitch or tie any animal thereto;

(G)    To make or permit to be made any connection with the main or service pipes of the waterworks system, or to turn on or use the water of the system without first obtaining a permit therefor;

(H)    To cover over or conceal from view any water valve box, service or meter box;

(I)    To remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or to in any manner change, interfere with or with any water meter;

(J)    To turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly water charge or for the violation of any rule, regulation, or ordinance of the city.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61) Penalty, see § 52.99


52.14 NO RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF WATER.

No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the city supply to any person except upon application to and approval by the city. City water may be resold or distributed only at the rates, charges and fees established by the city and subject to the other conditions as deemed reasonable by the city.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1967, passed 9-14-98) Penalty, see § 52.99


52.15 CONSTRUCTION OF WATER MAINS.

(A)    The minimum size of water mains required to serve any part of the city shall be eight inches in diameter. Any developer or subdivider shall install the necessary water system and all appurtenant work at its sole expense. Should a development require water main sizing in excess of eight inches, the City Manager, or his/her designee, will make the final decision on the size of mains required to be installed by the developer or subdivider. If the City Manager, or his/her designee, requires the developer or subdivider to install water lines in excess of eight inches in order to provide for future water line capacity, the City Manager, or his/her designee, may negotiate a reimbursement agreement with the developer or subdivider for the balance between the developer’s or subdivider’s actual cost for materials of eight inch water mains and the size required by the city, subject to budget fund availability. Only the cost for increases in materials is reimbursable.

(B)    When any individual constructs a water main through undeveloped areas, or adjacent to property not currently served by the municipal utility, the individual initiating construction shall be required to pay for all construction in the manner provided in this subchapter. If no assessment for improvement is levied against adjacent property, the individual may request a reimbursement agreement with the city. The agreements shall provide for the city to collect a construction charge from any individual who connects a service connection to the main; charges to be established based on a front foot or area basis shall not exceed the actual installation cost of the system. All agreements shall preclude any payment for individuals connecting a water main as described herein to the furthest extent of the water mains included in the agreement.

(C)    An individual’s right to reimbursement through agreements shall not exceed ten years from the date of the completion of construction of the covered main. All payments to the original installer shall cease at the expiration of the agreement. A construction charge as provided herein may be collected by the city subsequent to the expiration of the agreement. Any fees so charges shall be credited to the utility fund exclusively for the improvement of production or distribution facilities of the city. This section shall not affect those agreements in place at the time of adoption of Ordinance 429.

(D)    The city may establish a charge by front foot or area for all mains within the municipal system installed by municipal contract or by municipal employees. Charges shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be payable when benefitted properties connect to the water system.

(1)    The construction charge shall apply to property which is not served by the water system at the time of construction and is not assessed for the costs of improvements. The construction charge established may vary by project and area dependent upon the costs of construction of the improvements.

(2)    All construction charges shall be paid in addition to all other fees prescribed in this ordinance. Failure to pay the charges, or provide for a payment agreement, shall be cause for denial of water service.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1653, passed 3-14-88; Am. Ord. 2028, passed 12-18-00)

WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY


52.25 PURPOSE AND INTENT.

(A)    Whenever the City Council by resolution declares that a water shortage emergency condition prevails in the area served by the city due to drought conditions and that the ordinary demands and requirements of water consumers cannot be satisfied without depleting the water supply of the city to the extent that there would be insufficient water for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection, this subchapter shall be in effect until the City Council by resolution declares the emergency conditions over. This subchapter establishes a first and second level of water curtailment to be initiated as water shortage conditions prudently dictate.

(B)    In order to conserve the city’s water supply for the greatest public benefit with particular regard for domestic use, sanitation and fire protection, the City Council hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water to take effect immediately upon the passing of a resolution declaring an emergency.

(C)    The specific uses regulated or prohibited in this subchapter are nonessential, and if allowed would constitute wasted water and shall be regulated.

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93)


52.26 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CUSTOMER. Any person using water supplied by the city.

PERSON. Any person, firm, entity, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

WATER. Water from the city, unless expressly provided otherwise or required by the contract.

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93)


52.27 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS

The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all customers using water provided by the city.

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93)


52.28 FIRST LEVEL OF CURTAILMENT

(A)    Nonessential residential uses defined; prohibiting nonessential water use. Uses of water for residential purposes in excess of the following daily usage allotment are determined to be nonessential and are prohibited:

(1)    The use of water to wash any motorbike, motor vehicle, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle, except at a commercial fixed washing facility existing prior to the enactment of this subchapter or one that recycles and/or reuses the water.

(2)    The use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced area, or building or structure.

(3)    The use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi pools except for neighborhood fire control (when deemed needed by the City Manager), where the pools have recycling water systems and evaporative covers, or where the use of the pool is required by a medical doctor’s prescription.

(4)    The use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support pre-existing fish life, e.g. goldfish, etc.

(B)    Nonessential commercial or industrial use. The following commercial or industrial water uses are hereby determined to be nonessential and are prohibited:

(1)    The use of water to serve a customer in a restaurant unless requested by the customer;

(2)    The use of water for scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support fish life;

(3)    The use of water from hydrants for construction purposes, (unmetered), fire drills or any purpose other than fire fighting;

(4)    A minimum of 15% reduction in the use of water by a cemetery (owned by a separate taxing district), golf course or similar outdoor sport activities to irrigate any portion of its grounds except those areas designated as tees and greens or similar limited areas;

(5)    The use of water for dust control.

(C)    Gutter flooding. No person or customer shall cause or permit water to run to waste in any gutter or drain.

(D)    Regulation of applications for new water service. No applications for new, additional, further expanded or increased- in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains or other water service facilities of any kind shall be allowed, approved or installed during the period of this emergency, except for replacement of leaking water lines and interties (looping) of system.

(E)    Discontinuance of service.

(1)    The City Manger may, after one warning by certified mail or in person by staff, disconnect the water service of any person or customer whenever he determines that the person or customer has failed to comply with any provisions of this subchapter. Service so disconnected shall be restored only upon payment of the turn-on charge, in an amount of money as established by resolution of the City Council, or as otherwise specified by law, and any other costs incurred by the city in the discontinuance of service and the giving of suitable assurances to the city that the action causing the discontinuance will not be repeated.

(2)    In addition to the foregoing, the city may, prior to restoration of service, install a flow-restrictive device on the customer’s service.

(F)    Variances.

(1)    The City Manager may in his sole discretion, in writing, grant temporary variances for prospective uses of water otherwise prohibited after determining that due to unusual circumstances to fail to grant the variance would cause an emergency condition affecting health, welfare, sanitation or fire protection of the applicant or the public.

(2)    No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this subchapter occurring prior to issuance of the temporary variance.

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93) Penalty, see § 52.99


52.29 SECOND LEVEL OF CURTAILMENT.

In addition to the restrictions in §52.28, the following curtailments are to be enforced:

(A)    One or two residential units - daily usage allotment.

	One permanent resident 	50 gallons

	Two permanent residents	85 gallons

	Three permanent residents	115 gallons

	Each additional permanent resident	30 gallons

(B)    Multi-residential units.

(1)    Daily usage allotment for each unit shall be 100 gallons per day.

(2)    Each customer in whose name water is supplied to a residence, or residences or apartment or other dwelling units, shall upon request of the City Manager advise the city under penalty of perjury the number of permanent residents using water supplied to the residence, residences, apartments or other dwelling units. If the customer fails to advise the City Manager, each residence, apartment or dwelling unit shall be permitted the water allocation herein provided for one permanent resident.

(C)    Nonessential commercial uses defined. Uses of water for commercial purposes in excess of the following amounts are determined to be nonessential and are prohibited:

(1)    The use of water for schools (irrigation), parks, cemeteries, recreation areas, golf courses, community food gardens, residential gardens, and similar recreation or memorial type facilities in excess of 75% of the amount consumed in the same time period of the previous year.

(2)    The use of water for schools (domestic), for nursery facilities, restaurants, shopping centers, gasoline service stations, health and swim clubs, and all other commercial uses in excess of 90% of the amount consumed in the same time period as the previous year.

(D)    Nonessential industrial uses defined. Uses of water for industrial purposes in excess of the following amounts are determined to be nonessential:

(1)    The use of water for manufacturing, food processing, cooling or cleaning of equipment in excess of 85% of the amount consumed in the same time period as the previous year. Customers may, with proper documentation of need, obtain a variance from the City Manager, granting the level of relief needed.

(2)    The use of water for agricultural irrigation in excess of 75% of the amount consumed in the same time period as the previous year.

(E)    Other nonessential uses. All other uses of water not expressly set forth in this subchapter in excess of 75% of the amount consumed in the same time period as the previous year are determined to be nonessential.

(F)    Determination of amount of prior water consumption. The amount of water consumed in the same time period as the previous year shall be determined by the city from its records. Where no records exist, the amount shall be the average use of similar existing services as determined by the city from its records.

(G)    Evaluation of applications for new water service. No applications for new, additional, further expanded or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains or other water service facilities of any kind shall be allowed, approved or installed during the time this emergency is declared by City Council resolution to be in effect, except for replacement of leaking water lines, making interties (looping), areas where the pressure provided by the city is very low and relief can only be obtained by providing a larger service line(s).

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93)


52.30 ENFORCEMENT.

Each city law officer of the city’s police force shall diligently enforce the provisions of this subchapter. All employees of the city, Public Works Department and Fire Department have the duty and are hereby authorized and directed to notify the City Manager of violations of the provisions of this subchapter.

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93)


52.31 VARIANCES.

(A)    The City Manager in his sole discretion may, in writing, adjust any consumer’s usage allotment if it is determined that due to unusual circumstances to fail to do so would cause an emergency condition affecting health, sanitation or fire protection of the applicant or the public.

(B)    No variance or adjustment shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this subchapter occurring prior to issuance of temporary variance or adjustment.

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93)


52.32 PROVISIONS CONTROLLING.

The provisions of this subchapter shall prevail and control in the event of any inconsistency between this subchapter and any other rules or regulations of the city.

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93)


52.99 PENALTY.

(A)    Any person violating any of the provisions of §§52.01 through 52.15 commits a Class A violation.

(Ord. 429, passed 6-14-61; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(B)    (1)    Any person violating any provision of §§52.25 through 52.32 commits a Class A violation.

(2)    After notice, each day is a separate violation. In addition, the City Manager may, after written or personal warning, disconnect the water service of any customer that repeatedly violates §§52.25 through 52.32. Water service disconnected shall be restored only upon payment of any turn-on charge and any other costs incurred by the assurances that the action causing the discontinuance will not be repeated.

(3)    In addition to the foregoing, the city may, prior to restoration of service, install a flow-restrictive device on the customer’s service.

(Ord. 1822, passed 6-28-93; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


CHAPTER 53 Energy Services

Section

53.01    Customer service policies


53.01 CUSTOMER SERVICE POLICIES.

(A)    The customer service policies, rates, and associated fees for the city, d//b/a Hermiston Energy Services, shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.

(B)    Resolutions adopting customer services policies, rates, and associated fees for the city, d/b/a Hermiston Energy Services, shall be kept on file at the office of the City Recorder.

(Ord. 2065, passed 12-23-02)


TITLE VII Traffic Code

Chapter

70.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

71.    TRAFFIC RULES

72.    PARKING REGULATIONS

73.    BICYCLES


CHAPTER 70 General Provisions

Section

70.01    Title

70.02    Definitions

70.03    Powers of City Council as to traffic authority

70.04    Authority of police and fire officers

70.05    Application of provisions to emergency vehicles

70.06    Illegal cancellation of traffic citations

70.07    Seizure and impoundment of motor vehicles

70.99    Penalty


70.01 TITLE.

Chapters 70, 71, and 72 of this Code of Ordinances may be cited as the Hermiston Traffic Code.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 2050, passed 12-10-01)


70.02 DEFINITIONS.

The definitions contained in the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon shall be used where applicable in this traffic code. Except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning, the definitions contained in the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon shall be used where applicable in this traffic code.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92)

Statutory reference:

Oregon Motor Vehicle Code, see ORS Chs.801 through 823


70.03 POWERS OF CITY COUNCIL AS TO TRAFFIC AUTHORITY.

Subject to state laws, the City Council shall exercise all local traffic authority for the city except those powers expressly delegated by this traffic code or another ordinance. The powers of the City Council include, but are not limited to:

(A)    The parking and standing of vehicles by:

(1)    Classifying portions of streets upon which either parking or standing or both shall be prohibited, or prohibited during certain hours.

(2)    Establishing the time limit for legal parking in limited parking areas.

(3)    Designating the angle of parking if other than parallel to the curb.

(4)    Designating city owned or leased property on which public parking will be permitted.

(B)    Through streets and one way streets.

(C)    For trucks exceeding specified weights, streets to which they shall be restricted and streets on which they are prohibited.

(D)    Traffic control signals and the time of their duration.

(E)    Bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles.

(F)    Loading zones.

(G)    Turn regulations at intersections and driveways.

(H)    Marked pedestrian crosswalks and safety zones.

(I)    Special speed regulations in city parks.

(J)    Parking regulations.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 2072, passed 7-28-03)


70.04 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICERS.

(A)    It shall be the duty of the Police Department through its officers to enforce the provisions of this traffic code.

(B)    In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this traffic code.

(C)    Members of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, or other public emergency may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92)


70.05 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS TO EMERGENCY VEHICLES.

The provisions of this traffic code regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles except as provided by the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon, and as follows:

(A)    A driver, when operating such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person, may park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this traffic code.

(B)    A driver of a police or fire department vehicle, when operating such vehicle in an emergency, may disregard regulations governing turning in specified directions as long as he does not endanger life or property.

(C)    The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of others.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92)

Statutory reference:

Oregon Motor Vehicle Code, see ORS Chs. 801 through 823


70.06 ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner except where approved by the municipal judge except through appropriate legal proceedings.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92)


70.07 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.

(A)    Oregon Revised Statutes 809.720 authorizes a police officer who has probable cause to believe that a person, at or just prior to the time the police officer stops the person, has committed an offense described in this division (A) may, without prior notice, order the vehicle impounded until a person with right to possession of the vehicle complies with the conditions for release or the vehicle is ordered released by a hearings officer. This division (A) applies to the following offenses:

(1)    Driving while suspended or revoked in violation of ORS 811.175 or 811.182.

(2)    Driving while under the influence of intoxicants in violation of ORS 813.010.

(3)    Operating without driving privileges or in violation of license restrictions in violation of ORS 807.010.

(4)    Driving uninsured in violation of ORS 806.010.

(B)    Community caretaking considerations: Vehicles are not to be towed and/or impounded under the authority of ORS 809.720 under any of the following circumstances:

(1)    The vehicle is parked on private property on which the registered owner or operator is legally residing, or the property owner does not object to the vehicle being left in the parked location.

(2)    The registered owner and/or a passenger present in the vehicle at the time of the stop have a valid driver’s license and are willing and legally able to drive the vehicle at the time.

(3)    The vehicle is legally parked at a time and place where the likelihood of it being subject to theft and/or vandalism is remote and traffic or public safety is not impeded.

(C)    All impoundment proceedings pursuant to this section shall be done in accordance with ORS 809.716, 809.725, and 819.180 and as supplemented below:

(1)    All vehicles towed and impounded shall be by a licensed tow company under contract with the city to a storage site operated by the towing company.

(2)    The owner of the impounded vehicle, or the owner’s authorized agent, may reclaim such vehicle upon providing proof of ownership, proof of compliance with the financial responsibility laws of the Oregon Motor Vehicle Code and the payment of a towing bill, an impound fee and storage fees on a per day basis commencing with the date of impoundment, all as established by resolution of the City Council.

(3)    If the vehicle is not reclaimed within 30 days from the date of impoundment, then such vehicle shall be disposed of by the towing storage company under contract with the city as authorized by state law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles.

(4)    The City Manager shall adopt a procedure for a hearing to be held before the City Manager, or his or her designee, as hearings officer.

A person entitled to lawful possession of such vehicle may request a hearing to contest the validity of the impoundment of the vehicle by filing a written request at City Hall for such hearing. The hearing must be requested within ten days of when the vehicle was impounded. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall set a time for hearing the request within ten days after a written request for a hearing is filed with the city. All reasons in division (A) of this section for impounding the motor vehicle may be raised at the hearing and any notice of the reason for impound may be amended to conform to the evidence.

(Ord. 1883, passed 6-12-95; Am. Ord. 2082, passed 4-12-04; Am. Ord. 2158, passed 7-13-09)


70.99 PENALTY.

Anyone who violates any provision Violations of this traffic code, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided, commits a Class A violation shall be punished as provided in §10.99. The municipal court may issue a minimum bail schedule for all offenses contained in this traffic code. Each day any violation described in this traffic code continues shall be treated as a separate offense. Violation of a provision of this traffic code which is identical to state law shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the penalty prescribed by the state statute.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


CHAPTER 71 Traffic Rules

Section

71.01    Permits required for parades

71.02    Funeral processions

71.03    Use of toy vehicles, skis and the like

71.04    Pedestrians must use crosswalks

71.05    Jacob’s brakes

71.06    Operating trucks over city streets

71.07    Driving on sidewalks

71.08    Removing glass and debris

71.09    Crossing private property

Cross-reference:

Killing or injuring animals with vehicle, see § 90.03


71.01 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES.

No procession or parade, except a funeral procession, the forces of the United States Armed Forces and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police. Such permit may be granted where it is found that such parade is not to be held for any unlawful purpose and will not in any manner tend to a breach of the peace, cause damage or unreasonably interfere with the public use of the streets, or the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of this city.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92)


71.02 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.

(A)    Vehicles in a funeral procession shall be escorted by at least one person authorized by the Chief of Police to direct traffic for such purposes and shall follow routes established by the Chief of Police.

(B)    Except when approaching a left turn, each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive along the right-hand traffic lane and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe.

(C)    No driver of a vehicle shall cross through a procession except where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or when so directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.03 USE OF TOY VEHICLES, SKIS AND THE LIKE.

(A)    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any sidewalk on East Main street from First to Third and in the east-west alleys between Main Street and Gladys Avenue and between Main Street and Hurlburt Avenue from First to Third streets and also on any sidewalk on West Hermiston Avenue from North First Place to West Second Street or upon any street except a play street or except to cross at a crosswalk.

(B)    No person on skis, toboggans, sleds or similar devices shall travel on any street, except play streets.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.04 PEDESTRIANS MUST USE CROSSWALKS.

If marked crosswalks are provided, no pedestrian may cross a street other than within a crosswalk if within 150 feet of a marked crosswalk.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.05 JACOB’S BRAKES.

The operation of compression brakes, commonly known as "Jacob’s Brakes," within the city is hereby prohibited when use of such device causes additional noise levels of the vehicle.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.06 OPERATING TRUCKS OVER CITY STREETS.

It shall be unlawful to operate any truck over 30 feet in total length or any truck and trailer or truck and semitrailer combination upon any public street within the city unless such street has been designated as a truck route. However, these vehicles may use public streets for the specific business purpose of picking up, discharging and delivering goods and property at any business establishment or residence located on other than a designated truck route.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.07 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.

(A)    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk or parkway area except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.

(B)    A temporary driveway may be used only after first obtaining a written permit therefor from the superintendent of public works who may impose such requirements as are necessary to protect the public improvements within the streets at the temporary driveway.

(C)    Any person who damages or causes to be damaged any public improvements within the street by driving a vehicle upon or within any sidewalk or parkway area shall be liable for such damage, regardless of whether or not the damage resulted from the authorized use of a temporary driveway.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.08 REMOVING GLASS AND DEBRIS.

Any party to a collision or other vehicle accident or any other person causing glass or other material or substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle to be upon any street in this city shall as soon as possible remove or cause to be removed from such street all such glass or other material or substance.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.09 CROSSING PRIVATE PROPERTY.

No operator of a motor vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by crossing private property or premises open to the public. This provision does not apply to the operator of a motor vehicle who stops on the property to procure or provide goods or services.

(Ord. 1949, passed 3-9-98) Penalty, see § 70.99


CHAPTER 72 Parking Regulations

Section

72.01    Unlawful marking

72.02    Method of parking

72.03    Parking prohibited in certain locations

72.04    Parking in loading zones

72.05    Standing or parking buses and taxicabs

72.06    Storage and parking of trucks, trailers and the like

72.07    Obstructing streets

72.08    Exemption for certain vehicles

72.09    Parking and using recreational vehicles for sleeping or living purposes outside recreational vehicle parks

72.10    Parking citation procedure


72.01 UNLAWFUL MARKING.

Except as provided by this traffic code, it shall be unlawful for any person to letter, mark or paint in any manner any letters, marks or signs on any sidewalk, curb or other portion of the street, or to post anything designed or intended to prohibit or restrict parking on any street.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.02 METHOD OF PARKING.

(A)    No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street or public lot other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking.

(B)    Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than at the indicated direction and within a single marked space.

(C)    Whenever the owner or driver of a vehicle discovers that such vehicle is parked immediately in front of or close to a building to which the Fire Department has been summoned, he or she shall immediately remove such vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.03 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.

In addition to provisions of the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon prohibiting parking, no person shall park a vehicle:

(A)    Upon any bridge, viaduct or other elevated structure used as a street, unless otherwise indicated by lawfully installed signs.

(B)    In any alley except to load or unload persons or materials not to exceed 30 minutes.

(C)    Upon any street or public property for the principal purpose of:

(1)    Displaying such vehicle for sale.

(2)    Greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

(3)    Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinances of this city.

(4)    Storage or as junkage or dead storage for more than 72 consecutive hours.

(D)    Upon any parkway except where specifically authorized.

(E)    In front of a public or private drive.

(F)    Within ten feet of a fire hydrant.

(G)    Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance of a fire station.

(H)    Not within the single space markings of city owned or leased property upon which public parking is permitted unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible.

(I)    In a space reserved for disabled persons which would constitute a violation of ORS 811.615.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99

Statutory reference:

Oregon Motor Vehicle Code, see ORS Chs. 801 through 823


72.04 PARKING IN LOADING ZONES.

(A)    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, freight or passengers in any place designated as a loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop in a loading zone for loading and unloading of passengers and personal baggage exceed 30 minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.

(B)    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place designated as a passenger loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to passenger loading zones are in effect.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.05 STANDING OR PARKING BUSES AND TAXICABS.

(A)    The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stand or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers.

(B)    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stand or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab about to enter or using such zone.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.06 STORAGE AND PARKING OF TRUCKS, TRAILERS AND THE LIKE.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having control of any truck or trailer in excess of 10,000 pounds gross weight or any truck power unit or tractor to park the same upon any street, alley, parking strip, avenue or public way in any residential area of the city or adjacent to any residence, church, school, hospital, multiple dwelling, park or playground in any area of the city. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the lawful parking of such equipment upon any street, avenue or public way in the city for the actual loading or unloading of goods, wares or merchandise; provided, however, that "loading" or "unloading" as used in this section shall be limited to the actual time consumed in such operation. In addition thereto, the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit minor repairs on any such vehicles described above wherein total lapsed time in making such repairs does not exceed eight hours duration. The parking of any equipment under authority of this section shall in no event be within 20 feet of the intersection of property lines at any intersection, except alleys. Any vehicle mentioned in this section parked upon any street, avenue parking strip or public way within the city in violation of this section may be towed and impounded. The registered owner or operator shall be liable for all expenses incurred.

(B)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having control of any bus or a vacation house trailer, camper, boat and/or boat trailer, motor home, tent trailer, utility trailer or any motorized or unmotorized vehicle undergoing repairs while incapable of being moved by its own power source to park the same upon any streets or on any parking strip, avenue or public way within the city for longer than 72 hours.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.07 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.

Except as provided by this traffic code or any other ordinance of the city, no person shall place, park, deposit or leave upon any street or other public way, sidewalk or curb any article or thing or material which in any way prevents, interrupts or obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or obstructs a driver’s view of traffic-control signs and signals.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.08 EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.

The provisions of this traffic code regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on the street or any vehicle owned by the United states while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92)


72.09 PARKING AND USING RECREATIONAL VEHICLES FOR SLEEPING OR LIVING PURPOSES OUTSIDE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS.

(A)    Recreation Vehicle means a vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for human occupancy and is to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal, or emergency purposes.

(B)    Except in a recreational vehicle park, it shall be unlawful to park any recreational vehicle on any public way, road, street, or place within the city while using it for sleeping or living purposes for any period of time exceeding three hours except in residential neighborhoods where the period of time will not exceed 24 hours.

(C)    Except in a recreational vehicle park, it shall be unlawful to park any recreational vehicle within the city while using it for sleeping or living purposes for any period of time exceeding seven days within the last six months.

(D)    This section provides an exemption from §72.09(C) for the construction, reconstruction, or remodeling of a public or private nonprofit social service, community, religious, or recreational facility (hereinafter referred to as "project"). Recreational vehicles may be parked for sleeping or living purposes at or near the project in excess of seven days in conjunction with a project until the completion of the project or six months, whichever is less, provided that the following requirements are met:

(1)    The property owner and the person or agent in charge of the project, if the two are different, submit a complete application for the exemption permit together with a basic site plan (scale drawing not necessary); written consent to the parking of recreational vehicles for sleeping or living purposes at or near the project from all adjacent property owners and residents to the project site; and allow access by city officials to the project site and the location of the recreational vehicles for the purposes of inspection and enforcement of the terms and conditions of the permit, including towing of the recreational vehicles and removal of temporary sewer and water service connections, whether or not the permit has expired.

(2)    The exemption permit must be issued to the property owner and the person or agent in charge of the project, if the two are different, before the recreational vehicles are used for sleeping or living purposes in conjunction with the project.

(3)    Before a recreational vehicle is used for sleeping or living purposes in conjunction with a project, the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of the recreational vehicle must sign a release allowing access to and towing of the recreational vehicle for purposes of inspection and enforcement of the terms and conditions of the exemption permit.

(4)    Recreational vehicles used for sleeping and living purposes in conjunction with a project must be parked at the location indicated in the exemption permit. Upon expiration of the exemption permit, all recreational vehicles must be removed from the project site, whether they are used for sleeping or living purposes or not.

(5)    The recreational vehicles must either be self contained, with all grey water and/or sewage disposed of at an appropriate disposal location in accordance with state regulations or be connected to a temporary connection for city sewer.

(6)    If temporary connections for city sewer and water service are used, they must be installed in accordance with all applicable state codes and city regulations at the expense of the property owner and/or the person or agent in charge of the project. All temporary connections must be removed upon expiration of the exemption permit. (SDC charges will not be assessed on the temporary connections.)

(7)    The recreational vehicles must meet all requirements of the Hermiston Code of Ordinances.

(E)    The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby delegated the general authority to issue the exemption permits authorized herein, including the preparation of the forms for the applications and permits, and the terms and conditions thereof.

(F)    The maximum number of permits that may be issued under 72.09(D) is for six recreational vehicles.

(G)    A person commits the offense of "Filing a False Application for an RV Parking Permit" if the application contains false information. The offense described in this section is a Class A violation. In addition, the exemption permit may be immediately revoked at the discretion of the City Manager or his/her designee.

(H)    A person commits the offense of "Violating an RV Parking Exemption Permit" if the property owner or person in charge of the project, or any agent thereof, or any person using the recreational vehicles violates the terms of the exemption permit or any provisions of 72.09 herein. The offense described in this section is a Class A violation. In addition, the exemption permit may be immediately revoked at the discretion of the City Manager or his/her designee.

(I)    Upon completion of the project or six months, whichever is sooner, the recreational vehicle(s) must be removed by the owner or occupant(s) of the recreational vehicles or by the property owner or agent in charge of the construction. If not so removed, the City Manager or his/her designee may have the recreational vehicles towed at the expense of the owner or occupant(s) of the recreational vehicles or the property owner or agent in charge of the project, or all of them.

(J)    The City Manager or his/her designee shall maintain an accurate record of the cost incurred by the city in removing the recreational vehicle, including any attorney fees, whether or not any legal action is filed, and shall include therein an overhead charge of 10% of the total cost for administration. The total cost, including the administrative overhead, shall thereupon be assessed to the property.

(K)    Upon expiration of the exemption permit, all temporary sewer and water service connections must be removed by the property owner and the person or agent in charge of the project. If not so removed, the City Manager or his/her designee may enter the property and remove the temporary connections at the expense of the property owner and the person or agent in charge of the project.

(L)    The City Manager or his/her designee shall maintain an accurate record of the cost incurred by the city in removing the temporary sewer and water connections, including any attorney fees, whether or not any legal action is filed, and shall include therein an overhead charge of 10% of the total cost for administration. The total cost, including the administrative overhead, shall thereupon be assessed to the property.

(M)    In case suit or action is instituted by the city in the circuit court to enforce the exemption permit, the property owner and the person or agent in charge of the project shall pay the attorney’s fees of the city incurred in arbitration or trial thereof, and on any appeal therefrom.

(N)    Fees for permits issued under 72.09(D) may be set by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 1759, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 2046, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2048, passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2049, passed 12-10-01; Am. Ord. 2053, passed 2-25-02)


72.10 PARKING CITATION PROCEDURE.

(A)    Citation procedure for certain parking violations. In lieu of personal delivery of a citation on person committing a violation of this traffic code, the citing authority may issue a parking violation notice pursuant to and in accordance with the procedures set forth in ORS 221.340. The citation shall instruct the operator to answer to the charge or pay the penalty imposed within 10 days, during specific hours, and at a specified place.

(B)    Failure to comply with parking citation. If the operator does not respond to the parking violation notice attached to the vehicle within 15 days, the city, at its option, may mail a letter to the registered owner of the vehicle informing the owner that as a result of the owner’s failure to respond to the citation within 10 days of its issuance that the fine has now been doubled and that the doubled fine must be paid within 10 days of the date the letter is mailed. If the owner does not comply within 10 days, the city, at its option, may request a copy of the parking violation notice be filed with the court and by affidavit request that the court issue an order to appear and show cause on a certain date and time. The order to appear and show cause shall be served personally and a return of service shall be completed and filed with the court.

(C)    Registered owner subject to prosecution. The registered owner of a vehicle receiving a parking violation citation issued pursuant to this section, shall be presumed to be the owner in fact of the vehicle at the time of the citation’s issuance. The registered owner of any vehicle, shall have an affirmative defense to a prosecution of the violation, if at the time the violation notice was issued the vehicle’s use was not authorized by the owner, either expressly or by implication.

(Ord. 2046, passed 10-22-01)


CHAPTER 73 Bicycles

Section

Bicycle Operation

73.01    Bicycle to be in safe condition: compliance with laws

73.02    Compliance with traffic signals

73.03    Unlawful to ride on sidewalk in commercial zone

73.04    Riding abreast

73.05    Clinging to moving vehicles

73.06    Single riders

73.07    Carrying articles

73.08    Racing; trick riding

73.09    Parking regulations

73.10    Speed

73.11    Riding on parks, playgrounds and schools

73.12    Turns

73.13    Crossing

73.14    Signals

73.15    Accidents

Bicycles Certification

73.25    Certificate required

73.26    Issuance of certificate by police; records

73.27    Safe mechanical condition

73.99    Penalty

BICYCLE OPERATION


73.01 BICYCLE TO BE IN SAFE CONDITION: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the city unless the bicycle is equipped as otherwise provided in this chapter and unless the bicycle is in safe mechanical condition. Every person riding or operating a bicycle on any street, alley, or public place in the city shall be subject to all provisions of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city applicable to the drivers of vehicles, except the provisions thereof that by their very nature can have no application.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.02 COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC SIGNALS.

Every person operating a bicycle in the city shall stop for all stop signs and traffic signals.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.03 UNLAWFUL TO RIDE ON SIDEWALK IN COMMERCIAL ZONE.

It shall be unlawful to ride or operate a bicycle on any sidewalk in the city inside of the commercial zone. It shall be lawful to ride or operate a bicycle on any sidewalk in the city outside of the commercial zone.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.04 RIDING ABREAST.

Every person riding or operating a bicycle on any street, alley, or public place in the city shall keep the bicycle on the extreme right of the traffic lane, and it shall be unlawful for two or more operators of bicycles to travel abreast on any street, alley, or public place in the city or to operate the bicycle on traffic lanes otherwise than in single file.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.05 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.

No person riding or operating a bicycle in the city shall cling or attach himself or his bicycle to any other moving vehicle or person in any other vehicle.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.06 SINGLE RIDERS.

No person shall operate or ride on any bicycle upon the streets, alleys, or public highways of the city two or more persons upon the same bicycle; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to tandem bicycles or other bicycles equipped for two or more riders.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.07 CARRYING ARTICLES.

No person riding or operating a bicycle in the city shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prohibits the rider from having full control of the bicycle at all times.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.08 RACING; TRICK RIDING.

(A)    Racing. No person riding or operating a bicycle upon a public highway or street shall participate in any race, speed, or endurance contest unless such race or endurance contest has the written permission of and is under supervision of the Chief of Police.

(B)    Trick riding. No person riding or operating a bicycle shall perform or attempt to perform any acrobatic fancy, or stunt riding upon any public highway or street in the city

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.09 PARKING REGULATIONS.

(A)    No person shall park any bicycle against windows or parking meters or on the main traveled portion of the sidewalk nor in such manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians, traffic, or property.

(B)    If there are no bicycle racks or other facilities intended to be used for parking of bicycles in the vicinity, bicycles may be parked on the sidewalk in an upright position parallel to and within 24 inches of the curb.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.10 SPEED.

No person shall ride or operate a bicycle faster than is reasonable and proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and other persons upon the streets, sidewalks, and public highways of the city.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.11 RIDING ON PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND SCHOOLS.

No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any playground, park, or school ground where children are playing without permission of the person having supervision thereof.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.12 TURNS.

(A)    Turning. Every person riding or operating a bicycle upon the streets and highways of the city shall turn only at intersections except as otherwise provided herein.

(B)    Right turn. Every person riding or operating a bicycle intending to turn to the right at an intersection or into an alley or driveway, shall approach the turning point in the line of traffic nearest the right-hand curb of the street.

(C)    Left turn. Every person riding or operating a bicycle intending to turn left at an intersection or to enter an alley or driveway shall approach the joint of turning in the line of traffic nearest to the center of the roadway. The operator of a bicycle in turning left at an intersection shall pass to the right of the center of the intersection before turning unless otherwise directed by markers, buttons, or signs.

(D)    U-turns.

(1)    No bicycle shall be turned in any business district so as to proceed in the opposite direction, except at intersections.

(2)    No bicycle operated in a residence district shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction when any other vehicle is approaching from either direction within 200 feet, except at an intersection.

(E)    Turn right against red light. The operator of a bicycle which is stopped as close as practicable to the entrance of an intersection in obedience to a red light or stop signal may make a right turn but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at the intersection, unless a sign has been posted at the intersection prohibiting such turn.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.13 CROSSING.

The operator of a bicycle on leaving an alley or driveway, when his view of either the sidewalk or street area is obstructed shall stop such bicycle immediately prior to riding upon such sidewalk or street area.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.14 SIGNALS.

No person shall turn a bicycle or stop a bicycle which he is riding or operating unless such movement can be made with safety, and then only after giving an appropriate signal during the last 50 feet traveled by the bicycle before turning or stopping.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.15 ACCIDENTS.

(A)    The operator of any bicycle involved in an accident shall take reasonable steps to ascertain whether or not anyone was injured, and he shall give his name, address, and the license number of his bicycle to the person with whom he was in collision, and he shall obtain the same information from the other person.

(B)    It shall be the duty of the bicycle operator to make a written report of any accident resulting in death or injury to the Police Department with 24 hours of such accident.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99

BICYCLES CERTIFICATION


73.25 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, highways, or alleys of the city without first obtaining from the Police Department or its authorized agent a certificate therefor.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.26 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE BY POLICE; RECORDS.

(A)    The Police Department is hereby authorized and directed to issue bicycle certificates of title which shall be good until revoked. Such certificates, when issued, shall entitle the holder thereof to operate such bicycle for which the certificate was issued upon the streets, alleys, or public highways of the city, exclusive of the sidewalks, except as hereinafter provided. The Police Department may issue a bicycle certificate of title for a bicycle when so requested by the owner. The Police Department shall charge a fee for issuing a certificate as established by resolution of the City Council.

(B)    The Chief of Police may issue to each bicycle dealer certificate of title forms which shall be executed in duplicate at time of sale of each bicycle, the original thereof which shall be delivered to the purchaser, the duplicate forwarded within 24 hours to the Chief of Police. The certificate of title form shall include such information as the make and model of the bicycle sold, the color thereof, the frame number, date of sale, name and address of purchaser, and such other information as the Chief of Police may direct. There will be no fee for the issuance of such certificate.

(C)    The purchaser shall promptly take the certificate to the Police Department which shall issue a number therefor, and will cause the identical number to be stamped upon the underside of the sprocket of the bicycle. The Police Department will maintain a record of the bicycle by name and address of certificate holder, together with complete description of the bicycle and any other information which might serve to promptly identify the bicycle.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65; Am. Ord. 2243, passed 3-20-17. Formerly 73.256)


73.27 SAFE MECHANICAL CONDITION.

Every person desiring a bicycle certificate must satisfy the Chief of Police or his authorized agent that the bicycle for which the applicant desires to secure license plates meets the following requirements as to safe mechanical condition.

(A)    Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake adequate to skid the front or rear tire of the bicycle upon application of the brake.

(B)    Warning devices. Every bicycle may be equipped with a horn or bell capable of emitting sound audible for a distance of not less than 100 feet under normal conditions.

(C)    Sirens and whistles. It shall be unlawful to equip a bicycle with a siren or whistle.

(D)    Handlebar grips. Every bicycle that is equipped with handlebar grips must have the grips securely glued or cemented to the handlebars.

(E)    Carriers. Every bicycle equipped with a carrier must have the carrier securely attached to the bicycle.

(F)    Stands. Every bicycle should be equipped with a stand of either kick or "U" type.

(G)    Lights. Every bicycle operated at any time from a half-hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person or vehicle on the streets or sidewalks shall be equipped with a lamp affixed to the front of the bicycle, which lamp shall exhibit a white light visible for a distance of 500 feet from the front of the bicycle, and the bicycle shall be equipped with a red lamp or reflector affixed to the rear fender, which shall exhibit a red light visible for a distance of 300 feet from the rear of the bicycle.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65; Am. Ord. 2243, passed 3-20-17. Formerly 73.267) Penalty, see § 73.99


73.99 PENALTY.

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in 10.99 commits a Class A violation.

(Ord. 558, passed 12-22-65; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


TITLE IX General Regulations

Chapter

90.    ANIMALS

91.    [RESERVED]

92.    NUISANCES

93.    PARKS AND RECREATION

94.    STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

95.    ALARM SYSTEMS


CHAPTER 90 Animals

Section

General Provisions

90.01    Definitions

90.02    Animals running at large prohibited

90.03    Vehicles injuring animals

90.04    Killing of birds

90.05    Removal of animal carcasses

Dogs

90.15    Definitions

90.16    Dog at large 

90.17    Vaccination

90.18    Public nuisances

90.19    Affirmative defense

90.20    Licenses and records

90.21    Destruction of certain dogs

90.22    Impoundment procedures

90.99    Penalty

Cross-reference:

Animals damaging park property, see §93.04

GENERAL PROVISIONS


90.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of §§ 90.03 through 90.05 only, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

PERSONS. Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other legally identifiable group, whether he or it is acting for himself or itself or as the clerk, servant, employee or agent of another.

PREMISES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. Has the same meaning as that set forth in ORS 801.400.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


90.02 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.

No person, persons or corporation owning or having possession or control of any livestock or poultry shall allow the livestock or poultry to run at large or to be or remain at large upon the streets, sidewalks, public grounds or unfenced lots or grounds within the limits of the city. Hereafter in this chapter whenever the word "animal" or "animals" is used it shall mean and include any and all kinds of livestock or poultry.

(Ord. 4, passed 8-7-07; Am. Ord. 366, passed 9-11-57)


90.03 VEHICLES INJURING ANIMALS.

Any person operating a vehicle as defined by the motor vehicle laws of Oregon, upon any premises open to the public, who shall run over, strike, injure, maim or kill any animal shall immediately stop and render aid to the animal, if injured, or provide for the disposition of the carcass, if the animal be killed. If it is a domestic animal, the person shall make due and diligent inquiry to determine the owner of such and, if located, shall notify him of the occurrence.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 90.99


90.04 KILLING OF BIRDS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, air gun, blow gun or other similar device, or throw any missile at any non-game bird with the intent to injure or kill the same.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 90.99

Cross-reference:

Discharging of firearms, see §130.31


90.05 REMOVAL OF ANIMAL CARCASSES.

It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit the carcass of any animal owned by them to remain upon any premises open to the public, and no person who is the owner or occupant of any property shall suffer or permit the carcass of any animal to remain thereon. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant forthwith to cause the carcass to be disposed of in a manner approved by law.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 90.99

DOGS


90.15 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

AT LARGE. Any dog off the premises of the owner and/or not under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.

DOG. Both male and female.

OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog.

(Ord. 1503, passed 3-26-84)


90.16 DOG AT LARGE.

(A)    It is a strict liability offense for a dog to be at large and the owner of the dog shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter if the dog is found to be in violation. 

(Ord. 1503, passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord. 1613, passed 10-27-86; Am. Ord. 2229, passed 4-27-15)


90.17  VACCINATION.

It shall be unlawful for the owner to keep or maintain any dog unless it shall have been vaccinated by a licensed veterinary surgeon with anti-rabies vaccine within one year of the date on which the dog is kept or maintained.

(Ord. 1503, passed 3-26-84) Penalty, see §90.99


90.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES.

(A)    A dog is a public nuisance if it:

(1)    Bites or attempts to bite a person;

(2)    Chases vehicles or persons;

(3)    Attacks other dogs;

(4)    Damages or destroys property of persons other than the owner of the dog;

(5)    Scatters refuse;

(6)    Habitually trespasses on private property of persons other than the owner of the dog;

(7)    Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises; or

(8)    Is a female in heat and at large.

(B)    It is a strict liability offense for a dog to be a public nuisance, and the owner of the dog shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter if the dog is found to be a public nuisance. 

(Ord. 1503, passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord. 2229, passed 4-27-15) Penalty, see §90.99


90.19 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.

A dog shall not be considered a public nuisance for biting or attempting to bite a person if it bites or attempts to bite a person wrongfully assaulting the dog or the dog’s owner, or if it bites or attempts to bite a person trespassing upon premises occupied by the dog’s owner after being provoked by that person. 

(Ord. 1503, passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord. 2229, passed 4-27-15)


90.20 LICENSES AND RECORDS.

(A)    Every person owning or keeping any dog which has a set of permanent canine teeth, within 30 days after becoming an owner of the dog, shall obtain from the Finance Director/Recorder a license for the dog by paying to the Finance Director/Recorder a license fee. The license fee shall be $5 for each spayed female or neutered male dog for which a veterinarian’s certificate of operation for the spaying or neutering of the dog is presented to the Finance Director/Recorder. The license fee shall be $25 for unaltered dogs. If the person fails to obtain the license within the time provided by this section, an additional penalty in a sum established by resolution of the City Council for each dog shall be assessed.

(B)    The Finance Director/Recorder shall at the time of issuing the license and as a part thereof supply the licensee, without charge, with a suitable tag having legibly stamped with dies across one side thereof, to wit: year license issued, license number and to be imprinted with "City of Hermiston, OR." The tag shall be fastened by the licensee to a collar and kept on the dog at all times when not in the immediate possession of the licensee. The license fee shall be the only license or tax required for the ownership or keeping of a dog within the city.

(C)    This section does not apply to dogs owned by dealers, breeders or exhibitors where they are kept in kennels exclusively for sale or exhibition purposes, or while the dogs are being transported by dealers, breeders or exhibitors to and from a dog show or fair. No license shall be required for the dogs kept for these purposes until they are sold or otherwise disposed of to another person.

(D)    No license shall be required to be paid for any dog owned by a blind person who uses it as a guide. A license shall be issued for the dog upon filing with the Finance Director/Recorder an affidavit by the blind person showing the dog to come within this requirement.

(E)    The Finance Director/Recorder shall keep a record of dog licenses in a special book for such purposes. 

(Ord. 1503, passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord. 2229, passed 4-27-15)


90.21 DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS.

(A)    When a dog habitually runs at large and is so elusive, or when a dog kills or seriously injures a person or other animal, or when a dog shows obvious symptoms of being rabid, or if a dog cannot be impounded without grave risk, or if the dog is badly injured and suffering, the police officer may destroy the animal in the safest, most humane way available.

(B)    When a dog has been found by the judge, in a judicial proceeding, to be of vicious temperament, the judge may order the dog to be euthanized either by the owner or by the pound authorities should the dog have been impounded. Destruction will be performed in a humane manner and at the expense of the owner of the dog. 

(Ord. 1503, passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord. 1613, passed 10-27-86; Am. Ord. 2229, passed 4-27-15)


90.22 IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES.

(A)    All dogs taken up and impounded under this section shall be held in an adequate and sanitary pound which has been inspected by the City Manager or the Manager’s designee. Any dog so impounded shall be held for at least five days from the date of the impounding before being placed for adoption, euthanized, or otherwise disposed of.

(B)    After any dog is impounded, the owner will be notified, or, if the owner of the dog is unknown, written notice shall be posted for three days on the city’s website describing the dog and the place and time of taking. If the owner appears and redeems the dog, the owner shall pay, in amounts as established by resolution of the City Council, an impoundment fee and in addition a sum for each day, or part thereof, the dog was impounded, this fee being the actual cost of boarding the animal at the pound. The boarding fee will not be assessed for the first day of impoundment if the dog is taken after 8:00 p.m.

(C)    If no owner appears or the owner fails to redeem the dog within five days from its impounding or five days from the date the owner was notified or notices were posted, or if the dog was impounded as a public nuisance for biting or attempting to bite a person, it may be euthanized in a humane manner; except that if, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, the dog is not dangerous and can be safely kept, the Chief of Police may release the dog to any responsible person upon receiving assurance that the person will properly care for the dog and not allow it to become a nuisance, and upon payment of a sum of money as established by resolution of the City Council, plus the cost of keeping during its impounding. The person shall thereafter be liable as owner of the dog.

(D)    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (C) of this section, any dog impounded for biting a person shall be held for not less than ten days before it is released or euthanized to determine if the dog is rabid. 

(Ord. 2229, passed 4-27-15)


90.99 PENALTY.

(A)    Anyone who violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided commits a Class A violation. (Ord. 4, passed 8-7-07; Ord. 1503, passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(B)    Whoever violates §§ 90.03 through 90.05 commits a Class A violation. Any person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in §§ 90.03 through 90.05, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating the act, shall be guilty of an offense of attempt to commit as to that offense.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


CHAPTER 91 [Reserved]


CHAPTER 92 Nuisances

Section

General Provisions

92.01    Definitions

92.02    Nuisances affecting public health

92.03    Creating a hazard

92.04    Noxious vegetation

92.05    Depositing rubbish

92.06    Trees

92.07    Fences

92.08    Radio and television interference

92.09    Junk

92.10    Odoriferous nuisances

92.11    Attractive nuisances

92.12    Blowing dust

92.13    Unenumerated nuisances

92.14    Abatement procedure

92.15    Graffiti

Excessive Noise

92.23    Purpose

92.24    Findings

92.25    Definitions

92.26    Jurisdiction

92.27    General prohibition

92.28    Noises prohibited

92.29    Exemptions

92.30    Enforcement

92.31    [Reserved]

92.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


92.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

PEOPLE RESPONSIBLE. The persons jointly and severally for abating a nuisance and liable for penalties upon conviction of a violation of this subchapter include:

(1)    The owner of the property on which the nuisance originated.

(2)    The person in charge of property, as defined in this section.

(3)    The person who caused a nuisance, as defined in this subchapter or another ordinance of the city, to come into or continue in existence.

PERSON. A natural person, firm, general partnership, limited partnership, association, foundation, trust, limited liability company, or corporation.

PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract buyer or other person having possession or control of property or supervision of a construction project.

PUBLIC PLACE. A building, way, place or accommodation, publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91; Am. Ord. 1944, passed 11-24-97)


92.02 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH.

No person shall cause or permit a nuisance affecting public health on property owned or controlled by him. The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this subchapter:

(A)    Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the city, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with State Health Division regulations.

(B)    Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the city.

(C)    Stagnant water that affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

(D)    Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

(E)    Decayed or unwholesome food offered for human consumption.

(F)    Premises that are in a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or that are in an unsanitary condition.

(G)    Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises.

(H)    Cesspools or septic tanks that are in an unsanitary condition or that cause an offensive odor.

(I)    Mastics, oil, grease or petroleum products allowed to be introduced into the sewer system by a user connected to the sewer system.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.03 CREATING A HAZARD.

No person shall create a hazard by:

(A)    Maintaining, leaving, abandoning, discarding or storing in the open, in a place accessible to children, a container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid that locks or fastens automatically when closed and that cannot be easily opened from the inside, including but not limited to ice boxes, refrigerators or freezers.

(B)    Being the owner or otherwise having possession of property on which there is a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation, or other hole of a depth of four feet or more, and a top width of 12 inches or more and failing to cover or fence it with a suitable protective construction.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91) Penalty, see § 92.99 

Cross-reference:

Attractive nuisances, see § 92.11


92.04 NOXIOUS VEGETATION.

(A)    No owner or person in charge of property within 100 feet of a public access, roadway, adjacent or abutting streets, alleys, other adjacent or abutting properties, or from any combustible structure, including a fence, shall permit weeds or other noxious vegetation to grow upon his property over 15 inches high. The owner or person in charge of property shall cut down, destroy or remove grass, shrubbery, brush, weeds, or other noxious vegetation as often as necessary to prevent them from becoming a fire hazard, or from maturing or going to seed.

(B)    For purpose of this section, NOXIOUS VEGETATION means:

(1)    Vegetation that is, or is likely to become:

(a)    A health hazard;

(b)    A fire hazard; or

(c)    A traffic hazard, because it impairs the view of a public thoroughfare, or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous.

(2)    Weeds commonly known as puncture vines, sandburs, bull thistles, Canadian thistles, and star thistles regardless of their height and/or distance from public access, roadway, adjacent or abutting streets, alleys, other adjacent or abutting properties. Blackberry bushes that extend into a public way or a pathway frequented by children or across a property line.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91; Am. Ord. 2159, passed 7-13-09) Penalty, see § 92.99




92.05 DEPOSITING RUBBISH.

No person shall deposit, on public or private property, rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle traveling on a public way.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.06 TREES.

(A)    No owner or person in charge of property that abuts on a street or public sidewalk shall permit trees or bushes on the property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. An owner or person in charge of property that abuts on a street or public sidewalk shall keep all trees and bushes on the premises, including the adjoining parking strip, trimmed so that they do not project over a sidewalk at an elevation of less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk or over a street at an elevation of less than 13 feet above the level of the street.

(B)    No owner or person in charge of property shall allow a dead or decaying tree to stand if it is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near property.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.07 FENCES.

(A)    No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed wire or razor wire fence, or permit barbed or razor wire to remain as part of a fence, along a sidewalk; except the wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high so long as it does not extend over the sidewalk.

(B)    No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.08 RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.

(A)    No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television receiver of good engineering design.

(B)    This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.09 JUNK.

(A)    No person shall keep junk outdoors on a street, yard, lot, or premises or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed except for doors used for ingress and egress.

(B)    The term JUNK, as used in this section, includes a motor vehicle or vehicles unless currently registered and operable, or an accumulation of any of the following: old motor vehicle parts, tires, abandoned automobiles, old machinery, old machinery parts, old appliances or appliance parts, old iron or other metals, glass, paper, lumber, wood or other waste or discarded material.

(C)    This section does not apply to junk kept, salvaged, used or resold as part of a business being conducted on property in compliance with all city zoning laws where zoning laws authorize the use.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.10 ODORIFEROUS NUISANCES.

(A)    Odoriferous nuisances. No person in charge of property on which obnoxious, offensive or objectionable odors are crated or generated shall cause or permit odors to escape from that property so as to endanger the health of, cause significant discomfort to, or otherwise deleteriously affect the convenience, safety or welfare of any person within the city limits. All obnoxious, offensive and/or objectionable odors within the city limits are odoriferous nuisances affecting public health and safety, may be penalized as provided in § 92.99, and may be abated as provided in § 92.14, notwithstanding any governmental authorizations or permits issued to the odor-causing activity and irrespective of the location of the activity or the economic or social utility thereof.

(B)    Evidence of odoriferous nuisances. All or any of the following shall be evidence of the existence of obnoxious, offensive or objectionable odors within the city limits:

(1)    The oral or written complaint of three or more persons, within any 12-hour period, to the effect that odors emanating from any activity within or in the vicinity of the city are causing adverse health effects, significant discomfort, or serious inconvenience to the persons (or to minors within the custody or care of the persons) at a residence or place of business within the city limits; or

(2)    The detection and measurement, by a qualified person employing appropriate technology, of one or more of the following odor constituents, at or above the following concentrations, within the city limits:

(a)    Hydrogen sulfide at or in excess of six parts per billion (ppb);

(b)    Ammonia at or in excess of 50 ppb; or

(3)    The finding, by an odor panel, that odors emanating from a source inside or outside the city limits exceed two odor units at the property boundary or at the city limits (whichever is closest to the source.) The odor panel shall be comprised of six residents of the city appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The determination by the odor panel shall be based on substantial adherence to the following procedure: A sample is collected in a glass sampling bulb (25 to 10,000 ml in size) and delivered immediately to the odor panel for a series of dilutions and sniffings using the triangle olfactometer method, in which three samples are presented to each panelist from a series of glass sniffing ports. Two are test room air (blanks), and the third is odorous air diluted with test room air. The olfactometer supplies six dilution level. An odor unit is defined as the volumetric amount of the odorous gas which is detectable by only half the odor panel in 0.03m3 (1 cu. ft.) of odor-free air. The strength of an odor is determined by the number of dilutions with odor-free air needed to reduce an odor to a barely detectable level.

(C)    Abatement of odoriferous nuisances. The creation or generation of any odoriferous nuisance may be abated upon the motion, petition or complaint of the city or any resident of the city:

(1)    By an order of the municipal court of the city enjoining an odor-causing activity within the city limits until such time as the person in charge of the property has given verifiable and enforceable assurances that the activity will no longer create an odoriferous nuisance;

(2)    By an order of the circuit court of the State of Oregon for Umatilla County enjoining an odor-causing activity either within or outside the city limits until such time as the person in charge of the property has given verifiable and enforceable assurances that the activity will no longer create an odoriferous nuisance within the limits of the city; or

(3)    By any other appropriate legal or equitable remedy available to the city or its residents for the abatement of nuisances.

(Ord. 1944, passed 11-24-97) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.11 ATTRACTIVE NUISANCES

(A)    Definition. The following definition shall apply to this section.

PERSON. Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other legally identifiable group, whether he or it is acting for himself or itself or as the clerk, servant, employee or agent of another.

(B)    Unlawful activity. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant or any person having control, custody or management of any premises to suffer or permit to remain unguarded upon the premises any machinery, equipment or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance or which is liable to attract children. It shall further be unlawful for any of the aforementioned persons to suffer or permit to remain unguarded upon the premises any pit, quarry, cistern, well or other excavation.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.12 BLOWING DUST.

(A)    It is unlawful for any owner, contractor, developer, or other person in charge of property, who disturbs land, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, grubbing, excavating, filling, landscaping, or erecting buildings, or allows, contracts for, or directs the disturbance of the land, to cause or permit dust, sand, and dirt, etc., from blowing from the disturbed land site to other real property, including streets and dry wells in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as to be inconvenient, annoying, or injurious to human health, plant or animal life, or property.

(B)    As part of any development agreement entered into between the city and a developer, or when another person intends to disturb one acre or more of land at any one time by one or more phases of development, and the disturbance is located on the same parcel of land or on contiguous parcels of land under the same ownership, or as part of any public improvement contract let by the city involving disturbance of one or more acres of land, a written Blowing Dust Control Plan must be filed with the city for review. No Development Agreement or Notice to Proceed will be issued until the city has certified that the Blowing Dust Control Plan contains reasonably acceptable control measures that, if followed, will prevent or substantially reduce blowing dust during high winds. A cash deposit, performance bond, letter of credit, or other security to secure performance of the Blowing Dust Control Plan, in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council, must be submitted with the Blowing Dust Control Plan.

(C)    It is an affirmative defense to a blowing dust violation that the owner, contractor, developer, or other person in charge of property, who disturbs land made a good faith effort, to the maximum extent possible, to control dust, sand, and dirt, etc., from blowing from the disturbed land site to other real property, including streets and dry wells.

(D)    The Blowing Dust Control Plan shall identify the reasonably acceptable control measures that will be utilized to prevent blowing dust, including persons who will check the site during weekends and holidays and have the ability and means to take corrective action. Corrective action must be available 24 hours per day, seven days per week. The names and phone numbers of such persons shall be included in the plan, and the city shall be advised immediately, in writing, if there are any changes in the names or phone numbers of the person or persons to contact. The Blowing Dust Control Plan and security deposit shall remain in effect for the full period of the activity which disturbs the land. The city may require the Blowing Dust Control Plan and the security deposit to continue beyond the final completion of the land disturbance activity for up to, but not to exceed, two years if the extension is necessary to ensure that the disturbed soil has stabilized.

(E)    Actions by a public utility, the city, or other governmental agency to remove or alleviate an emergency condition, restore utility service, or reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic are exempt from controlling dust.

(F)    Where the occurrence of blowing dust can be reasonably attributable to a given site, the city shall notify the offender to immediately suppress the blowing dust. In addition the city may order the suspension of all activity on the offending site and require the immediate employment of sufficient efforts to control the blowing dust. If the person in possession or control of the site or the contact person or persons listed in the Blowing Dust Control Plan are unavailable or do not initiate sufficient dust control efforts within four hours of being notified to do so, the city may initiate such efforts as it deems reasonable to suppress the blowing dust. The costs incurred by the city for dust suppression efforts shall be borne by the owner, developer, and other persons responsible for the land disturbance activity on the site. The cost for labor and equipment used or hired by the city for dust suppression shall be set by resolution of the Council. Such costs may be deducted from any security filed with a Blowing Dust Control Plan. These costs are in addition to any penalty assessed against a violator.

(G)    Violation of division (A) involving a site of less than one acre is a Class A violation. Failure to notify the city within 24 hours of any changes in the names and phone numbers of persons listed in a Blowing Dust Control Plan who will check the site during weekends and holidays and have the ability and means to take corrective action is a Class A violation. Violation of division (A) involving a site of one acre or more, or failing to implement a Dust Control Plan, or sufficient dust control efforts within four hours of being notified to do so is punishable by a fine of up to $2,500 per day per violation. In addition, failure to pay the fine and the costs incurred by the city for dust suppression shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or licenses.

(Ord. 1992, passed 6-14-99; Am. Ord. 2024, passed 10-9-00) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.13 UNENUMERATED NUISANCES.

(A)    The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in § 92.02 et seq. are declared public nuisances.

(B)    In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated in this subchapter, every other thing, substance or act that is determined by the Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this subchapter.

(Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91)


92.14 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.

(A)    Abatement notice.

(1)    Upon determination by the City Manager or his or her designate that a nuisance exists as defined in the Hermiston Code of Ordinances, a notice shall be posted on the premises liable for the nuisance directing removal or abatement.

(2)    At the time of posting, the city shall mail notice to the owner or agent in charge of the property at the last known address of the owner or agent.

(3)    The notice to abate shall contain:

(a)    A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which or adjacent to which the nuisance exists;

(b)    A direction to remove the nuisance within seven days from the date of the notice;

(c)    A description of the nuisance;

(d)    A statement that unless the nuisance is removed or abated, the city will do so and the cost thereof shall be a lien against the property;

(e)    A statement that the owner or agent in charge of the property may protest the action by actual delivery of notice to the City Manager within seven days from the date of the notice.

(4)    The person posting and mailing the notice as provided herein shall, upon completion of the posting and mailing, execute and file in the office of the Finance Director/Recorder a certificate stating the date and place of mailing and posting.

(5)    An error in the name or address of the owner or agent in charge of the property or the use of a name other than that of the owner or agent shall not make the notice void and in such case the posted notice shall be deemed sufficient.

(B)    Abatement by the owner.

(1)    Within the time allowed by the notice as provided in subsection (A)(3) of this section, the owner or agent in charge of the property shall remove and abate the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.

(2)    Upon the city’s determination that a nuisance does in fact exist, the owner or agent in charge shall within a reasonable time but not more than seven days, remove or abate the nuisance.

(C)    Abatement by the city.

(1)    If within the time fixed, as provided in this chapter, the nuisance has not been abated by the owner or agent in charge of the property, the city shall cause the nuisance to be abated.

(2)    The city shall maintain an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in abating the nuisance and shall include therein an overhead charge of ten percent of the total cost for administration.

(3)    The total cost, including the administrative overhead, shall thereupon be assessed to the property as hereinafter provided.

(D)    Assessment of cost.

(1)    A notice of the assessment shall be forwarded by certified mail with return receipt to the owner or agent in charge of the property by the Finance Director/Recorder. The notice shall contain:

(a)    The total cost, including the administrative overhead, of the abatement.

(b)    A statement that the cost as indicated will become a lien against the property unless paid within 60 days.

(c)    A statement that if the owner or agent in charge of the property objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the Finance Director/Recorder within 30 days from the date of the notice.

(d)    Notice that fee for recording in County Deed Records may be added.

(2)    Objections to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the City Manager or his or her designate. Owners or agents in charge of the property who show total household income below the current year federal poverty threshold may receive 50% reduction in the cost of the assessment indicated.

(3)    An assessment for the cost of the abatement as determined by the City Manager or his designate and adopted as a matter of record by resolution of the Council shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens, and upon the entry being made, it shall constitute a lien against the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated. Also, it may be recorded in the County Deed Records.

(4)    The lien shall be collected in the same manner as improvement liens are collected and shall bear interest at a rate as established by resolution of the City Council. The interest shall commence to run 30 days after the entry in the lien docket.

(5)    An error in the name of the owner or agent in charge of the property shall not void the assessment nor will a failure to receive the notice of the assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property.

(E)    Supplemental nature of provisions. The procedure provided by this section is not exclusive but in addition to procedure provided by other ordinances, and furthermore, the city may proceed summarily to abate a sanitary or other nuisance which exists and from which there is imminent danger to human life or property.

(Ord. 1887, passed 6-26-95; Am. Ord. 1907, passed 7-8-96; Am. Ord. 2197, passed 3-25-13)


92.15 GRAFFITI.

Any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any surface that is not authorized by the owner or person in charge of the property is deemed a public nuisance.

(Ord. 2197, passed 3-25-13)

EXCESSIVE NOISE


92.23 PURPOSE.

This subchapter is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the residents and visitors of Hermiston through the reduction, control, and prevention of loud and raucous noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety; or causes public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to reasonable individuals of ordinary sensitivity.

(Ord. 2259, passed 8-13-18)


92.24 FINDINGS.

The City Council of Hermiston finds that:

(A)    Loud or raucous noise degrades the environment of the city to a degree that is harmful to the health, welfare and safety of its residents and visitors; interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property; interferes with the well-being, tranquility and privacy of the home; and may cause or aggravate health problems.

(B)    The effective control of loud or raucous noise is essential to the health and welfare of the city’s residents and visitors, and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life, including recreation, work and communication.

(C)    The use of sound-amplification devices may create loud and raucous noise that may, in a particular manner and at a particular time and place, substantially and unreasonably invade the privacy, peace and well-being of residents and visitors of the city.

(D)    Certain short-term easing of noise reductions is essential to allow the construction and maintenance of structures, infrastructure, and other elements necessary for the physical and commercial vitality of the city.

(E)    The obligation to draft regulations that affect speech in a content-neutral fashion is of paramount importance to protect the freedom of expression under the Oregon and Federal Constitutions. This chapter enacts narrowly drawn, content-neutral regulations that are to be interpreted as such so as not to infringe upon constitutionally protected rights.

(Ord. 2259, passed 8-13-18)


92.25 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ALARM SYSTEM. Has the meaning as provided in § 95.03.

ANIMAL or ANIMALS. Has the meaning as provided in § 90.02.

CITY. City of Hermiston.

CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city or the City Manager’s designee.

CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The person appointed by the City Manager to enforce the provisions of city ordinances or, by his/her order, specifically designated peace officers.

EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.

EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed to prevent or alleviate physical trauma or property damage, whether actually caused or threatened by an emergency, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

FALSE ALARM. Has the meaning as provided in § 95.03.

HIGHWAY. Every public way, road, street, thoroughfare, and place, including bridges, viaducts, and other structures in the city, open, used, or intended for use of the general public for vehicles or vehicular traffic as a matter of right.

NOISE-SENSITIVE AREA. Includes, but is not limited to, a sleeping facility, or real property normally used as a school, church, hospital, or public library within the service area of the City of Hermiston. Property used in industrial or agricultural activity is not a noise-sensitive area, unless it also meets the above criteria in more than an incidental manner.

PERSON. Has the meaning as provided in § 10.05(B).

PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound that can be heard by a reasonable individual of ordinary sensitivities using his or her unaided hearing faculties, including, but not limited to, understandable spoken words, comprehensible musical rhythms, vocal sounds other than words, mechanical, or electronic noise.

PREMISES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. Includes any premises open to the general public for the use of motor vehicles, whether the premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of the premises.

PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a government entity.

PUBLIC SPACE. Any real property or structures on real property, owned by a government entity and normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to parks and other recreational areas.

RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any area of the city that is designated as residential land use in accordance with the terms and maps of the city’s zoning ordinance.

SLEEPING FACILITY. Includes, but is not limited to, a residential dwelling, hotel, motel, or residential care facility.

UTILITY SERVICE. The normal operation of utilities within the city, whether provided by the city or by another entity, including but not limited to water, wastewater, electricity, natural gas, telecommunications and garbage hauling.

(Ord. 1709, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 2259, passed 8-13-18)


92.26 JURISDICTION.

(A)    Scope. This subchapter applies to all sound originating within the jurisdictional limits of the city.

(Ord. 1709, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 2259, passed 8-13-18)


92.27 GENERAL PROHIBITION.

(A)    No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued:

(1)    Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise within the jurisdictional limits of the city; or

(2)    Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable individuals of ordinary sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the city; or

(3)    Within the jurisdictional limits of the city, any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any individuals within the residential area from which said noises are heard; or as to unreasonably interfere with, or detrimentally or adversely affect, the peace and comfort of residents or their guests, or operators or customers in places of business.

(B)    Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud or raucous noise include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1)    The proximity of the sound to a noise-sensitive area;

(2)    The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound emanates and the area where it is heard;

(3)    The time of day or night the sound occurs;

(4)    The duration of the sound;

(5)    Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and

(6)    Whether the sound is created by a sound-amplification device.

(Ord. 1709, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 8-26-91; Am. Ord. 2259, passed 8-13-18) Penalty, see § 92.99


92.28 NOISES PROHIBITED.

The following acts are declared to be per se violations of this chapter. It includes, but is not limited to:

(A)    Unreasonable noises. The unreasonable making of, or unreasonably permitting to be made, any unreasonably loud, boisterous, or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion, or vibration in any residential dwelling, place of business or upon any highway, park or other place or building. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises, commotion or vibration incidental to the operation of these places when conducted in accordance with the usual standards of practice and in a manner which will not unreasonably disturb the peace and comfort of adjacent noise-sensitive areas or which will not detrimentally affect the operators of adjacent places of business are exempted from this provision.

(B)    Sound-amplification devices. Except as allowed by applicable city, state, or federal laws, a city special permit, or as a city hosted event, the unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a sound-amplifying device in the following areas:

(1)    Within or adjacent to a residential or noise-sensitive area.

(2)    Within public space if the sound is plainly audible across the real property line of the public space from which the sound emanates and is unreasonably loud or raucous.

(C)    Yelling, shouting, and similar activities. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable individuals of ordinary sensitivities. This subsection is to be applied only to those situations where the disturbance is not a result of the content of the communication but due to the volume, duration, location, timing, or other factors not based on content.

(D)    Construction and similar activities.

(1)    The construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, street, highway or the like, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of the public welfare and safety, emergency construction or repair noises are exempt from this provision.

(2)    In nonemergency situations, the City Manager may issue a permit, upon application, if the City Manager determines that the public welfare and safety, as affected by loud and raucous noise caused by construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of buildings, streets and highways between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. will not be impaired, and if the City Manager further determines that loss or inconvenience would otherwise result. The permit shall grant permission in nonemergency cases for a period of not more than 30 days. The permit may be renewed once, for a period of 30 days or less.

(E)    Noise-sensitive areas. The creation of any unreasonably loud and raucous noise adjacent to any noise-sensitive area while it is in use, and which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the noise-sensitive area or which disturbs the individuals within the noise-sensitive area.

(F)    Blowers and similar devices. In a residential area or noise-sensitive area, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan, or any internal combustion engine; provided, that the noise from the blower, power fan or internal combustion engine can be heard across the property line from which it emanates.

(G)    Commercial establishments adjacent to residential property. Unreasonably loud or raucous noise from the premises of any commercial establishment, including any outdoor area which is a part of or under the control of the establishment, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., which is plainly audible at the nearest property line of a noise-sensitive area within the service area of the City of Hermiston.

(H)    Vehicle horns, signaling devices and similar devices. The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, on any motor vehicle on a highway or premises open to the public otherwise than as a reasonable warning or makes any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device. The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, as a danger warning, is exempt from this prohibition.

(I)    Loading or unloading. The creation of unreasonably loud, raucous and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle at a place of business or residence.

(J)    Nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place. The reasonable sounding of such devices by houses of religious worship, seasonal contribution solicitors, or by the city for traffic control purposes are exempt from the operation of this subsection.

(K)    Emergency signaling devices. The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding of any emergency signaling device, including fire alarm, siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling device, except in an emergency or except as provided in subsections (K)(1) and (2) of this section.

(1)    The testing of an emergency signaling device occurring between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed five minutes. Testing of the emergency signaling system shall not occur more than once in any calendar month.

(2)    Sounding or permitting the sounding of any alarm system shall terminate within 15 minutes of activation unless an emergency exists. If a false alarm occurs more than twice in a calendar month, then the owner or person responsible for the alarm system shall be in violation of this chapter.

(L)    Radios, televisions, boomboxes and similar devices. The use or operation of a radio, television, boombox, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any individual other than the player or operator of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of residents in a residential area or noise-sensitive area.

(M)    Animals and birds. Unreasonably loud and raucous noise emitted by an animal or bird for which a person is responsible. A person is responsible for an animal if the person owns, controls, or otherwise cares for the animal or bird.

(Ord. 1709, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 2259, passed 8-13-18)


92.29 EXEMPTIONS.

Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the prohibitions of § 92.28 and are in addition to the exemptions specifically set forth in that section:

(A)    Motor vehicles on highways or premises open to the public; provided, that the prohibition in §§ 92.28(H) and (K)(2) continues to apply.

(B)    Repairs of utility structures which pose a clear and immediate danger to life, health or significant loss of property.

(C)    Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or alarm systems used to signal an emergency, provided the prohibition under § 92.28(K) continues to apply.

(D)    The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting individuals to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.

(E)    Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways by or on the behalf of the city, state, or federal government, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when public welfare and convenience render it impractical to perform the work between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

(F)    Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including but not limited to school athletic and school entertainment events.

(G)    Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting events, and other similar outdoor events; provided, that a special permit has been obtained beforehand from the city’s proper permitting authority; or the event is being sponsored by the city; or the event has been sanctioned by the city on city owned property.

(H)    Noise emanating from the combustion, detonation, or concussion caused by using fireworks or other similar devices, from July 1 until July 5 of each year.

(Ord. 1709, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 2259, passed 8-13-18)


92.30 ENFORCEMENT.

The City Manager, Police Chief, Code Enforcement Official, or any designee(s) thereof will have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained in this subchapter. Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the City Manager, Police Chief or Code Enforcement Official from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice, or education.

(Ord. 1709, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 2259, passed 8-13-18)


92.31 [RESERVED].


92.99 PENALTY.

(A)    Anyone who violates any provision of §§ 92.01 through 92.10, § 92.12, and § 92.13 commits a Class A violation. The court may, in addition to the fine, order the convicted person to reimburse the city for the actual expenses incurred by the city in abating the nuisance and to order the person to abate the nuisance. Each day’s violation of a provision of the sections constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 1750, passed 10-28-91; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98; Am. Ord. 1992, passed 6-14-99)

(B)    Violation of any provision of § 92.11 is a Class A violation. The court may order the convicted person to pay court costs, assessments, and restitution, when applicable. Any person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in § 92.11, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating the act, shall be guilty of an offense of attempt to commit as to that offense. (Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(C)    Violation of any provision of §§ 92.27 through 92.28 shall constitute a Class A violation. (Ord. 1709, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98; Am. Ord. 2262, passed 9-24-18)


CHAPTER 93 Parks and Recreation

Section

93.01    Creation of Parks and Recreation Committee

93.02    Definition

93.03    Exclusions and exceptions

93.04    Rules and regulations

93.99    Penalty


93.01 CREATION OF PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE.

(A)    There is hereby created the Parks and Recreation Committee to be composed of seven members.

(B)    There shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council seven members:

(1)    Three to serve for a three-year term;

(2)    Three to serve for a two-year term;

(3)    One to serve for a one-year term;

(C)    Thereafter, as the term of each member expires, the Mayor and Council shall appoint a new member to serve for a period of three years.

(D)    This Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council on all park and recreation matters and act as the community tree board.

(E)    Applicants who reside within the Hermiston city limits shall be given preference for appointment onto the Parks and Recreation Committee.

(Ord. 1979, passed 11-9-98; Am. Ord. 2152, passed 8-25-08; Am. Ord. 2209, passed 10-28-13)


93.02 DEFINITION.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

PUBLIC PARKS. All properties owned and controlled by the city and operated as parks for use by the public.

(Ord. 1588, passed 4-28-86)


93.03 EXCLUSIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.

(A)    The following rules and regulations in § 93.04 shall not apply to employees of the city acting in the course of their normal employment or to individuals or groups which have received prior approval of the city to carry on activities which would otherwise be prohibited.

(B)    Exceptions to the rules and regulations in § 93.04 or reservation of any park facility shall be made through the City Manager or his designee. The City Manager or his designee may approve the exceptions or reservations when he finds:

(1)    That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;

(2)    That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;

(3)    That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;

(4)    That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary activity or burdensome expense on the city; and

(5)    That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application.

(Ord. 1588, passed 4-28-86)


93.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.

For the conduct of persons using or frequenting the public parks of the city, the following rules and regulations to be observed and enforced within the public parks are hereby established:

(A)    Cutting, removing or damaging any flowers, trees, or shrubs or otherwise disturbing the surface of any public park is prohibited.

(B)    Defacing, mutilating or damaging any buildings, equipment, tables, benches, signs or other public property in any public park is prohibited.

(C)    Motorized vehicles shall not be operated in any city park.

(D)    Bicycles, skateboards or skates shall not be operated on park sidewalks in any manner so as to be a safety threat or hazard to pedestrians, or operated at any time on any tennis or basketball courts.

(E)    It shall be prohibited to ride or drive any horse or animal upon any portion of any public park.

(F)    Dogs shall not be permitted to run at large within any public park and all dogs shall be kept in control on a leash, cord, chain or otherwise at all times. Owners of dogs or other animals destroying or damaging park property will be held liable for the full value of the property damaged or destroyed in addition to impounding fees and the penalty imposed for violation of this chapter.

(G)    All trash, garbage and litter shall be disposed of in the receptacles provided.

(H)    Fires may be built only within fireplaces, fire pits or stoves provided specifically for such purposes.

(I)    Operation or playing of any amplified musical instrument or any equipment manufactured primarily for the purpose of amplifying sound in any public park which disturbs the repose of others shall be prohibited.

(J)    Park hours shall be from sunrise to 12:01 a.m. Lights at athletic facilities shall be off after 11:00 p.m. Other park hours may be established by resolution of the City Council. Loitering after hours or overnight camping shall not be permitted in any city park.

(K)    Sales or solicitations in any park shall be allowed only as part of a permitted community-wide activity or under a franchise agreement with the city. Commercial vendors without a franchise agreement must obtain a solicitor’s license prior to sales or solicitations.

(L)    Personal or group displays or shows by civic, fraternal, charitable or nonprofit organizations may be allowed upon approval of the City Manager or his or her designee.

(M)    The consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in city parks; provided, however, that the consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted for private events in McKenzie Park. A "private event" is generally defined as a function which: (1) is hosted by a private individual; (2) is personal and non-commercial; (3) is only open to persons personally invited by the host; (4) provides no monetary gain to the host; and (5) does not engage in charges or fund-raising for anything whatsoever, including any charge for admission or donation for food, beverage, music or other goods or services. Rules governing the conditions under which a permit may be issued for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at private events in McKenzie Park shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council and administered by the City Manager or his or her designee.

(N)    Requests for reserving any park facility or entire park shall be made with the City Manager or his or her designee. The fees for reserving any park facility or an entire city park shall be as established by resolution of the City Council.

(O)    Using any buildings, equipment, tables, benches, signs or other property provided by the city in any manner other than its intended use or design in any city park is prohibited.

(Ord. 1588, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 1670, passed 9-12-88; Am. Ord. 2027, passed 12-18-00; Am. Ord. 2119, passed 3-27-06; Am. Ord. 2134, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 2136, passed 7-11-07; Am. Ord. 2152, passed 8-25-08; Am. Ord. 2171, passed 3-28-11; Am. Ord. 2227, passed 3-23-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.99 PENALTY.

Any person violating any of the foregoing rules and regulations commits a Class A violation and may be excluded by a city police officer from a city park for not more than 30 days.

(Ord. 1588, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98; Am. Ord. 2227, passed 3-23-2015)




CHAPTER 94 Streets and Sidewalks

Section

General Provisions

94.01    City’s jurisdiction over public rights-of-way

94.02    Sidewalk repair

94.03    Planting and maintenance of trees

94.04    Running of water on streets prohibited

94.05    Definitions

94.06    Driving on sidewalks

94.07    Obstructing streets and sidewalks

94.08    Vending goods from streets or sidewalks

94.09    Leaving cellar door or grating open on sidewalk

94.10    Removal of ice and snow

94.11    Maintenance of drainage swales.

Numbering and Naming Streets

94.20    Uniform system

94.21    Base lines

94.22    Suffixes

94.23    Prefixes

94.24    Numbering of lots and structures

94.25    Authority to assign numbers

94.26    Location and type of numbers

Excavations

94.35    Short title

94.36    Definitions

94.37    Permit application

94.38    Routing and protection of traffic

94.39    Relocation and protection of city-owned facilities

94.40    Protection of watercourses

94.41    Preservation of monuments

94.42    Clearance for vital structures

94.43    Breaking through pavement

94.44    Depth of structures

94.45    Backfilling

94.46    Noise, dust and debris

94.47    Inspections

94.48    Maintenance of drawings

94.49    Clean up of area

94.50    Emergency action

94.51    Liability of City

94.52    Penalty charge for excavating newly surfaced streets

Driveway Construction

94.65    Definitions

94.66    Prohibited activity

94.67    Permit application and issuance

94.68    Supervision of construction

94.69    Construction requirements

94.70    Width and location

94.71    Cooperation with Building Inspector

94.72    Maintenance and removal

94.73    Unusual conditions

94.99    Penalty

Cross-reference:

Moving buildings, see §§152.25 through 152.31

Spitting on sidewalks, see §130.08

GENERAL PROVISIONS


94.01 CITY’S JURISDICTION OVER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.

(A)    Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following mean:

(1)    CITY. The City of Hermiston.

(2)    PERSON. Individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company and similar entities.

(3)    PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including subsurface and air space over these areas.

(4)    WITHIN THE CITY. Territory over which the city now has or acquires jurisdiction for the exercise of its powers.

(B)    Jurisdiction. The City of Hermiston has control over all public rights-of-way within the city under the authority of the city charter and state law.

(C)    Scope of regulatory control. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

(D)    City permission requirement. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises, licenses and permits.

(E)    Obligations of the city. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

(Ord. 1923, passed 2-10-97)


94.02 SIDEWALK REPAIR.

(A)    It shall be the duty of every owner of any lot or part thereof or parcels of land fronting any of the public streets of the city where sidewalks have been constructed abutting the lots or parcels of land to keep sidewalks in good repair, and in a safe and sound condition for the travel of the public, and to keep sidewalks clear of sand, weeds or other obstructions.

(1)    The owner of real property responsible for maintaining the adjacent sidewalk shall be liable to any person injured because of any negligence of owner in failing to maintain the sidewalk in good condition.

(2)    If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to persons or property caused by the failure of a person to perform the duty which this section imposes, the person shall compensate the city for the amount of the damages thus paid. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section.

(B)    If the owner of any lot or part thereof or parcel of land shall suffer any sidewalk along the same to become out of repair, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to post a notice of repair on the adjacent property headed "Notice to Repair Sidewalk" in letters not less than one inch in length and the notice shall, in legible characters, direct the owner, agent or occupant of the property immediately to repair the same in good and substantial manner, and the City Engineer shall file with the Finance Director/Recorder an affidavit of the posting of the notice stating the date when and the place where the same was posted.

(C)    It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or occupant immediately after the posting of the notice and before making repair to obtain from the City Engineer a permit so to do which shall prescribe the kind of repairs to be made, the material to be used and specifications therefor; and the owner, agent or occupant shall make repairs within 20 days from the posting of the notice. If the owner, agent or occupant of any lot or part thereof or parcel of land shall fail, neglect or refuse to make the sidewalk repairs within the time designated, the Council may authorize the City Engineer to make the same, the City Engineer to keep an accurate account of the cost of labor and materials in making the repairs in front of each lot or part thereof or parcel of land fronting on the sidewalk upon which repairs are made.



(D)    The Council shall, at the first regular meeting in the month of September of each year, examine the reports upon sidewalk repairs field by the City Engineer in the office of the Finance Director/Recorder during the preceding year, and by ordinance assess upon each of the lots or parts thereof or parcels of land fronting upon sidewalks which have been so repaired, the cost of making repairs and 10% additional to defray the cost of notice, engineering and supervision. In each case all assessments may be combined in one assessment roll and the same shall be entered on the docket of city liens and collected in the same manner as is provided for special assessments for street improvements.

(Ord. 56, passed 5-31-11; Am. Ord. 1100, passed 11-7-77)


94.03 PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE OF TREES.

(A)    Planting trees in public place. No trees or shrubs shall be planted in, or removed from, any public parking strip or other public place in the city without permission from the City Manager or his duly authorized representative.

(B)    Street tree plans.

(1)    All trees and shrubs hereafter planted in any public parking strip or other public place in the city shall conform as to species and location to the street tree plan for the public place, street, or portion thereof.

(2)    Street tree plans for streets or public places within the city shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. These plans shall consist of maps of streets, blocks, or portions of streets and public places where the planting is permitted and shall by appropriate legends and symbols specify the species and location of the trees and shrubs which may be planted along each street or block or portion thereof or public place shown by the map thereof.

(3)    In formulating and adopting street tree plans, the public safety in the use of streets, sidewalks, and public places, the protection and preservation of public improvements, and the beautification of public places shall be taken into consideration by the following means:

(a)    Species of trees and shrubs shall be chosen with due regard to their size, appearance, rate, and manner of growth and other characteristics and to the size, nature, and construction and traffic volume on the street or other public place involved; and

(b)    Regulations regarding location and setback of trees permitted in public parking strips and other public places shall be adopted with due regard to traffic visibility, utility lien clearance, and relative location of public paving and other facilities.

(C)    Certain trees prohibited. No person shall plant in any public parking strip the following trees: poplar, Russian olive, Chinese elm, cottonwood, and certain locust. No person shall plant willow, cottonwood, or poplar trees anywhere in the city unless the City Manager or his duly authorized representative approves the site as one where the tree roots will not interfere with a public sewer.

(D)    Trimming and pruning of trees. The City Manager or his duly authorized representative may cause to be trimmed, pruned, or removed any trees, shrubs, plants, or vegetation in any parking strip or other public place, or may require any property owner to trim, prune, or remove any trees, shrubs, plants, or vegetation in a parking strip abutting upon the owner’s property; and failure to comply therewith, after 30 days’ notice by the Finance Director/Recorder, shall be deemed a violation of this section.

(E)    Trimming or removal of overhanging trees. If any tree or shrub, or part thereof, overhangs any public street or alley or sidewalk at a height of less than 14 feet above the street or alley surface or less than ten feet above the sidewalk or in any other way endangers or is likely to endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, sewer, or sidewalk, the same is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in §92.14.

(F)    Right to appeal. Appeals from orders made under sections on trimming, pruning or removal may be made to the City Council.

(G)    Damage to trees in public place prohibited. No person shall abuse, destroy, or mutilate any tree, shrub, or plant in a public parking strip or in any other public place, or attach or place any rope or wire (other than one used to support a young or broken tree), sign, poster, handbill, or other thing to or on any tree growing in a public place, or cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come into contract with any tree, or allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come in contact with their roots or leaves.

(Ord. 696, passed 4-26-71) Penalty, see §94.99


94.04 RUNNING OF WATER ON STREETS PROHIBITED.

(A)    No person, firm or corporation shall cause, permit or allow any irrigation water or water used for domestic or other purposes to run upon or cross any of the streets of the city unless the same is confined in properly constructed flumes, ditches, pipelines or culverts and no ditches, flumes, pipelines or culverts for water shall be constructed in, upon or across any of the streets of the city until a permit therefor shall first be obtained from the Finance Director/Recorder of the city, and any ditch, flume, pipeline or culvert shall be constructed under the supervision of the City Engineer and of material as the Engineer may prescribe.

(B)    It shall be the duty of every person who uses such ditch, flume, pipeline or culvert for the transmission of water, or whose land is served by water which passes through the ditch, flume, pipeline or culvert to keep the same in repair.

(Ord. 92, passed 7-5-17) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.05 Definitions.

For the purpose of §§94.05 through 94.10, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

PERSON. Any natural Person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other legally identifiable group, whether he or it is acting for himself or itself or as the clerk, servant, employee or agent of another.

PREMISES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. Has the same meaning as that set forth in ORS 801.400.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


94.06 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any animal or vehicle within any city park or upon, over, or across any sidewalk, except where a proper incline or crossing is provided for that purpose. This section does not apply to vehicles being used to maintain these areas or when specific permission has been granted by the city to do so.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.07 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.

It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to gather or to stand upon any sidewalk or street so as to prevent, interrupt or obstruct the travel or free passage over the same by the public, or to place or deposit any article which has the same effect. This section does not apply when specific permission has been granted by the city to do so.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.08 VENDING GOODS FROM STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any portion of a street or sidewalk for the purpose of vending goods, services, wares or merchandise by public outcry or otherwise, except when granted specific permission by the city to do so.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.09 LEAVING CELLAR DOOR OR GRATING OPEN ON SIDEWALK.

It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of any kind in or upon any sidewalk except when the same is necessarily open during the immediate use thereof. During the time the opening shall be properly guarded and protected.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.10 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.

It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant or person having control or custody of any premises or unimproved property to allow snow or ice to stand upon any sidewalks abutting upon the premises or property for a period longer than two hours after the snow or ice has ceased to fall thereon; provided, however, that if the snow is falling or the ice accumulating after the hour of 6:00 p.m., the same shall be removed within two hours after 7:00 a.m. on the next day.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.11 MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGE SWALES.

(A)    Definitions. For the pu rpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

BIOSWALE. Broad open channel that is lined with grass vegetation, which acts as a filter to remove pollutants from runoff.

PROPERTY OWNER. A person having any legal or equitable interest in property, including, but not limited to, a purchaser, lessee, lienholder, holder of any security interest in such property, or tenant.

(B)    Maintenance required. The property owner must maintain all bioswales on or abutting their property as installed at the time of swale construction. The owner shall maintain the grade, slope, depth, plantings, grass and all other facilities necessary for the operation of the swale.

(C)    Filing of plans. The project engineer shall file the as-built drawings for each street improvement containing swales. The plans will be kept on file with the Building Department.

(D)    Nuisance. Any bioswale determined to be non-functioning by the City Manager or the Manager's duly authorized representative must be repaired to the original design standard within 30 days of notice to the property owner or it will be declared a nuisance. The nuisance will be abated following the procedure  in § 92.14.

(Ord. 2139, passed 7-9-07)

NUMBERING AND NAMING STREETS


94.20 UNIFORM SYSTEM.

All streets shall be designated and all structures fronting on streets, except accessory structures, shall be numbered in accordance with this subchapter and the maps and plans on file in the office of the City Engineer.

(Ord. 556, passed 11-24-65; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1475, passed 7-25-83)


94.21 BASE LINES.

First Street and First Street extended to the south along the section lien shall be the north-south base line; Main Street east from First Street and Hermiston Avenue west, from First street shall constitute the east-west base lien for the establishment of quadrants, with each base line extended to the city limits.

(Ord. 556, passed 11-24-65)


94.22 SUFFIXES.

(A)    All streets running northerly and southerly shall be denominated by numbers, that is, First Street, and shall be designated as "streets".

(B)    A street lying between numbered streets shall be denominated by number and designated "place", for example, First Place.

(C)    All streets running in an easterly and westerly direction, with the exception of Main Street, shall be named and designated "avenues."

(D)    Circular and semi-circular streets shall be designated as "drives."

(Ord. 556, passed 11-24-65)


94.23 PREFIXES.

To indicate the general location of any street, it shall bear the prefix of the quadrant in which it is located, for example, "S.E. Third Street"; and for the same purpose, each avenue shall bear the prefix of the half in which it is located, for example, "East Hurlburt Avenue."

(Ord. 556, passed 11-24-65)


94.24 NUMBERING OF LOTS AND STRUCTURES.

A lot or structure fronting a street shall be numbered as follows:

(A)    Even numbers shall be assigned lots and structures to the right of an observer facing out from the base lines and uneven numbers to the opposite side.

(B)    Numbers shall be fixed by grids as established by the maps and plans on file in the office of the City Engineer. Whenever feasible, each grid section shall encompass a square block and each grid’s length shall be allowed 100 numbers. Numbers shall run consecutively with a new 100, starting at each grid line.

(C)    Owner of groups of dwelling units may place an assigned number upon the principal building or office of the group and use numbers or letters to designate each of the units as may be required.

(Ord. 556, passed 11-24-65)


94.25 AUTHORITY TO ASSIGN NUMBERS.

In conformity with the provisions of this subchapter, the City Engineer shall assign numbers to all lots and structures now or hereafter to be constructed. A person who obtains a building permit for construction of a new building shall, at the time of receipt of the permit, obtain from the City Engineer the number for the building.

(Ord. 556, passed 11-24-65)


94.26 LOCATION AND TYPE OF NUMBERS.

Numbers assigned shall be at least 3 1/2 inches high including background and shall be of a nature and location as to be easily legible from the center line of the street, and shall be installed within 60 days from the date of issue of the number.

(Ord. 556, passed 11-24-65) Penalty, see § 94.99

EXCAVATIONS


94.35 SHORT TITLE.

This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Street Excavation Ordinance of the city.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)


94.36 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his designate, including the Street Superintendent, city inspectors and others.

EXCAVATION. Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the public place.

FACILITY. Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor, cable, junction box, transformer or any other material, structure or object of any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under of over any public place.

PUBLIC PLACE. Any public street, street right-of-way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza or any other public property owned or controlled by the city.

SUBSTRUCTURE. Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable or wire or any other structure located below the surface of any public place.

VITAL STRUCTURES. Those elements of the fire and safety protection system of the city and those elements of public and private utility systems which are vital to the health and safety of the city.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)


94.37 PERMIT APPLICATION.

(A)    No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the City Manager. The written application shall state that the applicant agrees to comply with prescribed procedures for making and restoring cuts and to make the necessary payments for work performed by the city. The application, when approved and signed by the City Manager, shall constitute a permit. The permit fees shall be in amounts as established by resolution of the City Council. Fees shall be doubled if the start of construction occurs prior to application of the permit.

(B)    One permit may cover more than one cut providing the following conditions are met:

(1)    Cuts shall be within a 400-foot section of street.

(2)    All work to all cuts is performed by the same contractor.

(3)    Each cut is listed on the cut permit with a map showing the location and size.

(C)    No permit shall be given to an applicant without information regarding the contractor performing the restoration of the city right-of-way. If more than one contractor is used to perform the cut restoration, or the contractor changes, a new cut permit shall be required.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)


94.38 ROUTING AND PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC.

(A)    The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the City Manager may permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him, if in his opinion it is necessary.

(B)    The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred feet. If an excavation is made across a public street, alley or sidewalk, at least one safe crossing shall be maintained when possible for vehicles and pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along the sidewalk line.

(C)    It shall be the duty of every person making an excavation in or upon any public place to place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for safety according Oregon Department of Transportation specifications. Warning signs shall be placed far enough back of the construction operation to alert traffic within a public street, and cones or other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, all in accordance with Oregon Department of Transportation specifications. The permittee shall notify the city when the public street is again usable to traffic. He shall see that all barriers are removed at this time so that normal traffic routing can proceed. Barriers shall meet Oregon Department of Transportation specifications.

(D)    Warning lights shall be electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. Electrical markers or flashers shall emit a light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting materials may be used to supplement, but not replace, light sources.

(E)    The permit for a street excavation may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such case, the permit shall not be valid until the notice is given.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.39 RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF CITY-OWNED FACILITIES.

The permittee shall not interfere with any existing city-owned utility without the written consent of the City Manager. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing city-owned utility, this shall be done by the city. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of the work be borne by the permittee.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)


94.40 PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES.

(A)    The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of the curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersection street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained.

(B)    The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for damage resulting from his failure to so provide.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)


94.41 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.

Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey bench mark within the city shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the City Manager to so do. Permission to remove or disturb the monuments, reference points or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the person applying for the permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of this monument by the city.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)


94.42 CLEARANCE FOR VITAL STRUCTURES.

The excavation work shall not interfere with access to vital structures.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.43 BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.

(A)    The City Manager shall require cutting of pavement surfaces ahead of excavations in a manner as to confine pavement damage to the limits of the trench. Pavement wearing surface cuts shall be made with a sharp edged tool which will result in a smooth edge along the sides of the excavation.

(B)    Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or saw cut edge.

(C)    Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and over-breakers, and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.

(D)    Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the center line of the trench.

(E)    Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line.

(F)    Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be required by the City Manager.

(G)    The permittee shall not be required to repair damage existing prior to excavation unless his cut results in small floating sections that my be unstable, in which case the permittee shall remove and refill the area.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.44 DEPTH OF STRUCTURES.

(A)    No person shall, without written permission of the City Manager, install any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts and catch basins at a distance less than:

(1)    Streets. Thirty inches below the established street or alley grade.

(2)    Parkways.

(a)    The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 24 inches below established street or alley grade when the substructure parallels the parkway.

(b)    The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 24 inches below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when a substructure is at right angles to the parkway.

(3)    Other public places. The minimum depth of any substructure in any other public place shall be 24 inches below the surface; provided, however, that the City Manager may permit a lesser depth in special cases.

(B)    Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to maintain the specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of grade in the surface unless the grade in the substructure interferes with the maintenance of, or travel on, a public street.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.45 BACKFILLING.

(A)    Selected backfill material shall be placed in trenches containing pipe simultaneously on both sides of the pipe for the full width of the trench in layers about six inches in depth and tamped thoroughly with a pneumatic tamper. The entire depth of the trench shall be thoroughly compacted with selected material and by means of hand or mechanically operated tampers, in layers of approximately six inches and shall be brought to the required surface grade without damage to the pipe.

(B)    In lieu of the backfilling procedure specified above, river run gravel or crushed rock or gravel may be used for backfilling that portion of the trench more than six inches above the top of the pipe, provided the maximum size of material shall not exceed four inches in diameter and shall be of uniform graduation with 20% or more passing a 1/4-inch square screen, 3/4"- 0 crushed rock shall be placed in the final 12 inches of the trench and compacted in six-inch lifts, to a smooth finished grade equal to the existing surface.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.46 NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS.

Each permittee shall conduct excavation work in a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.47 INSPECTIONS.

The City Manager shall have inspections made as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this subchapter. The permittee shall notify the city prior to backfilling an excavation so that proper inspection may be made.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.48 MAINTENANCE OF DRAWINGS.

Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in substructures under the surface of any public place used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication impulse, water, steam, ammonia or oil in the city shall file with the City Manager within 120 days after adoption of this chapter a map or set of maps each drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet showing in detail the location, size, description and date of installation, if known, of all substructures, except service line designed to serve a single property owner, beneath the surface of the public place belonging to, used by or under the control of the person having any interest and shall file with the City Manager within 15 days after the first day of January of each and every year a corrected map or set of maps each drawn to the scale including all installations made during the previous year to and including the last day of the year provided, however, that a public utility owner may at its option provide corrected atlas sheets at more frequent intervals.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.49 CLEAN UP OF AREA.

Immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall, at his or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the City Manager, the work may be done by the city and the cost thereof charged to the permittee.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.50 EMERGENCY ACTION.

Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the making of the excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the location of trouble in a conduit or pipe or for making repairs provided that the person making the excavation shall apply to the City Manager for a permit on the first working day after the work is commenced.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)


94.51 LIABILITY OF CITY.

This subchapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee any liability responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or by the approval of any excavation work.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)


94.52 PENALTY CHARGE FOR EXCAVATING NEWLY SURFACED STREETS.

In order to conserve new paving and resurfacing of streets, pavement cuts are prohibited therein except for emergency repairs or upon payment of a penalty charge. The maximum period of time for which a penalty shall apply to a street shall be five years. The penalty shall be five times the cost of restoring the pavement surface during the first year, four times the restoration costs during the second year, three times the restoration costs during the third year, two times the restoration costs during the fourth year and equal to the restoration costs during the fifth year. This penalty fee shall be computed in addition to the normal resurfacing charge and shall be computed from the date at which the city accepted the newly paved surface. In order to avoid the necessity of these penalties, the city shall inform utilities and affected property owners before new paving or resurfacing is performed. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to any necessary reservicing of utility lines serving existing structures.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97)

DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION


94.65 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

BUSINESS DRIVEWAY APPROACH. A driveway approach providing ingress and egress to any property other than residential property.

CORNER. The point of intersection of the lines of two street curb faces extended into the street intersection.

CURB PARKING SPACE. A length of curb equal to 18 feet where an automobile or other vehicle can park.

CURB RETURN. That portion of a curb next to a driveway approach which includes the radius of curvature or the ramp-type lug on commercial or industrial type pavements and which connects the driveway approach to the street curb.

DRIVEWAY. A place on private property for the operation of automobiles and other vehicles.

DRIVEWAY APPROACH. An area, construction, or facility between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from a roadway of a public street to private property. For clarification, a Driveway Approach must provide access to something definite on private property such as a parking area, a driveway, or a door at least seven feet wide intended and used for the entrance of vehicles.

OUTSIDE SIDEWALK LINE. A line parallel to the property line lying along the edge of the sidewalk nearest the street roadway or curb; or where no sidewalk exists, a line in the street right-of-way parallel to and four feet from the line of the private property.

PARCEL OF LAND. A lot or lots, or a tract officially registered under one ownership.

RESIDENT DRIVEWAY APPROACH. A driveway approach providing ingress and egress to residential property.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63)


94.66 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break out, or remove any curb along a street or alley without first obtaining a permit for a driveway approach, as hereinafter provided.

(B)    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend, or permit or cause to be constructed, altered, or extended, any driveway approach which can be used only as a parking space or area between the curb and private property.

(C)    All permits granted for the use of public property under the terms of this subchapter shall be revocable at the will of the City Council.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.67 PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.

(A)    Any person desiring to construct a driveway approach across any curbing, parking, sidewalk, or sidewalk space shall first make application to the City Engineer for a permit therefor. The application shall be in writing upon a form provided by the city, and made available at the office of the City Engineer. The application shall contain information showing type of construction, the width of the proposed driveway approach, the location of the driveway approach by lot and block number, as well as by street and house number, and other information as may be required by the City Engineer. The application shall be filed by the property owner desiring to construct the driveway approach or by his or her duly authorized agent.

(B)    The permit shall be issued, at no charge, by the City Engineer if he has determined that the applicant has complied with the terms of this subchapter.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63)


94.68 SUPERVISION OF CONSTRUCTION.

All work done under a permit issued in compliance with this subchapter shall be under the direction and supervision of the City Engineer, who is hereby authorized to make the necessary rules, regulations, and specifications with respect to materials for and method of construction of driveway approaches. A permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be revoked by the City Engineer at any time he is satisfied that the work is not being performed according to the provision hereof.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63)


94.69 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.

In addition to the rules, regulations, and specifications promulgated by the City Engineer with respect to driveway approaches, the following requirements shall be complied with in the work done under the provisions of this subchapter.

(A)    The outside of the driveway approach shall be a straight grade from the top of the curb to the grade of the outside sidewalk line.

(B)    No curb cuts shall be made beyond any property line as projected except when consented to in writing by the adjoining property owner involved.

(C)    The top of the paving of the driveway slab at the back of the curb line shall be 1 5/8 inches above the flow line of the gutter and shall slope in a straight line to the flow line of the gutter, and shall be constructed in a manner that will not interfere with or obstruct the drainage in the street.

(D)    The owner and contractor shall protect the public from injury or damage during the construction of driveway approaches, and it is herein stipulated, as an essential condition of the issuance of a permit, that the city shall not be liable for damage which may arise from the prosecution of work.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.70 WIDTH AND LOCATION.

(A)    Driveway approaches, regardless of zoning, shall be a maximum of 36 feet plus a transition of at least five feet on each side of the driveway cut from the edge of the curb cut to the top of the curb.

(B)    Where the frontage of the parcel of land does not exceed 60 feet in width, there may be constructed only one driveway approach.

(C)    Where the frontage of the parcel of land exceeds 60 feet in width, the cumulative total of all curb cuts for driveway approaches shall not exceed 60% of the frontage of the parcel of land unless a different percentage is required by the City Engineer based upon site specific conditions relating to drainage, access spacing, or other criteria deemed relevant by the city. Wherever more than one driveway is proposed for a parcel, at least 25 feet shall separate each driveway approach.

(D)    Driveway standards for all driveways constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall conform to the requirements of § 157.150, the City of Hermiston Standard Plans and Specifications, and the spacing standards in the Hermiston Transportation System Plan.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63; Am. Ord. 2268, passed 10-22-18) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.71 COOPERATION WITH BUILDING INSPECTOR.

Any plans submitted to the Building Inspector for approval which include or involve unusual driveway approaches or problems shall be referred by the Building Inspector to the City Engineer for his approval before a building permit shall be issued.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63)


94.72 MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.

(A)    Every driveway approach or entrance to abutting property shall be maintained and kept in a safe condition by the owner of the abutting property, and any driveway approach which shall not be so maintained and kept or which shall interfere with or obstruct the drainage carried by a street or the use of the street for the purpose of travel shall be repaired to conform with the specifications of this ordinance and the City Engineer or be removed. Upon the removal of any driveway approach, that portion of the street occupied by the same shall be restored as nearly as practicable to its former condition and all curbing shall be replaced, all by and at the expense of the owner of the abutting property.

(B)    Whenever any driveway approach constructed under the provisions of this chapter no longer provides access for vehicles to something definite on private property, such as a parking area, a driveway, or a door at least seven feet wide, intended and used for the entrance of vehicles, the driveway approach shall be removed forthwith, and that portion of the street occupied by the driveway approach shall be restored as nearly as practicable to its former condition and all curbing shall be replaced, all by and at the expense of the owner of the abutting property.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.73 UNUSUAL CONDITIONS.

The City Engineer is hereby authorized to grant in writing variances from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter, provided he first determines that the following conditions are present:

(A)    The exception or variance desired arises from peculiar physical conditions not ordinarily existing in similar districts in the city or is due to the nature of the business or operation on the abutting property.

(B)    The exception or variance desired is not against the public interest, particularly safety, convenience, and general welfare.

(C)    The granting of the permit for the exception or variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or tenants.

(D)    That the strict application of the terms of this subchapter will work unnecessary hardship on the property owner or tenant.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63)


94.99 PENALTY.

(A)    The owner, agent or occupant of any lot or part or parcel of land abutting or fronting upon any sidewalk which is now or may hereafter be constructed upon any street of the city, who shall suffer or permit the accumulation of sand drifts or banks of dirt or the growth of weeds or the accumulation of filth and trash or other obstruction upon the sidewalk abutting upon his or her property commits a Class A violation.

(Ord. 56, passed 5-31-11; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(B)    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §94.03, or failing to comply therewith, commits a Class A violation.

(Ord. 696, passed 4-26-71; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(C)    Any person who shall fail to make any repair required by §94.04 within five days after notified so to do by the Finance Director/Recorder commits a Class D violation.

(Ord. 92, passed 7-5-17; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(D)    Offenses set forth in §§94.05 through 94.10 are Class A violations. Any person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this division, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating the act, shall be guilty of an offense of attempt to commit as to that offense.

(Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(E)    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§94.20 through 94.26 commits a Class A violation. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished.

(Ord. 556, passed 11-24-65; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(F)    Anyone who violates a provision of §§94.35 through 94.51 commits a Class A violation. Every full business day during which a business activity continues to be conducted in violation of §§94.35 through 94.51 shall be considered a separate offense. Offenses under §§94.35 through 94.51 shall be heard by the Board of Appeals as a violation and not as a crime. As a violation, there is no right to jury trial or court-appointed counsel.

(Ord. 1942, passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

(G)    Any person violating any of the provisions of §§94.65 through 94.73, or causing, permitting, or suffering the same to be done, commits a Class A violation. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of §§94.65 through 94.73 is committed, continued or permitted. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of §§94.65 through 94.73.

(Ord. 490, passed 8-23-63; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


CHAPTER 95 Alarm Systems

Section

95.01    Short title

95.02    Purpose

95.03    Definitions

95.04    User permits required

95.05    Duties of alarm business

95.06    Unauthorized automatic dialing services

95.07    False alarms

95.08    Equipment testing

95.99    Penalty


95.01 SHORT TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as the Alarm Control Ordinance.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80)


95.02 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the emergency services of the city from abuse and misuse.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80)


95.03 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ALARM BUSINESS. The business by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any burglar, robbery or fire alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.

ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the presence of illegal entry or activity requiring urgent attention and which is interconnected to the City Emergency Communications Center.

ALARM USER. The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind in control of a premises wherein an alarm system is being maintained.

AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. A device which is interconnected to a regular telephone line and is programmed to select a particular phone number so that a prerecorded voice message or a code signal indicating the existence of a situation detected by an alarm system may be transmitted to the selected telephone number.

CHIEF OF POLICE. The head of the Police Department or his designated representative.

CITY EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER. The facility used to receive emergency and general information from the public by the Police and Fire Department, better known as the Public Safety Center.

FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal necessitation response by the Police or Fire Department where an emergency situation does not exist. Alarm signals occurring due to acts of God or due to off-premises causes are not FALSE ALARMS.

INTERCONNECT. To connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.

PRIMARY TRUNK LINE or EMERGENCY TELEPHONE LINE. A telephone line or lines serving the City Emergency Communications Center that is designated by the Chief of Police to receive emergency calls.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80)


95.04 USER PERMITS REQUIRED.

(A)    All existing and future users of burglary, robbery or fire alarm systems shall obtain an alarm users permit from the office of the Chief of Police upon the effective date of this chapter or pursuant to use of an alarm system. Systems using robbery, burglary or fire alarm capabilities are required to obtain a permit for each function. Application for the burglar, robbery, or fire alarm permit and a fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, for each must be filed with the Chief of Police for each year or part thereof. All permits shall expire on the date of June 30. Each permit will bear the signature of the issuing official and the Chief of Police and shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and there available for inspection by the Chief of Police.

(B)    Residential alarm users over the age of 65 and being the principal occupant of the premises wherein no business is conducted will not be required to pay the permit fee but will be required to obtain a permit within the 60 days after the need for the permit arises.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80)


95.05 DUTIES OF ALARM BUSINESS.

(A)    Every alarm business selling or leasing to any user an alarm system which is installed upon a premises that is interconnected to the City Emergency Communications Center shall furnish that person with instructions that provide adequate information to enable persons using the equipment to operate it properly and where to obtain service for the equipment at any time.

(B)    If the Chief of Police determines in his reasonable discretion that the information is incomplete, unclear, or inadequate, he may require the alarm business to revise the information to meet his approval and then to distribute the revised information to alarm users.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80)


95.06 UNAUTHORIZED AUTOMATIC DIALING SERVICES.

(A)    It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select a primary trunk line and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary trunk line within 24 hours of notice that it is so programmed.

(B)    Within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, all existing, automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line will be reprogrammed or disconnected if the device is located within the corporate limits of the city.

(C)    It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select any emergency telephone line assigned to the City Emergency Communications Center. It is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram within 24 hours of notice of an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select an emergency telephone line assigned to the City Emergency Communications Center.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80) Penalty, see § 95.99


95.07 FALSE ALARMS.

Signals from an alarm system which are false alarms are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The user may have an allowance of four false alarms occurring within a one-year period starting from the date an alarm permit is issued until it expires one year later or until June 30, whichever occurs first. The fifth false alarm within that one-year period shall be subject to a service charge as established by resolution of the City Council charged to the user of the alarm system. Any additional false alarms occurring within that same one-year period shall be subject to an additional fee. Payment of service charges are payable within 60 days of notification that the charges are due. Failure to pay the assessed service charge shall result in the user’s permit being suspended and his alarm system immediately terminated. Determination of whether or not the alarm falls within the definition of false alarm is the sole discretion of the Chief of Police.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80)


95.08 EQUIPMENT TESTING.

Whenever a user of an alarm system deems it necessary to test or otherwise intentionally set off or activate an alarm system located on his premises, he shall notify the City Emergency Communications Center that he intends to test or otherwise intentionally activate that alarm prior to actual tests being conducted. Failure to do so will result in that user being considered as having had a false alarm.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80)


95.99 PENALTY.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter commits a Class A violation.

(Ord. 1329, passed 10-13-80; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87)


TITLE XI Business Regulations

Chapter

110.    AIRPORT COMMERCIAL BUSINESS

111.    GARAGE SALES

112.    TRANSIENT ROOM TAX

113.    SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS

114.    SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS

115.    CABLE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES REGULATIONS

116.    MOBILE FOOD VENDORS

117.    TAXICABS


CHAPTER 110 Airport Commercial Business

Section

General Provisions

110.01    Purpose and intent

110.02    Waiver provisions

110.03    Rates, charges, taxes and assessments

110.04    Utility and service charges

110.05    Operator requirements

110.06    Laws, ordinances and regulations

110.07    Subordinate provisions

110.08    Subleases and sublets prohibited

110.09    Rights in common

110.10    Public benefits

110.11    Hazardous conditions

110.12    Maintenance of premises

110.13    Future developments

Fixed Base Operation

110.20    Fixed base operations

110.21    Primary services

110.22    Specialty services

110.23    Application for operator rights

110.24    Construction cost

110.25    Conduct of business

110.26    Approval of City Council

110.27    Liability insurance

110.28    Fire and damage insurance

110.29    Records and books of accounts

110.30    Repair and maintenance

110.31    Revocation of lease or license

110.32    Certificates

110.33    Complaints in writing

110.34    Rights of inspections

110.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


110.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.

(A)    The minimum standards for commercial activity, operation or service hereinafter set forth have been developed to promote in a reasonable manner the best interest of the public concerning the competent and qualified operation of the Hermiston Municipal Airport.

(B)    These standards shall be administered on fair and reasonable terms in accordance with the provisions of Section 308 of the Federal Aviation Act; Title VI, of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; Part 21, of Department of Transportation Regulations; FAA Advisory Circular, 150/5190-1A, dated December 16, 1985; and FAA Advisory Circular 150/5190-1, dated September 2, 1966.

(C)    Any standard which a tenant operator is required to meet must be uniformly applicable to all operators seeking the same franchise privileges, and the basic premises herein contained are applicable to all.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.02 WAIVER PROVISIONS.

(A)    The Council may in its discretion waive any portion of these rules and regulations for the benefit of a commercial airline licensed by the CAB, any governmental agency, or a person performing nonprofit public service performing air search and rescue operations, or engaging in fire fighting operations.

(B)    The Council may consider an application by an individual for a license to perform in one of the following functions and not connected with a fixed base operation when in the Council’s discretion the service is necessary for the convenience of the public:

(1)    Special flight instructor;

(2)    Ground school instructor;

(3)    Aircraft mechanic;

(4)    Avionics or other specialist technician;

(5)    Agricultural applicator pilot.

(C)    The Council may in its discretion waive any portion of these rules and regulations for the benefit of non-aviation-related activities and developments on airport lands.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.03 RATES, CHARGES, TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS.

(A)    The rates and charges for any and all activities and services of operators shall be determined by the operators, subject to the approval of the City Council, and subject, further, to the requirement that all rates or charges shall be reasonable and be equally and fairly applied to all users of the services.

(B)    All fixed base operators shall at their own expense pay all taxes and assessments against any buildings or other structures placed on the premises by them as well as all taxes and assessments against the personal property used by them in their operations.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.04 UTILITY AND SERVICE CHARGES.

All operators shall provide and pay for all lights, gas, electrical current, water, sewer charges and garbage collection charges used or incurred anywhere in or about the leased premises and shall pay the charges made therefor by the suppliers thereof promptly when due.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.05 OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS.

All operators at the airport shall be full-time, financially sound and progressive business enterprises, with adequately manned and equipped facilities, including ample office facilities, and who observe normal or specifically required business hours.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.06 LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS.

All operators shall abide by and comply with all state, county and city laws and ordinances, the rules and regulations of the city and the rules and regulations of the State and Federal Aviation Administration.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.07 SUBORDINATE PROVISIONS.

All contracts and leases between operators and the city shall be subordinate to the provisions of any existing or future agreement between the city and the United States, relative to the operation or maintenance of the airport, the execution of which has been or may be required as a condition precedent to the expenditure of federal funds for the development of the airport properties.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.08 SUBLEASES AND SUBLETS PROHIBITED.

(A)    No fixed base operator shall sublease or sublet any premises leased by the operator from the city, or assign any lease without the prior written approval of the City Council; and any subletting or assignment shall be subject to all of the minimum standards herein set forth.

(B)    In the event the lessee sublets any portion of his lease, the sublease must agree to assume the full obligations of the lease as set out herein and must agree to fully cooperate with the city in seeing that these standards are complied with. The sublease shall immediately comply with any reasonable request or direction of the city as it relates to the enforcement of these standards.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.09 RIGHTS IN COMMON.

Fixed base operators shall have the right, in common with others authorized so to do, to use common areas of the airport, including runways, taxiways, aprons, roadways, floodlights, landing lights, signals and other conveniences for the takeoff, flying and landing of aircraft of lessee.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.10 PUBLIC BENEFITS.

(A)    Lessees will, at all times during the continuance of the term of the lease and any renewal or extension thereof, conduct, operate and maintain for the benefit of the public the fixed base operation provided for and described therein, and all aspects and parts and services thereof as defined and set forth, and will make all services available to the public and that they will devote their best efforts for the accomplishment of the purposes, and that they will at all times make charges to patrons and customers for all merchandise or materials and services furnished or rendered, but that they will refrain from imposing or levying excessive or otherwise unreasonable charges or fees for any facilities or services.

(B)    Notwithstanding anything contained in a lease that may be or appear to the contrary, it is expressly understood and agreed that the rights granted thereunder are nonexclusive, and the lessor reserves the right to grant similar privileges to another operator or operators on other parts of the airport when, in its sole discretion the City Council feels a need exists.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.11 HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.

The city reserves the right to take any actions it considers necessary to protect the aerial approaches to the airport against obstructions, together with the right to prevent any fixed base operator from erecting, or permitting to be erected, any building, sign or other structure on the airport which, in the opinion of the city, would limit the usefulness of the airport or constitute a hazard to aircraft.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.12 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.

The lessee shall remove from the airport, or otherwise dispose of in a manner approved by the City Manager, all garbage, debris and other waste material (whether solid or liquid) arising out of its occupancy of the premises or out of its operations. The lessee shall keep and maintain his leased premises in a neat and orderly manner; lessee shall keep the grass cut and the buildings painted. Any garbage debris waste which may be temporarily stored in the open shall be kept in suitable garbage or waste receptacles, the same to be made of metal and equipped with tight-fitting covers and to be of a design safely and properly to contain whatever may be placed therein and all in accordance with city ordinances. The lessee shall use extreme care when effecting removal of all waste.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.13 FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS.

The City Council reserves the right to further develop or improve all areas of the airport as it sees fit, regardless of the desires or views of any fixed base operators, and without interference or hindrance from any fixed base operators.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)

FIXED BASE OPERATION


110.20 FIXED BASE OPERATIONS.

(A)    A Fixed Base Operator is defined as any person, firm or corporation performing any of the functions or furnishing any of the services as hereinafter set out for fixed base operators at the Hermiston Municipal Airport. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any commercial activity as a fixed base operator as herein defined unless the same is done in full compliance with the standards, rules and regulations herein set forth.

(B)    All activities, operations or services provided on the airport property for compensation shall be considered commercial and shall meet the standards as set forth in this section.

(C)    Only fixed base operators shall conduct a commercial activity on the airport. The following sections have been set forth as possible services.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.21 PRIMARY SERVICES.

(A)    The sales, rental and leasing of aircraft, accessories and supplies.

(B)    Flight training, ground school (instruction) and related operations.

(C)    Charter and/or air taxi service.

(D)    Maintenance activities to include repair, overhaul, rebuilding and modification of aircraft, engines and accessories.

(E)    Line services to include aviation fuel and oil sales and other miscellaneous service activities.

(F)    Provide hangar facilities and non-public tie down areas.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.22 SPECIALTY SERVICES.

(A)    Aerial photography.

(B)    Air ambulance service.

(C)    Agni-chemical spraying.

(D)    Radio and/or instrument repair.

(E)    Propeller and/or avionics shop.

(F)    Other specialty services not listed.


110.23 APPLICATION FOR OPERATOR RIGHTS.

An applicant desiring a lease or license to provide a commercial service at the airport shall submit a written application to the City Council containing all the pertinent information as set forth in Appendix (A), attached to Ordinance 1034, titled "Application for Fixed Base Operator," six months prior to the desired occupancy date. The Council within 90 days shall arrive at some contract agreement or reject the application.

(A)    Special provisions.

(1)    The Council may grant licenses for special services.

(2)    Land areas and/or facilities used or needed shall be by lease or license only and shall not be transferable unless authorized in writing by the Council.

(3)    All proposals for fixed base operations shall include a sufficient land lease area to accommodate the required services and to provide for suitable buildings in which to conduct proposed activities.

(4)    All buildings or structures used by fixed base operators are considered "public buildings" and shall comply with state and local laws and codes and regulations pertaining to their construction.

(5)    An applicant shall specify each and every activity, operation or service to be provided as listed in §§ 110.21 and 110.22; and he shall conduct only those activities, operations or services for which he qualifies and which are specified in his lease and/or license.

(B)    The intent of the city in granting a lease or license is that no fixed base operator shall have any preferential advantage over another fixed base operator, and that the true variable of success shall be good and sound business practice.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.24 CONSTRUCTION COST.

When, and in the manner as authorized by the City Council, a fixed base operator shall at his own expense provide, construct, install, equip and maintain all utilities, buildings, structures, ramps, tie downs and other facilities and improvements used for his own business. The city may at its discretion provide assistance for the development of the operational area and also lease any existing city-owned structures as it sees fit.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.25 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.

Each fixed base operator shall, upon being authorized by the Council, complete the structures, facilities and/or improvements necessary for his operation or activity within a time limit as included and set forth in his lease or license.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.26 APPROVAL OF CITY COUNCIL.

Applicant shall satisfy the City Council of his ability to perform the services to be provided in the application and shall be stipulated in the lease or license.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.27 LIABILITY INSURANCE.

(A)    The fixed base operator shall secure minimum public liability insurance coverage from an acceptable insurance company as follows:

(1)    Bodily injury: $250,000 each person or $500,000 each occurrence

(2)    Property damage: $200,000 each occurrence

(B)    The insurance coverage shall name the city as a co-insured with the fixed base operator. The policy or policies shall be maintained in full force and effect during all terms of existing leases, contracts or agreements and renewals or extensions of same. A copy of the policy shall be delivered to the Finance Director/Recorder. Each policy shall contain a provision that the policy may not be canceled without at least ten days prior notice in writing to the City Manager.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.28 FIRE AND DAMAGE INSURANCE.

At all times during the term of a lease, lessor shall insure, at lessor’s own cost or expense, all hangars and structures on the leased ground against any loss or damage by fire, windstorm, hail, explosion or smoke with a responsible insurance company which is acceptable to the City Council.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.29 RECORDS AND BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS.

Lessee shall keep accurate records and book of accounts on the operation of its facility, and the records and books shall be open to examination by the City Council or its authorized representative.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.30 REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE.

The leased area facilities and structures shall be kept in an acceptable state of repair and maintained at all times. Lessor shall be responsible for the structural supports and exterior walls of the facilities which are owned by the city; lessee shall be responsible for all else.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.31 REVOCATION OF LEASE OR LICENSE.

The Council in its discretion shall have the right to terminate any lease, license or agreement authorizing the fixed base operator to conduct any service or activity and to revoke a lease on any land or facility upon the airport for any cause or reason provided by these rules or by law, and in addition, upon the happening of one or more of the following:

(A)    Filing a petition of voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy by the operator;

(B)    The making by the fixed base operator of any general assignment for the benefit of creditors;

(C)    The abandonment or discontinuance of any permitted operation at the airport by the fixed base operator or the failure to conduct any service, operation or activity which the lessee or licensee has agreed to provide under the terms of his contract. If this condition exists for a period of ten days without prior approval of the Council, it will constitute an abandonment of the land or facilities and the lease and/or license shall become null and void;

(D)    The failure of the fixed base operator to promptly pay to the city, when due, all rents, charges, fees or other payments which are payable to the city in accordance with applicable leases or licenses;

(E)    The failure of the fixed base operator to remedy any default or breach or violation of these rules and regulations by him or his employees within 30 days after notice from the City Manager;

(F)    Violates any of these rules and regulations or fails to maintain current FAA licenses required for his operation;

(G)    Supplies the city with false or misleading information or misrepresents any material facts on his application or documents, or in statements to or before the Council, or fails to make full disclosure on his financial statement or other required documents; and

(H)    Operates or allows any employee to operate an aircraft or equipment in a dangerous or hazardous manner which may endanger the public in any manner.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.32 CERTIFICATES.

Fixed base operators and/or employees shall be competent and shall hold all current valid certificates, permits, licenses or other authorities required by the CAB and the FAA, including any required air taxi permits and public utility commission certificates, and shall not utilize any pilot in any aircraft operations who does not hold valid and current certificates from CAB and FAA, nor shall they allow any aircraft to be flown which does not have a current and valid license and permit.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77) Penalty, see § 110.99


110.33 COMPLAINTS IN WRITING.

All complaints against any fixed base operator or his employees for violation of these rules and regulations shall be in writing and signed by the complainant and filed with the Finance Director/Recorder.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.34 RIGHTS OF INSPECTIONS.

To the extent necessary to protect the rights and interests of the city or to investigate the terms of these rules and regulations, the City Manager or his authorized representative shall have the right to inspect, during reasonable hours, all aircraft, structures, premises, facilities and improvements on the airport, preferably in the presence of the lessee or owner.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


110.99 PENALTY.

Any person who violates a provision of this chapter commits a Class B violation.

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77; Am. Ord. 1549, passed 12-10-84; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87)

(Ord. 1034, passed 2-14-77)


CHAPTER 111 GARAGE SALES

Section

111.01    Definition

111.02    Time frame restrictions

111.03    Advertisements

111.04    Exemptions

111.04    Exemptions

111.05    Permits not required

111.06    Violation; notice

111.99    Penalty


111.01 DEFINITION.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

GARAGE SALE. Any sale, displaying of goods for sale, or the offer to sell used goods within the city limits by any individual or group of individuals from any private property, including but not limited to garages, porches, carports, yards.

(Ord. 1533, passed 9-10-84)


111.02 TIME FRAME RESTRICTIONS.

(A)    No property owner or householder shall hold or conduct more than one household sale or garage sale on his property or at his residence in any one calendar year quarter, and the sale shall not be conducted for a longer period than four consecutive days.

(B)    Calendar year quarters as herein used are:

(1)    First quarter: January 1 through March 31;

(2)    Second quarter: April 1 through June 30;

(3)    Third quarter: July 1 through September 30; and

(4)    Fourth quarter: October 1 through December 31.

(Ord. 1533, passed 9-10-84)


111.03 ADVERTISEMENTS

Household and garage sales may be advertised by:

(A)    Notices placed on a designated community bulletin board or bulletin boards and via internet sources, radio, television and other print media;

(B)    Signs on the property of the property owner or resident hosting the yard or garage sale;

(C)    Off-premises signs on private property not hosting the yard or garage sale with the permission of the owner of that private property;

(D)    Signs in or on a legally parked vehicle that does not cause any visual obstruction to other drivers.

All signs must be removed within four hours of when the yard or garage sale is over except for notices placed on a designated community bulletin board or bulletin boards and via internet sources, radio, television and other print media.

(For additional information see § 155.18, Sign Placement and Requirements – Prohibited signs.)

(Ord. 1533, passed 9-10-84; Am. Ord. 2257, passed 5-29-18) Penalty, see § 111.99


111.04 EXEMPTIONS

The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(A)    The offering for sale of one item by public display with a sign indicating the item is for sale, and the sale of more than one individual item not offered for sale by public display or by signs concerning a sale or place of sale; and

(B)    Sales commonly referred to as "rummage sales," conducted by members of fraternal, civic, patriotic, religious, service, charitable, educational organizations.

(Ord. 1533, passed 9-10-84)


111.05 PERMITS NOT REQUIRED.

No permit, permit fee or notice to the city is required for holding the activities as permitted herein.

(Ord. 1533, passed 9-10-84)


111.06 VIOLATION; NOTICE.

Property owners or householders presumed to be in violation of this chapter shall be served with a copy of this chapter at least 96 hours before any enforcement action is commenced; however, the property owner or householder, once served, shall be presumed to be advised of the existence of this chapter; and any further presumed violations by a person may cause enforcement action without a notice.

(Ord. 1533, passed 9-10-84)


111.99 PENALTY.

Any person, persons, firms, organizations, associations or corporations in violation hereof commits a Class A violation. Each day will be a separate violation.

(Ord. 1533, passed 9-10-84)


CHAPTER 112 Transient Room Tax

Section

General Tax Provisions

112.01    Title

112.02    Definitions

112.03    Registration of transient lodging tax collectors required

112.04    Tax imposed

112.05    Rules for collection

112.06    Duties of transient tax collector

112.07    Due date for returns and payment

112.08    Delinquencies and interest

112.09    Deficiency determinations

112.10    Redeterminations

112.11    Lien on property

112.12    Refunds

112.13    Exemptions

Administration and Enforcement

112.25    Distribution of taxes; fees

112.26    Appeals to City Council

112.27    Disposition of proceeds

112.28    Violations

112.99    Penalty

GENERAL TAX PROVISIONS


112.01 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as the Transient Room Tax Ordinance.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91)


112.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING. A system of accounting in which the operator enters the rent due from a transient on his records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

CASH ACCOUNTING. A system of accounting in which the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on his records until the rent is paid.

COLLECTION REIMBURSEMENT CHARGE. The amount a transient lodging tax collector may retain as reimbursement for the costs incurred by the transient lodging tax collector in collecting and reporting a transient lodging tax and in maintaining transient lodging tax records.

COUNCIL. The City Council.

HOTEL. Any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for 30 days or less, for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, or similar structure, or portions thereof so occupied, provided the occupancy is for less than a 30-day period.

OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to use or possess lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a hotel, or space in a mobile home or trailer park, or portion thereof.

OPERATOR. The person who is proprietor of a hotel or recreational vehicle park in any capacity. Where the OPERATOR performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an OPERATOR for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.

PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A mobile home park, manufactured dwelling park, recreational vehicle park or trailer park or similar location, or portions thereof, which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for 30 days or less for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, provided the occupancy is for less than a 30-day period.

RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property, or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction.

RENT PACKAGE PLAN. The consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this chapter shall be the same charge made for rent when consideration is not a part of a package plan.

TAX. Either the TAX payable by the transient, or the aggregate amount of TAXES due from an operator during the period for which he is required to report his collections.

TOURISM PROMOTION ASSESSMENT CHARGE. An increase in the local transient lodging taxes as herein adopted to fund tourism promotion of the facility known as the Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center.

TRANSIENT. Any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a TRANSIENT checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the TRANSIENT is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a TRANSIENT until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy.

TRANSIENT LODGING.

(A)    Hotel, motel and inn dwelling units that are used for temporary overnight human occupancy;

(B)    Spaces used for parking recreational vehicles or erecting tents during periods of human occupancy; or

(C)    Houses, cabins, condominiums, apartment units or other dwelling units, or portions of any of these dwelling units, that are used for temporary human occupancy.

TRANSIENT LODGING INTERMEDIARY. A person other than a transient lodging provider that facilitates the retail sale of transient lodging and charges for occupancy of the transient lodging.

TRANSIENT LODGING PROVIDER. A person that furnishes transient lodging and includes OPERATOR.

TRANSIENT LODGING TAX COLLECTOR. A transient lodging provider or a transient lodging intermediary.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 1971, passed 10-12-98; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.03 REGISTRATION OF TRANSIENT LODGING TAX COLLECTORS REQUIRED.

(A)    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a transient lodging provider or transient lodging intermediary shall register with the Finance Director/Recorder.

(B)    Transient lodging tax collectors engaged in business at the time this chapter is adopted must register not later than 30 calendar days after passage of this chapter. Transient lodging tax collectors starting business after this chapter is adopted must register within 15 calendar days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration.

(C)    Registration shall set forth the name under which a transient lodging tax collector transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business and other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the Finance Director/Recorder may require. The registration shall be signed by the transient lodging tax collector. The Finance Director/Recorder shall, within ten days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business for each registrant.

(D)    Certificates shall be non-assignable and non-transferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Finance Director/Recorder upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.

(E)    The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

(1)    The name of the transient tax collector;

(2)    The address of the hotel or recreational vehicle park;

(3)    The due date upon which the certificate was issued;

(4)    This "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the "Transient Room Tax Ordinance" of the city by registration with the Finance Director/Recorder for the purpose of collecting the tax imposed by the city and remitting the tax to the Finance Director/Recorder. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel or recreational vehicle park without strictly complying with all local applicable laws including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, council, department or office of the city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.04 TAX IMPOSED.

(A)    On and after April 1, 2003, a tax in the amount of eight percent is imposed on the rent charged for the sale, service or furnishing of transient lodging defined in this chapter for each day of occupancy, provided, however, the occupancies rented for seven consecutive days to the same individual or party shall pay a rate of two and one-half percent of the rent charged per night of occupancy up to the 30-day limitation of this chapter.

(B)    On and after January 1, 2016, a tourism promotion assessment charge is imposed in the amount of $2 per one room night rented in any hotel, provided, however, the occupancies rented for seven consecutive days to the same individual or party also shall pay the tourism promotion assessment charge of $2 per night of occupancy up to the 30-day limitation of this chapter. This charge shall be reduced to $1 per room night rented as of January 1, 2031.

(C)    On and after January 1, 2016, a tourism promotion assessment charge is imposed in the amount of $1 per one space night rented in any recreational vehicle park, provided, however, the space occupancies rented for seven consecutive days to the same individual or party also shall pay a tourism promotion assessment charge of $1 per night of occupancy up to the 30-day limitation of this chapter.

(D)    The taxes and assessments imposed by subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the transient tax collector or to the city. The transient shall pay the taxes and assessments to the transient tax collector at the time the rent is paid. The transient tax collector shall enter the taxes and assessments on its records when rent is collected if the transient tax collector keeps its records on the cash accounting basis and when earned if the transient tax collector keeps its records on the accrual accounting basis.

(E)    If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax and charges shall be paid by the transient to the transient tax collector with each installment. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the transient tax collector, the Finance Director/Recorder may require that the tax shall be paid directly to the city. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations, and parking space in mobile home parks or trailer parks.

(F)    Rates established herein shall not be increased for at least five years from January 1, 2016.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 1850, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. 2067, passed 1-27-03; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. 2236, passed 12-14-15)


112.05 RULES FOR COLLECTION.

(A)    Every transient tax collector shall collect the transient room tax and the tourism promotion assessment charge from the transient. The transient room tax and tourism promotion assessment charge collected or accrued by the transient tax collector shall be held in trust by the transient tax collector until such funds are remitted to the city as provided herein.

(B)    In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the transient tax collector may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the transient tax collector shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made.

(C)    The Finance Director/Recorder shall enforce provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement.

(D)    For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be remitted.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.06 DUTIES OF TRANSIENT TAX COLLECTOR.

Each transient tax collector shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the transient tax collector’s records, and any receipt rendered by the transient tax collector. No transient tax collector shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the transient tax collector, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this chapter.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.07 DUE DATE FOR RETURNS AND PAYMENT.

(A)    The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the transient to the transient tax collector at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of the taxes collected by any transient tax collector accrue and are payable to the Finance Director/Recorder on a quarterly basis. The taxes accrue on the last day of the quarter and are delinquent 30 days thereafter.

(B)    On or before the thirtieth day following each quarter when the amount of funds held by a transient tax collector equals or exceeds $100, a return for that quarter’s transient room tax and tourism promotion assessment charge shall be filed with the Finance Director/Recorder. The return shall be filed in the form as the Finance Director/Recorder may prescribe by every transient tax collector liable for payment to the city of the transient room tax and the tourism promotion assessment charge.

(C)    Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The Finance Director/Recorder may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between reported rentals and amounts tendered, the amount of rents exempt, if any, and description of units rented for periods of seven consecutive days, or for more than 30 days.

(D)    The transient tax collector required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of tax due, to the Finance Director/Recorder at City Hall either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.

(E)    For good cause, the Finance Director/Recorder may extend, but not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by action of the City Council as provided herein. Any transient tax collector to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this chapter.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.08 DELINQUENCIES AND INTEREST.

(A)    Original delinquency. Any transient tax collector who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

(B)    Continued delinquency. Any transient tax collector who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15% of the amount of tax due plus the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

(C)    Fraud. If the Finance Director/Recorder determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.

(D)    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any transient tax collector who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(E)    Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and the interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

(F)    Petition for waiver. Any transient tax collector who fails to remit the tax levied within the time stated shall pay the penalties; provided, however, the transient tax collector may petition the City Council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof, and the Council may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.09 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS.

(A)    Deficiency determination. If the Finance Director/Recorder determines that the returns are incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one, period and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in § 112.08.

(1)    In making a determination the Finance Director/Recorder may offset overpayment, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties, and interest, on the underpayment. The interest on underpayment shall be computed in the manner set forth in § 112.08.

(2)    The Finance Director/Recorder shall give to the transient tax collector or transient a written determination notice. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the transient tax collector’s address as it appears in the records of the Finance Director/Recorder. In case of service by mail or any notice required by this chapter the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.

(3)    Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires the later.

(4)    Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the Finance Director/Recorder has given notice thereof, provided, however, the transient tax collector may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

(B)    Fraud, refusal to collect, evasion. If any transient tax collector shall fail or refuse to collect the tax or to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this chapter, the Finance Director/Recorder shall proceed in the manner he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Finance Director/Recorder has determined the tax due that is imposed by this chapter from any transient tax collector who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit the tax, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against the transient tax collector the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case a determination is made, the Finance Director/Recorder shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. The determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the Finance Director/Recorder of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect the tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the Finance Director/Recorder has given notice thereof, provided, however, the transient tax collector may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

(C)    Transient tax collector delay. If the Finance Director/Recorder believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he or she shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the transient tax collector shall immediately pay same determination to the Finance Director/Recorder after service of notice thereof; provided, however, the transient tax collector may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of determination, if the petition is filed within ten days from the date of service of notice by the Finance Director/Recorder.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.10 REDETERMINATIONS.

(A)    Any person against whom a determination is made under § 112.09 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in § 112.09. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in § 112.09, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.

(B)    If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the Finance Director/Recorder shall reconsider the determination and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him ten days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The Finance Director/Recorder may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

(C)    The Finance Director/Recorder may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and if any increase is determined the increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.

(D)    The order or decision of the Finance Director/Recorder upon a petition for redetermination of redemption and refund becomes final ten days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of the order or decision is filed with the Council within the ten days after service of the notice.

(E)    No petition for redetermination of redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the transient tax collector has first complied with the payment provisions hereof.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.11 LIEN ON PROPERTY.

(A)    The tax imposed by this chapter together with the interest and penalties herein provided and the filing fees paid to the Clerk of Umatilla County, the advertising costs which may be incurred when same becomes delinquent as set forth in this chapter shall be and, until paid, remain a lien from the date of its recording with the Clerk of Umatilla County, Oregon. The lien shall be superior to all subsequently recorded liens on all tangible personal property used in the hotel of a transient tax collector within Hermiston and may be foreclosed on and the necessary property sold to discharge the lien, if the lien has been recorded.

(B)    Personal property subject to the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as a nonpossessory chattel lien for labor or material expended on chattel in ORS Chapter 87. When the Finance Director/Recorder files a notice of claim of lien with the County Recorder, the Finance Director/Recorder or deputy shall send forthwith a copy of the notice to the transient tax collector and the owner of the chattel (if different from the transient tax collector) by certified mail at their last known address.

(C)    At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the Finance Director/Recorder may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States, in the name of the city, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest.

(D)    In suits to foreclose the lien the court shall, upon entering judgment, allow as part of the lien the moneys paid for the filing or recording of the lien. The court shall also allow reasonable attorney fees at trial and on appeal to the prevailing party.

(E)    Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the proper county official shall, upon the payment of all taxes, penalties, and interest thereon, be released by the Finance Director/Recorder when the full amount determined to be due has been paid to the city and the transient tax collector or person making the payment shall receive a receipt therefor stating that the full amount of taxes, penalties, and interest thereon have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien is satisfied.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2162, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.12 REFUNDS.

(A)    Transient tax collector’s refunds. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Finance Director/Recorder under this chapter, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Finance Director/Recorder within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the Finance Director/ Recorder. If the claim is approved by the Finance Director/Recorder, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the transient tax collector from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to each transient tax collector, his or her administrators, executors or assignees.

(B)    Transient refunds. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the transient tax collector, and deposited by the transient tax collector with the Finance Director/Recorder, and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Finance Director/Recorder, it may be refunded by the Finance Director/Recorder to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with the Finance Director/ Recorder within three years from the date of payment.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.13 EXEMPTIONS.

(A)    No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon:

(1)    Any occupant for more than 30 successive calendar days. (A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in the month, shall not be deemed a transient.)

(2)    Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than $3 per day.

(3)    Any person who rents a private house, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who rents the facilities incidentally to his own use thereof.

(4)    Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people, to a public institution owned and operated by a unit of government, to a shelter home, halfway house or other rehabilitation facility.

(5)    Federal employees and employees of federal instrumentalities (i.e., American Red Cross) on official business. (A member or employee of a nonprofit organization and employees of state and local governments of Oregon or any other state are required to pay any tax imposed under this chapter.)

(6)    Persons with diplomatic immunity.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2244, passed 3-20-17)

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


112.25 DISTRIBUTION OF TAXES; FEES.

(A)    Distribution.

(1)    The taxes imposed by § 112.04(A) and remitted to the city, less five percent retained by the transient tax collector, shall be distributed as follows:

(a)    Twenty-five percent to improve, maintain and operate the Hermiston Community Center and the Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center;

(b)    Nine percent for recreation and recreation-related programs and activities and park improvements administered by the advisory committee pursuant to § 112.27(B);

(c)    Fifteen percent to offset costs of programs such as the senior citizen taxi program, economic development, streets maintenance and similar programs funded from the general fund;

(d)    Nine percent for city parks and recreation development administered by the Parks and Recreation Committee pursuant to § 112.27(D). The proceeds of the tax for parks and recreation development shall accumulate in a reserve account and may not be diverted or utilized in any other manner;

(e)    One and one-half percent for preventative maintenance and/or repairs to a community outdoor swimming pool;

(f)    Thirty-seven and one-half percent for the cost of constructing a community outdoor swimming pool, including the retirement of any bonds issued for its construction; and

(g)    Three percent for the cost of operating a visitor’s information center within the City of Hermiston.

(2)    Fifty percent of the funds collected from the tourism promotion assessment charge imposed by §§ 112.04(B) and (C) and remitted to the city, less seven percent retained by the transient tax collector, are dedicated to and shall be transferred promptly to the Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center Authority to fund tourism promotion by it of the Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center until January 1, 2031, when this percentage shall be 100% again.

(3)    Fifty percent of the funds collected from the tourism promotion assessment charge imposed by §§ 112.04(B) and (C) and remitted to the city, less seven percent retained by the transient lodging tax collector, shall be used to offset the cost of constructing the Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center, including the retirement of any bonds issued for its construction until January 1, 2031, when this provision shall lapse.

(B)    Records required from transient tax collectors; forms. Every transient tax collector shall keep guest records of room and space sales and accounting books and records of room and space sales. All records shall be retained by the transient tax collector for a period of three years and six months after they come into being.

(C)    Collection fee. Every transient tax collector liable for collection and remittance of the transient room tax imposed by this chapter may withhold five percent of the net tax and every transient tax collector liable for collection and remittance of the tourism promotion assessment charge imposed by this chapter may withhold seven percent of the net tax herein collected to cover the transient tax collector’s expenses in collection and remittance of the tax and charge.

(D)    Examination of records; investigations. The Finance Director/Recorder or any person authorized in writing by him or her may examine during normal business hours the books, papers, and accounting records relating to room sales of any transient tax collector after notification to the transient tax collector liable for the tax and may investigate the business of the transient tax collector in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the transient tax collector, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.

(E)    Confidential character of information obtained; disclosure unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the Finance Director/Recorder or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate, or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:

(1)    The disclosure to, or the examination of, records and equipment by another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter; or collecting taxes imposed hereunder.

(2)    The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the City Attorney approves each disclosure and that the Finance Director/Recorder may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection (E) when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby.

(3)    The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued.

(4)    The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1850, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. 2056, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2067, passed 1-27-03; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. 2236, passed 12-14-15; Am. Ord. 2240, passed 4-25-16; Am. Ord. 2252, passed 11-13-17)


112.26 APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL.

(A)    Any dispute in the amount of taxes due, refunds, or other provisions of this chapter may be filed with the Finance Director/Recorder. If not satisfied by the Finance Director/Recorder, the transient tax collector may appeal the decision of the Finance Director/Recorder to the City Manager, and if not satisfied by the Manager, to the City Council.

(B)    The Council, acting as the review authority for disputes, may:

(1)    Hear and determine appeals of decisions of the personnel of the city, prescribe the forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals, and take other actions consistent with the appeal function. In reviewing a decision or dispute, the Council may take evidence and make an investigation. The Council shall give notice of determinations and shall file a certified copy of each determination with the Finance Director/Recorder. A determination of the Council becomes final after 20 days and becomes due, subject to interest and penalties, and enforceable by the city in the same manner as an order or decision of the Finance Director/Recorder as described herein.

(2)    Approve, modify or disapprove all forms, rules and regulations prescribed by the Finance Director/Recorder if the forms, rules and regulations are challenged in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

(3)    Hear and determine protests made to a form, rule or regulation approved or prescribed by the Finance Director/Recorder.

(4)    Prescribe rules for extensions and, for good cause, grant extensions of time in excess of one month for filing a return or paying the tax.

(5)    Make investigations regarding imposition and administration of the tax and report findings publicly; assist in directing enforcement actions; and determine the necessity to amend or alter this chapter.

(6)    Any other duties not specifically enumerated herein which are consistent with this chapter.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15)


112.27 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.

(A)    The city shall receipt for the proceeds of the tax in the "Transient Room Tax Fund."

(B)    The Council shall appoint an advisory committee consisting of a motel operator, a member of the Parks and Recreation Committee, a representative of the Chamber of Commerce, a member of the Council and one citizen at large not affiliated with any of the organizations potentially funded through the proceeds of the tax, to consider potential projects eligible for funding from the portion of the tax designated for recreation and recreation-related programs and activities and park improvements in § 112.25(A)(1)(b). Committee members shall be appointed in accord with the charter of the city and rules of the Council.

(C)    Advisory committee members will be appointed for three-year staggered terms, and may be any individual dwelling within the boundaries of Hermiston School District 8R. The type of projects, method of administration, and similar matters shall be established by the Committee, with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Committee shall recommend annual appropriations to the City Manager and the Council. The proceeds accounted in this fund may not be expended for any project until the Committee and the Council have agreed on the project and the amounts to be expended. Should the Committee and the Council fail to agree, the proceeds of the tax shall continue to accumulate in this account and may not be diverted or utilized in any other manner.

(D)    Pursuant to § 112.25(A)(1)(d), the Parks and Recreation Committee shall act as the advisory committee for parks and recreation development. The Parks and Recreation Committee shall recommend types of projects to be funded to the City Manager and Council. The proceeds accounted in this fund may not be expended for any project until the Parks and Recreation Committee and Council have agreed on the project and the amount to be expended. Should the Parks and Recreation Committee and the Council fail to agree, the proceeds of the tax for parks and recreation development shall continue to accumulate in this account and may not be diverted or utilized in any other matter.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1850, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. 2056, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2192, passed 7-23-12)


112.28 VIOLATIONS.

It is unlawful for any transient tax collector or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Finance Director/Recorder or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2232, passed 7-27-15) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.99 PENALTY.

Anyone who fails to register pursuant to this chapter commits a Class A violation for each continuing day of violation, and in addition is subject to the penalties assessed for non-payment as set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. 1719, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


CHAPTER 113 Secondhand Dealers And Junkyards

Section

113.01    Property and enclosure maintenance

113.02    Objects out of public view

113.99    Penalty


113.01 PROPERTY AND ENCLOSURE MAINTENANCE.

Any person, firm, or corporation conducting within the city the business of storing, wrecking, dismantling or selling any used article, shall confine the business within a building or within a fenced enclosure, the fence to be substantially constructed on all open sides or ends of the premises, to a height of at least seven feet above the ground, and without openings or apertures, excepting necessary gateways or doors for ingress or egress, and which gates and doors in the fence shall be kept closed when not in use for ingress or egress.

(Ord. 355, passed 6-12-57) Penalty, see § 113.99


113.02 OBJECTS OUT OF PUBLIC VIEW.

No secondhand object belonging to or under control of the person, firm or corporation conducting business shall be placed in public view outside of the building or fenced enclosure where the business is conducted.

(Ord. 355, passed 6-12-57) Penalty, see § 113.99


113.99 PENALTY.

Every person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter commits a Class A offense and may be liable for the costs of prosecution. Every day that a failure to comply with this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. 355, passed 6-12-57; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87)


CHAPTER 114 Solicitors And Transient Merchants

Section

114.01    Definition

114.02    License required

114.03    Fees

114.04    Application procedure

114.05    Issuance of license

114.06    License on person at all times

114.07    Revocation

114.08    Bond required

114.09    Duplicate orders

114.10    Public auctions

114.11    Exceptions

114.99    Penalty


114.01 DEFINITION.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

SOLICITOR. Any person who goes from house to house, or place to place, in the city, selling or taking orders for goods, wares, or merchandise, for present or future delivery, or for the making, manufacturing, or repairing of any article or thing whatsoever, for present or future delivery, except those selling to the merchants for resale.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54)


114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person to act as solicitor within the meaning and application of this chapter, unless he or his employer shall have first secured a license therefor in the manner provided by this chapter.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54) Penalty, see § 114.99


114.03 FEES.

The license fees for solicitors hereunder shall be as established by resolution of the City Council. Fees are to be charged on a calendar year basis, payable in advance. Fees as stated above apply to one solicitor from each firm making application with the fee for each additional solicitor in excess of one employed by any firm to be set at an amount as established by resolution of the City Council, payable in advance. The Finance Director/Recorder may waive the payment of the license fee for any applicant who is an honorably discharged disabled veteran and a resident of this state, upon presentation of the applicant’s certificate of honorable discharge from the service.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54; Am. Ord. 1777, passed 11-9-92)


114.04 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.

(A)    Any person or firm desiring to secure a solicitor’s license shall apply therefor in writing over his signature to the Finance Director/Recorder on forms provided by the city, and the application shall state as to each solicitor:

(1)    The name and address of each solicitor;

(2)    The name and address of the person, firm or corporation by whom employed;

(3)    The length of service of each solicitor with the employer;

(4)    The place of residence and nature of the employment of each solicitor during the last preceding year;

(5)    The nature or character of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be offered by each solicitor;

(6)    The personal description of each solicitor.

(B)    The application shall be accompanied by credentials and other evidence of the good moral character and identity of each solicitor as may be reasonably required by the Finance Director/Recorder.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54)


114.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.

If the Chief of Police shall determine after 30 days investigation that the facts set forth in the application are true, the solicitor is of good moral character, and that he proposes to engage in a lawful and legitimate commercial or professional enterprise, he shall then approve the application, and the City Council may issue the license applied for. The license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the license shall have been issued. Except as hereinafter provided no license shall be issued until the conclusion of 30 days investigation.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54)


114.06 LICENSE ON PERSON AT ALL TIMES.

The license shall be carried at all times by each solicitor for whom issued, when soliciting or canvassing in the city, and shall be exhibited by any solicitor wherever he shall be requested to do so by any police officer or any person solicited.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54) Penalty, see § 114.99


114.07 REVOCATION.

Any license may be revoked by the City Council for the violation or any violation by the employer or solicitor of any of the ordinances of the city or of any state or federal law, or whenever the solicitor shall in the judgment of the City Council cease to possess the character and qualifications required by this chapter for the issuance of a permit.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54)


114.08 BOND REQUIRED.

If any applicant for a license, including solicitor or his employer, shall be unwilling to receive a license only upon the conclusion of a 30-day period of investigation as provided in § 114.05 hereof, and if he desires the issuance of a license by the City Council immediately upon application, he may deposit with the Finance Director/Recorder of the city, a cash or surety bond in the sum of $10,000, conditioned upon the making of final delivery of the goods ordered or services to be performed, in accordance with the terms of the order, or, failing therein, that the advanced payment on the order be refunded, and thereupon the license or licenses may be immediately issued. Any person aggrieved by the action of any the solicitor shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages or both. The bond shall be payable to the city and remain on deposit for a period of 90 days after the expiration of the license unless sooner released by the City Council of the city.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54; Am. Ord. 1777, passed 11-9-92)


114.09 DUPLICATE ORDERS.

All orders taken by licensed solicitors shall be in writing in duplicate, stating the names as it appears on the license and address of both the solicitor and his employer, the terms thereof, and amount paid in advance, and one copy shall be given the purchaser.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54) Penalty, see § 114.99


114.10 PUBLIC AUCTIONS.

Any persons or firm engaging in a public auction for the disposal of merchandise from a temporary location shall be bound in the same manner as those defined as solicitors under this chapter.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54)


114.11 EXCEPTIONS.

The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers and articles, nor to newsboys, nor shall the terms of this chapter be held to include or to apply to any producer or his employee selling agricultural or farm products produced from the soil of the state of Oregon by the producer or his employee, nor shall the same apply to the selling of nursery products by the producer thereof from the soil of the state of Oregon, nor to any church, school, charitable or youth organization.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54)


114.99 PENALTY.

Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this chapter commits a Class A offense. Every day upon which a violation shall occur or upon which a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. 299, passed 1-20-54; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87)


CHAPTER 115 Cable and Telecommunications Facilities Regulations

Section

Purpose and Definitions

115.001    Purpose

115.002    Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way

115.003    [Reserved]

115.004    Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax

115.005    Definitions

Registration of Carriers

115.020    Purpose

115.021    Registration required

115.022    Registration fee

115.023    Exceptions to registration

Construction Standards

115.030    General

115.031    Construction codes

115.032    Construction permits

115.033    Permit applications

115.034    Traffic control plan

115.035    Construction permit fee

115.036    Diminished pavement life fee

115.037    Issuance of permit

115.038    Construction schedule

115.039    Locates

115.040    Compliance with permit

115.041    Noncomplying work

115.042    Completion of construction

115.043    As-built drawings

115.044    Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property

115.045    Landscape restoration

115.046    Construction and completion bond

Location of Facilities

115.060    Location of facilities

115.061    Interference with public rights-of-way

115.062    Relocation or removal of utility facilities

115.063    Removal of unauthorized utility facilities

Franchise

115.070    Franchise

115.071    Application

115.072    Application and review fee

115.073    Determination by the city

115.074    Rights granted

115.075    Term of grant

115.076    Franchise territory

115.077    Compensation to city

115.078    Amendment of grant

115.079    Renewal applications

115.080    Renewal determinations

115.081    Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal

115.082    Assignments or transfers of grant, notice to city

115.083    Transactions affecting control of grant

115.084    Revocation or termination of franchise

115.085    Notice and duty to cure

115.086    Public hearing

115.087    Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions

115.088    Other city costs

General Franchise Terms and Rates

115.100    Utility facilities

115.101    Damage to grantee’s facilities

115.102    Duty to provide information

115.103    [Reserved]

115.104    Compensation for city property

115.105    Payment of fees

115.107    [Reserved]

115.108    Grantee insurance

115.109    General indemnification

115.110    Performance surety

General Provisions

115.120    Governing law

115.121    Written agreement

115.122    Nonexclusive grant

115.123    Preemption

115.124    Other remedies

115.125    Compliance with laws

115.126    Consent

115.127    Franchise controlling

115.128    Confidentiality

115.999    Penalty

PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS


115.001 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

(A)    Comply with the provisions of state and federal law as they apply to local governments, carriers and the services they offer;

(B)    Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of carriers and telecommunications services and cable services;

(C)    Promote competition on a competitively neutral basis in the provision of telecommunications services and cable services;

(D)    Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services and cable services on the widest possible basis to businesses, institutions and residents of the city;

(E)    Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of-way on a competitively neutral basis and conserve the limited physical capacity of those public rights-of-way held in trust by the city;

(F)    Assure that the city’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and the use of the public rights-of-way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs to be incurred;

(G)    Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and its residents for permitting private use of the public rights-of-way;

(H)    Assure that all carriers providing telecommunications services and/or cable services within the city, or having utility facilities located in public rights-of-way, register and comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;

(I)    Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;

(J)    Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.002 JURISDICTION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.

(A)    The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the city Charter and state law.

(B)    The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement or other legal interest in such public right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each such public right-of-way regardless of whether its legal interest was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

(C)    No person or entity may work in, occupy or otherwise use a public right-of-way for the provision of telecommunications services or cable services without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to work in and to use public rights-of-way by franchises and permits.

(D)    The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the public right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the public right-of-way.

(E)    The city retains the right and privilege to remove, or to require the removal of, any utility facilities located within the public rights-of-way, as the city determines to be necessary, appropriate or useful.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.003 [Reserved]


115.004 REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX.

(A)    The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for the public rights-of-way provided for in this chapter or in any franchise, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a carrier, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services or cable services.

(B)    The city has determined that any fee imposed by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Chapter XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.005 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning defined in this chapter. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

ABOVEGROUND OR OVERHEAD FACILITIES. Utility facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

AFFILIATED INTEREST. The same meaning as ORS 759.010.

CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.

CABLE SERVICE. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

CARRIER. Any provider of telecommunications services or cable services within the city, or any person or entity that has or wishes to locate facilities within the public rights-of-way. Carrier includes telecommunications utilities and cable operators.

CITY. The City of Hermiston, Oregon.

CITY PROPERTY. All real property owned by the city other than public rights-of-way as those are defined in this chapter.

CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST. Actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee carriers, services and providers on a national level.

FRANCHISE. An agreement between the city and a grantee that grants a privilege to use public right-of-way for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.

GRANTEE. The person to which a franchise is granted by the city.

GROSS REVENUE. Gross revenue means gross revenue derived from the provision of telecommunications services or cable services originating or terminating in the city. For the purposes of this definition, net uncollectibles from revenue included in gross revenues may be excluded from gross revenues.

LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICE. Service provided within the boundaries of an exchange as the exchange appears on the exchange maps filed with and approved by the Oregon Public Utility Commission. LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICE includes "shared telecommunications service," as defined in ORS Chapter 759.

OREGON PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION or OPUC. The statutorily created state agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and administration of certain communications providers as set forth in Oregon law.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.

PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK. A system, including the construction, maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service, by a person for the exclusive use of that person and not for resale, directly or indirectly. PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Include, but are not limited to, all streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, that are owned, operated, maintained and controlled by the city and located within the legal boundaries of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY do not include trails, paths or sidewalks within parks or other areas of the city unless the trail, path or sidewalk has been dedicated as a right-of-way.

SERVICES. Telecommunications services and/or cable services.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission between and among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. §§ 151 et seq.) as adopted and as hereafter amended.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES includes but is not limited to any service provided for the purpose of voice, video or data transmission, including, but not limited to, local exchange service, access service, extended area service, call origination, interconnection, switching, transport, or call termination and any other telecommunications identified and authorized by the FCC or the OPUC. For purposes of this chapter, telecommunications service shall expressly include the provision of internet service via cable modem or other similar means. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES does not include cable services.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS UTILITY. Has the same meaning as ORS 759.005(1)(a) and is limited to incumbent local exchange carriers (ILECs).

UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. Utility facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for "overhead facilities."

USABLE SPACE. All the space on a pole, except the portion below ground level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits.

UTILITY EASEMENT. Any easement within the public right-of-way designated on a subdivision plat or partition map as a utility easement, public utility easement or "P.U.E." or any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with the telecommunications facilities.

UTILITY FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, transformers, plant and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility services, including cable service and telecommunications service.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)

REGISTRATION OF CARRIERS


115.020 PURPOSE.

The purpose for registration is:

(A)    To assure that all carriers who have facilities or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

(B)    To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the carriers who offer to provide telecommunications services and/or cable services within the city, or that own or operate utility facilities within the city.

(C)    To assist the city in the enforcement of this title and the collection of any fees or charges that may be due the city.

(D)    To assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws as they apply to grantees under this title.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.021 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.

Except as provided in § 115.023, all carriers having utility facilities within the public rights-of-way, and all carriers that offer or provide telecommunications services and/or cable services to customers within the city, shall register with the city. Registration shall be on forms to be provided by the City Manager or his designee which shall include the following:

(A)    The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliated interests.

(B)    The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.

(C)    A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed utility facilities within the public rights-of-way.

(D)    A description of the telecommunications service and/or cable service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing within the city.

(E)    Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public right-of-way franchising under this chapter.

(F)    Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services and/or cable services provided or to be provided by the registrant is subject to any fees, charges or taxes imposed by the city.

(G)    Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority or permit required by the FCC or the OPUC to provide telecommunications services and/or cable services within the city.

(H)    Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the FCC or the OPUC to have utility facilities within the city.

(I)    Such other information as the city may reasonably require.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.022 REGISTRATION FEE.

Each application for registration as a carrier shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee, in an amount to be established by resolution by the City Council.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.023 EXCEPTIONS TO REGISTRATION.

The following carriers are exempt from registration:

(A)    Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated exclusively for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state and provide telecommunications services for governmental purposes only.

(B)    A private telecommunications network; provided, that such network does not use or occupy any public rights-of-way.

(C)    Carriers that have a valid franchise with the city for the use of public rights-of-way, or carriers that are actively and expeditiously pursuing such a franchise.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)

CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS


115.030 GENERAL.

No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of utility facilities within public rights-of-way except as provided in this chapter. To be clear, carriers having a valid franchise shall also comply with the construction requirements set forth in this chapter. 

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.031 CONSTRUCTION CODES.

Utility facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.032 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.

(A)    No person shall construct or install any utility facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit and paying the construction permit fee established in § 115.035.

(B)    No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way unless the carrier has first applied for and received a franchise pursuant to §§ 115.070 through 115.088.

(C)    No permit shall be necessary for the installation of a customer specific wire ("a drop") by a carrier where no excavation within the public right-of-way occurs.

(D)    No permit shall be necessary for the installation of utility facilities within a utility easement that is not a public right-of-way.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.033 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.

Applications for permits to construct utility facilities within a public right-of-way shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans, specifications and maps, in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

(A)    That the utility facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations and that the utility facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise.

(B)    The location and route of all overhead facilities to be installed on, over or through the public rights-of-way. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground within the public rights-of-way. Existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction.

(C)    The location and route of all of underground facilities to be installed within the public rights-of-way.

(D)    A typical cross section shall be provided showing new or existing utility facilities in relation to the public right-of-way.

(E)    The location, dimension and types of all trees which will be substantially trimmed, removed or replaced as a result of the areas disturbed during construction and which are within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way along the route proposed by the applicant. The applicant shall submit a landscape plan, satisfactory to the city, for the replacement of such trees.

(F)    The application shall also be accompanied by computer generated electronic maps of the utility facilities to be installed by the applicant. Such electronic maps shall be in a format specified by the city unless the applicant demonstrates that a different format was developed by the applicant and is proprietary and that maps cannot reasonably be created that conform to the city’s specifications.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.034 TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN.

All work on, in, under, across or along any public rights-of-way shall be performed consistent with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.035 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.

Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council. Nothing in this section shall require a telecommunications utility that is solely providing exchange access service to pay a permit fee.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.036 DIMINISHED PAVEMENT LIFE FEE.

The grantee, for any construction requiring pavement cuts, shall pay to the city an amount to reimburse the city for the pavement degradation and shortened pavement life that results from such cuts. Such fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council and shall be based upon the linear feet of the pavement cut, the age of the pavement when cut and whether the excavation is transverse or longitudinal. This section shall not apply to a telecommunication utility if such fee is determined to fall within the restrictions of ORS 221.515(3).

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.037 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.

If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this title, the City Manager or his designee shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the utility facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.038 CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.

The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the City Manager or his designee before commencing any work in or about the public rights-of-way. At the city’s request, the construction schedule shall include a best estimate deadline for completion of construction. The schedule is subject to approval by the City Manager or his designee. The permittee shall further notify the City Manager or his designee not less than two working days in advance of commencing the project under the issued permit for excavation or work in the public rights-of-way. When advance notice is not possible because of an emergency, the permittee shall give notice within 24 hours of the excavation or work. When feasible, permittee shall contact all other occupants of the public right-of-way where construction is to occur. The purpose of the contact is to determine if joint projects are feasible in order to allow joint projects if desired to minimize duplication of work and unnecessary excavation. For those occupants expressing interest in a joint project, permittee shall give them reasonable notice of the particular dates on which open trenching exists. Upon mutual agreement, permittee shall make the trench available for installation of underground facilities. The payment for the cost of trenching and installation shall be as mutually agreed to by the parties thereto. Provided permittee demonstrates a good faith attempt to coordinate, the city shall not withhold issuance of any permit due to the inability of the permittee and other occupants to agree upon scheduling of the project and/or reimbursement of costs associated with the project.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.039 LOCATES.

The permittee is responsible for becoming familiar with, and understanding the provisions of ORS Chapter 757, governing the location of underground facilities (the "One-Call statutes"). Grantee shall comply with the terms and conditions set forth in the One-Call statutes. Every grantee under this chapter shall join and maintain membership in the Oregon Utility Notification Center and shall comply with the rules adopted by the center regulating the notification and marking of underground facilities.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.040 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.

All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the utility facilities. The City Manager or his designee and its representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such information that is not confidential, sensitive or proprietary as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.041 NONCOMPLYING WORK.

Upon order of the City Manager or his designee, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure has been given, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, the franchise agreement or the requirements of this chapter shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.042 COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION.

The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the public rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a permit within public rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance unless the City Manager or his designee agrees to a longer period.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.043 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.

Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the city with two complete sets of plans in hard copy format and a set in a computerized format specified by the city, drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all utility facilities constructed pursuant to the permit.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.044 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND CITY PROPERTY.

(A)    When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions and restore such public rights-of-way or city property to as near the original condition as reasonably possible, unless otherwise directed by the city.

(B)    If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected public rights-of-way or city property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.

(C)    If the permittee fails to restore public rights-of-way or city property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.

(D)    A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such public rights-of-way or city property.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.045 LANDSCAPE RESTORATION.

(A)    All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of utility facilities, shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.

(B)    All restoration work within the public rights-of-way or on city property shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the city.

(C)    Any tree, shrub or other landscaping that shows substantial damage within 18 months of completion of construction, attributable to construction, must be replaced at the sole expense of the grantee.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.046 CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND.

(A)    Unless otherwise provided in a franchise, or unless the city otherwise specifically approves an alternative security to assure performance, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the city, and authorized to transact business in Oregon, equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of constructing the utility facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be deposited with the city before construction is commenced.

(B)    The performance bond shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of public rights-of-way or city property affected by the construction.

(C)    The performance bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

(1)    Timely completion of construction;

(2)    Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

(3)    Proper location of the utility facilities as specified by the city;

(4)    Restoration of the public rights-of-way or city property affected by the construction;

(5)    The submission of "as-built" drawings after completion of the work as required by this title; and

(6)    Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)

LOCATION OF FACILITIES


115.060 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.

(A)    Grantee shall locate its utility facilities in accordance with the city’s generally applicable policies in effect as of the date of adoption of this chapter. No person with existing attachments to utility poles shall be required by this chapter to install new or existing utility facilities underground except as provided in the following subsection.

(B)    At such time as the city may adopt generally applicable policies and requirements permitting or requiring the underground installation of utility facilities, all persons subject to this chapter shall fully comply with such policies and requirements provided they are imposed on all carriers in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.061 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF WAY.

No grantee may locate or maintain utility facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All such utility facilities that do not comply with this provision shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the city at the sole expense of the grantee. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.062 RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF UTILITY FACILITIES.

(A)    Within 60 days following written notice from the city, a grantee shall, at no expense to the city, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the public rights-of-way whenever the city shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

(1)    The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way.

(2)    The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way.

(B)    Notwithstanding the 60-day limit, a grantee shall, at no expense to the city, relocate overhead facilities within 30 days following written notice from the City Manager or his designee that a joint pole owner has space on poles for such purpose. The 30- or 60-day limit may be waived by consent of the parties. Waivers shall not be unreasonably withheld.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.063 REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED UTILITY FACILITIES.

(A)    Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized utility facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove such utility facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way.

(B)    A utility facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

(1)    One year after the expiration or termination of a franchise.

(2)    Upon abandonment of a utility facility within the public rights-of-way. A utility facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or longer. A utility facility will not be considered abandoned if it: (i) is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs; (ii) is excess capacity of a current grantee who is not in default; (iii) is being replaced; or (iv) has been disconnected because the building or property being served is vacant.

(3)    If the utility facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a franchise.

(4)    If the utility facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.

(5)    If the utility facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by franchise.

(6)    If the utility facility interferes with or adversely affects existing utility facilities.

(C)    The 30-day limit may be waived or extended only by written consent of the city; provided, however, that such waivers or extensions shall not be unreasonably withheld.

(D)    If all the utility facilities and appurtenances are not removed within one year after the termination or expiration of a franchise or such further time as may be granted by the city, they shall be forfeited to the city. The city may notify the person described above that it waives forfeiture and may compel removal from the public right-of-way and restoration of the right-of-way and may maintain court suit to require such removal and restoration by the person or the payment of the cost thereof by the person.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)

FRANCHISE


115.070 FRANCHISE.

A franchise shall be required of any carrier who desires to occupy public rights-of-way. The franchise must specify the service or services to be provided, including whether the carrier will provide telecommunications services and/or cable services. The carrier shall compensate the city for use of the public rights-of-way in accordance with § 115.077, Compensation to city.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.071 APPLICATION.

Any person that desires a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the City Manager or his designee, which shall include the following information:

(A)    The identity of the applicant, including all affiliated interests of the applicant doing business in the state.

(B)    A description of the telecommunications services and/or cable services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant over its utility facilities within the city.

(C)    A description of the transmission medium that is being used or will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such telecommunications services or cable services within the city.

(D)    Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the utility facilities to be located within the public rights-of-way, including copies in hard copy and computerized format specified by the city and all in sufficient detail to identify:

(1)    The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed utility facilities;

(2)    The location of all overhead facilities and underground facilities in the public rights-of-way to be installed by applicant;

(3)    The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the utility facilities of other carriers;

(4)    The specific trees, structures, improvements, utility facilities and obstructions, if any, the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

(E)    If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, to the extent that the applicant will be using utility poles, evidence from the pole owner that usable space is available for locating the applicant’s overhead facilities on existing poles along the proposed route; and if usable space is not available in some or all service areas, an indication of these locations and a "make ready" schedule for completion.

(F)    If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public rights-of-way, provide information in sufficient detail to identify:

(1)    The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of the applicant’s underground facilities;

(2)    The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant’s underground facilities.

(G)    If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public rights-of-way:

(1)    The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;

(2)    The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after the installation of applicant’s underground facilities.

(H)    A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.

(I)    Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the utility facilities.

(J)    Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the utility facilities and services described in the application.

(K)    Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the utility facilities and to offer or provide the services proposed.

 (L)    An accurate map showing the location of any existing utility facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use or lease.

(M)    A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental institutions.

(N)    A description of the applicant’s access and line extension policies.

(O)    The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.072 APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE.

(A)    Any applicant for a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall pay an application and review fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council. This section shall not apply to a telecommunication utility which provides only local exchange access.

(B)    The application and review fee shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to § 115.071.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.073 DETERMINATION BY THE CITY.

(A)    The city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the franchise application in whole or in part, applying the standards listed below.

(B)    If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The standards to be applied by city are:

(1)    The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

(2)    The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed utility facilities.

(3)    The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate additional utility facilities if the franchise is granted.

(4)    The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private property, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.

(5)    The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public rights-of-way.

(6)    The availability of alternate routes or locations for the proposed utility facilities.

(7)    Applicable federal and state laws, regulations and policies.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.074 RIGHTS GRANTED.

No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term, and upon the conditions stated in the franchise.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.075 TERM OF GRANT.

Unless otherwise specified therein, a franchise granted under this title shall be in effect for a term of five years.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.076 FRANCHISE TERRITORY.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a franchise granted under this chapter shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the city to be served by the grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.077 COMPENSATION TO CITY.

(A)    As fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way, a carrier providing cable service shall pay the city a cable franchise fee in an amount equal to the lesser of five percent gross revenues on cable services or such amount as may be mutually agreed by the carrier and the city in a franchise.

(B)    As fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way, a carrier providing telecommunications services shall pay the city a license fee in an amount equal to the lesser of seven percent of gross revenues on telecommunications services or such amount as may be mutually agreed by the carrier and the city in writing.

(C)    For avoidance of doubt, any carrier using the same utility facilities located in public rights-of-way to provide both telecommunications services and cable services shall be required to compensate the city for the use of the public rights-of-way by paying both the license fee applicable to telecommunications services as set forth in subsection (B) of this section and the cable franchise fee applicable to cable services as set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

(D)    Any payment required under this section shall be made on a quarterly basis within 45 days of the close of each calendar quarter or by such dates as otherwise agreed by the carrier and the city in writing.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17; Am. Ord. 2258, passed 6-11-18)


115.078 AMENDMENT OF GRANT.

(A)    Conditions for amending a franchise:

(1)    A new application and grant shall be required of any carrier that desires to extend or locate its utility facilities in public rights-of-way that are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

(2)    If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its utility facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.

(B)    A new application and grant shall be required of any carrier that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.079 RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.

A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not less than 90 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise, which shall include the following information:

(A)    The information required pursuant to § 115.071 that has not previously been provided to the city in connection with the grantee’s existing franchise.

(B)    Any information required pursuant to the franchise between the city and the grantee.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.080 RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS.

(A)    Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under § 115.071, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards:

(1)    The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

(2)    The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s existing utility facilities.

(3)    The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise.

(4)    Applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and policies.

(B)    If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.081 OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL.

No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the franchise, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.082 ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT, NOTICE TO CITY.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise, grantee may not transfer, assign or dispose of its rights and obligations under a franchise without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.

(A)    Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise shall agree, in writing, to assume and abide by all of the provisions of the franchise.

(B)    No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the utility facilities pursuant to this chapter.

(C)    Unless otherwise provided in a franchise, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign a franchise.

(D)    Any transfer or assignment of a franchise or integral part of a franchise without prior approval of the city under this section or pursuant to a franchise shall be void and is cause for revocation of the grant.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.083 TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT.

Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of ten percent or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the ownership or working control of a franchise, or of the ownership or working control of affiliated interests having ownership or working control of the grantee’s utility facilities or substantial parts of such capacity or bandwidth, shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring city approval pursuant to § 115.082. Transactions between affiliated interests are not exempt from city approval.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.084 REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.

A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way may be revoked for the following reasons:

(A)    Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way without a franchise grant of authorization.

(B)    Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.

(C)    Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.

(D)    Failure to comply with sections of this chapter regarding sale, transfer or assignment of a franchise or utility facilities.

(E)    Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of the grantee’s franchise assets, or a substantial interest in the franchise.

(F)    Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.

(G)    Abandonment of utility facilities in the public rights-of-way.

(H)    Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this title.

(I)    Willful or continued failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the city unless subject to a bona fide dispute.

(J)    Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.

(K)    Violation of a material provision of this chapter.

(L)    Violation of a material term of a franchise.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.085 NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE.

Pursuant to § 115.084, in the event that the city believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the city shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:

(A)    That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.

(B)    That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.

(C)    That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.086 PUBLIC HEARING.

In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city as provided in § 115.085, the City Manager or his designee shall refer the apparent violation or non-compliance to the City Council. The City Council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.087 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS.

If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise, the City Council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:

(A)    Whether the misconduct was egregious.

(B)    Whether substantial harm resulted.

(C)    Whether the violation was intentional.

(D)    Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.

(E)    Whether there is a history of overall compliance.

(F)    Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.088 OTHER CITY COSTS.

All grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)

GENERAL FRANCHISE TERMS AND RATES


115.100 UTILITY FACILITIES.

Each grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all utility facilities within the public rights-of-way. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually including copies in paper and a computerized format specified by the city.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.101 DAMAGE TO GRANTEE’S FACILITIES.

Unless directly and proximately caused by willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any utility facility within the public rights-of-way as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly from such work.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.102 DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.

Within ten days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:

(A)    That the grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.

(B)    All books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the grantee with respect to its utility facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.103 [RESERVED].


115.104 COMPENSATION FOR CITY PROPERTY.

If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use or occupy city property for the installation of facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the city and is not subject to the limits contained in this chapter.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.105 PAYMENT OF FEES.

Any grantee who fails to remit any fee imposed by this chapter within 30 days of the date it is due shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the fee from the date on which the remittance first became due until paid.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.107 [RESERVED].


115.108 GRANTEE INSURANCE.

(A)    Unless otherwise provided in a franchise, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsured:

(1)    Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person; $1,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and $1,000,000 for all other types of liability.

(2)    Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $1,000,000 for each accident.

(3)    Workers’ compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

(4)    Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

(B)    The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the franchise, and such other periods of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise, or is engaged in the removal of its utility facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:

"This policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City Manager or his designee of such intent to cancel or not to renew."

(C)    Within 60 days after receipt by the city of such notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to the cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence that the grantee meets requirements of this section.

(D)    The insurance policy requirements of this section may be met by a program of self-insurance acceptable to the city.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.109 GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION.

Each franchise shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its utility facilities, and in providing or offering services over the utility facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise made or entered into pursuant to this chapter.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.110 PERFORMANCE SURETY.

Unless the city otherwise specifically approves an alternative security to assure performance, before a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, the grantee shall provide and maintain a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)

GENERAL PROVISIONS


115.120 GOVERNING LAW.

Any franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, the state of Oregon, and the ordinances and Charter of the city.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.121 WRITTEN AGREEMENT.

No franchise shall be granted unless the agreement is in writing.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.122 NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.

No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way for delivery of services or any other purposes.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.123 PREEMPTION.

In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this chapter, then the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and/or the time required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall return to full force and effect, and shall be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.124 OTHER REMEDIES.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.125 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.

Any grantee under this chapter shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city now in effect or adopted in the future or established during the entire term of any franchise granted under this chapter, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of utility facilities.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.126 CONSENT.

Wherever the consent of either the city or the grantee is specifically required, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.127 FRANCHISE CONTROLLING.

In the event of a conflict between any express term or provision contained in a franchise and the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, the franchise shall govern.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.128 CONFIDENTIALITY.

The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information designated by the grantee as a trade secret, to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


115.999 PENALTY.

Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall have committed a Class A violation. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs.

(Ord. 2249, passed 9-11-17)


CHAPTER 116: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS

Section

116.01    Definitions

116.02    License requirements

116.03    License application for mobile food vendors

116.04    Transfer of licenses

116.05    Applications for future licensees coming available

116.06    Grounds for termination or nonrenewal of license

116.07    Approved location

116.08    Operation and site requirements

116.09    Mobile food unit requirements

116.10    Short-term mobile food license

116.11    Exemptions

116.12    Hearing procedures

116.99    Violation penalties


116.01 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

APPROVED LOCATION. A site approved by the city from which a mobile food vendor may sell food.

CONSENT TO USE AGREEMENT. A fully filled out and notarized agreement from the lawful possessor of the approved location which specifically states the name, address, telephone number and email of the possessor, the location of the property, and how long the licensee may use the property for its operation, and states that the person is entitled to use the location for mobile food vending.

LICENSE APPLICATION. All initial and later applicants for licenses must make application to the city on an application form required by the city and provide all of the information required on the form and copies of all the documentation and information required by the application.

MOBILE FOOD UNIT. Any vehicle, trailer or other conveyance that is self-propelled, or can be pulled or pushed down a street or highway. Food may be prepared or processed on this vehicle, and the vehicle is used to sell and dispense food to the ultimate consumer.

MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person(s), entity(s) or other parties who sell food from any vehicle, trailer or other conveyance which is self-propelled or which can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, or highway and is required to have a Class II, III, or IV mobile food unit license as defined by Oregon statutes and administrative rules and modifications thereof.

VENDING YEAR is from April 1 of one calendar year through March 31 of the following calendar year.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 2261, passed 8-27-18)


116.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.

(A)    Beginning April 1, 2014, a person may not operate a mobile food unit in the city limits without first procuring a license to do so from the city unless an exemption in § 116.11 applies. Only one natural person may hold a license and a license holder may hold only one license at a time. No partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, other entities, or multiple persons are eligible. The license holder must also be the sole holder of a Class II, III, or IV mobile food unit license.

(B)    The license holder must actively operate the business by himself or herself or with employees or family who work for the license holder. No other person may have any ownership, lease, or other rights to the business of any kind or nature.

(C)    A license is granted only for a "vending year" and must be renewed before the beginning date of a new vending year or it shall terminate.

(D)    The present mobile food vendors have a preference to be issued a license provided he or she meets all of the requirements and qualifications of this chapter. The preference for present mobile food vendors shall expire on April 1, 2014. However, the April 1, 2014, deadline for present mobile food vendors to obtain a license may be extended by the City Manager for one month if the City Manager, in his sole opinion and discretion, believes the present mobile food vendor(s) is making a good faith effort to meet the requirements of this chapter to obtain a license.

(E)    Effective September 28, 2018, the total number of one-year licenses available to eligible vendors as established in subsection (A) of this section shall be six. The city may allow more licenses if it determines there is a need for more mobile food units to serve city residents. When it is determined by the City Council an increase in the number of licenses is necessary, the City Council shall approve the increase in the number of one-year licenses by motion.

(F)    A present mobile food vendor or other mobile food vendor licensee may obtain a license although the licensee does not have an approved location at the time of application or loses an approved location. But if any licensee does not have an approved location for one year, that licensee’s mobile food vendor’s city license shall be terminated.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 2261, passed 8-27-18)


116.03 LICENSE APPLICATION FOR MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.

(A)    Application for the license shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the city and shall contain the following information:

(1)    Name and address of the applicant.

(2)    A copy of the Class II, III or IV mobile food unit license issued to the applicant for the vending year. This license must be in the name of only one applicant for the mobile vending license and no other parties.

(3)    A copy of the mobile food unit’s operating schedule showing location(s) where the mobile food unit will be used during the day and where it will be parked overnight.

(4)    A copy of the title and registration of the mobile food unit to be used by the applicant, including trailers if they are required to be licensed and registered. The title and registration must be in the name of the applicant and no other parties.

(5)    A detailed site plan of the location to be approved as required by § 116.07, Approved location, showing the exact location of the unit on the site, parking, access to and from the site, location of any power service to the unit, location of buildings and improvements on the site, the address or the County Assessor’s map and tax lot for the site, and other particulars required by the city.

(6)    When a mobile food vendor initially applies for a city license, or when a mobile food vendor applies for a yearly renewal of his or her license, or when a mobile food vendor wants to operate from a new location, the mobile food vendor must have on file with the city or provide the city with a fully filled out and signed "Consent to Use Agreement" stating how long the licensee may use the property for mobile food vending that vending year.

(7)    After submitting the license application and documentation, provided it complies with the terms of this chapter, the applicant shall bring the mobile food unit to a place designated by the city for an inspection to determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter. It must meet the criteria of this chapter before a license will be issued and it must meet those criteria before the deadline for renewal.

(B)    If the applicant, the application and documentation, and the mobile vending unit meet the requirements of this chapter, the city shall approve the proposed location as an "approved location" for the mobile food unit and grant the applicant a license which runs for a period of one vending year. The licensee must operate the mobile food unit as set forth in the site plan for the approved location without modification, unless the modification is approved by the city.

(C)    For each vending year, the applicant must pay a yearly license fee as established by resolution of the Council, by good and sufficient check, cash or money order, and that fee must accompany the application. If the applicant is not granted the license, a portion of that sum, as set by resolution of the Council, will be retained as a processing cost and the balance returned to the applicant.

(D)    The operator shall post the license or card in a conspicuous place on the mobile food unit clearly showing the name and address of the licensee and license number.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 2261, passed 8-27-18)


116.04 TRANSFER OF LICENSES.

(A)    The license may be transferred to one natural person by a good and sufficient notarized assignment subject to all the other terms and conditions of this chapter.

(B)    All transfers of licenses must be approved by the city upon good and sufficient proof that the person to whom the license is being transferred is eligible to obtain a license as set forth in this chapter.

(C)    Upon a transferee being approved by the city and before the city will issue a new license to the transferee, the transferee must file a new application with the city the same as when a license is renewed and meet the same criteria as a new applicant and gain the same approvals as a new applicant before the city will issue the license to the transferee. Nevertheless, if a license is being transferred from one of the original vendors or assigns operating at a location indicated above, the location shall be exempt from the requirement to be at least 400 feet from a licensed restaurant.

(D)    To facilitate a transfer of a license from a seller to a buyer, contingent upon the transfer taking place, the city may preapprove a buyer for a license upon the person making application for a license and complying with all the terms of this license. Once the transfer takes place the city will issue the license to the transferee. However, if the city preapproves a buyer for a license, if proof of the transfer is not provided to the city within 45 days, the preapproval lapses and is of no force or effect.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13)


116.05 APPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE LICENSEES COMING AVAILABLE.

(A)    When the number of licenses drops below the number authorized, the city shall offer a license to applicants in the order of receipt of their applications for a future license on file with the city, with the earliest applicants having priority. If within 180 days of the mailing of the notice of eligibility the person does not make an approved application to the city and pay the application fee to the city and obtain the license, the license shall be offered to the next applicant in priority.

(B)    To be an applicant on the waiting list for a license, the person shall fill out an application for a future mobile vending license prepared by the City Administrator including the information required on the application and pay a $500 application fee. At any time an applicant may withdraw the application and obtain a refund of the fee.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13)


116.06 GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE.

(A)    A mobile food vendor’s license is subject to being terminated or not renewed, or both, if the mobile food vendor, his or her agents or employees are found to have delivered, possessed, furnished or sold any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances from the mobile food unit or the approved location.

(B)    A mobile food vendor’s license is subject to being terminated if he or she operates from a location that has not been approved by the city.

(C)    A mobile food vendor’s license is subject to being terminated if the licensee does not have an approved location for one year.

(D)    A mobile food vendor’s license is subject to being terminated if the license is not renewed before the beginning date of a new vending year.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13)


116.07 APPROVED LOCATION.

(A)    A mobile food vendor may only operate from an approved location which meets the criteria established in this chapter.

(B)    Except for present mobile food vendors in their present locations, approved locations must be more than 400 feet from any other mobile food vendor as measured from the closest property line of each approved location.

(C)    For a location to be approved it must have sufficient parking immediately adjacent to the mobile food unit of at least three parking spaces specifically designated for the use by the mobile vending unit.

(D)    For a location to be approved, the mobile food unit and its customer parking spaces must be at least 20 feet from the property line of an adjoining property owner unless the possessor of the adjoining property consents in writing to allow the mobile food unit and its customer parking to be closer to his or her adjoining property.

(E)    For a location to be approved, it must be 400 feet or more from the property line of a business having a restaurant license, except for the present locations of present mobile food vendors.

(F)    For a location to be approved, it must meet reasonable criteria for safety and not adversely affect adjoining property owners as to patrons using their access and parking. The locations of present mobile food vendors also must meet these criteria.

(G)    Mobile food vendors may operate from an approved location indefinitely and are not required to move to another approved location except as required by this chapter.

(H)    If after approving a location the city determines in its reasonable discretion that the approved location causes a safety hazard to people or property, it can withdraw the licensee’s right to use the location and the licensee must move to another approved location.

(I)    Mobile food vendors are permitted to operate in any commercial zone of the city; provided, that all other licensing, location and siting requirements within this chapter are met.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 2261, passed 8-27-18)


116.08 OPERATION AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.

Mobile food vendors must at all times comply with the following requirements:

(A)    Awnings attached to the mobile unit are allowed but no poles, supports or guy wires to the ground may be attached to the awning.

(B)    At least one 35-gallon trash receptacle with a tilting lid must be provided for the patrons of the mobile food vendor and must be emptied when three-fourths full.

(C)    The site must at all times be kept free and clear of all trash and debris. The licensee is responsible and liable for this cleanup.

(D)    No tables, tents, shades, chairs or other similar property for use of the mobile food vendor or its patrons is allowed.

(E)    No gas, propane, natural gas, water tanks or other property may be placed on the ground at any time. The mobile food vending unit must be fully self-contained.

(F)    No receptacles for gray water may be placed on the ground or used to collect water. All water produced by the unit must be contained in the unit.

(G)    Condensate from refrigerated air conditioner units or other HVAC units may be allowed to run onto the ground.

(H)    No swamp coolers or units which use water for cooling may be used.

(I)    No water lines or sewer lines may run to or from the unit.

(J)    The area where the unit is sited, its accesses and parking must all be paved.

(K)    The mobile food vendor’s restaurant license must be displayed on the unit at all times in a glass window of the unit or as otherwise required by Oregon law so it can be read from outside.

(L)    The mobile food vendor’s license must be displayed on the unit at all times in a glass window of the mobile food unit so it easily can be read from the outside.

(M)    The vehicle registration of the mobile food unit must be displayed on the unit at all times in a glass window of the unit so it can be read from the outside. The registration must be current and valid.

(N)    Mobile food units may only be driven or towed by a person possessing a valid driver’s license.

(O)    Mobile food units must be mobile and must be moved more than 400 feet away from their approved location by 10:00 p.m. each evening and not return to their approved location until 6:00 a.m. the following morning, or the unit may be moved to another site which is less than 400 feet away if it is parked behind a site-obscuring fence so it is not visible in any manner from a public street or from the approved location it uses and does not return to its approved location until 6:00 a.m. the following morning.

(P)    No mobile food vendors may be open for business in the city limits between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

(Q)    If external electric service is necessary, an underground electrical service outlet providing electricity to the unit may be used. The outlet must have a ground fault interrupter and meet all applicable city, state and federal codes. The extension cord from the outlet to the mobile food unit must not be longer than ten feet and must meet all city, state and federal codes.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13)


116.09 MOBILE FOOD UNIT REQUIREMENTS.

(A)    For present mobile vendors, existing unit color and unlighted signage on their units are acceptable, with no other signage allowed on or off the unit. By April 1, 2019, and for new mobile food vendors not listed in this chapter, the following requirements apply:

(1)    All units must be painted white, grey, tan or brown or some other subtle color. No yellow, orange, red, pink or other loud colors are allowed for the base color.

(2)    Signage on the unit may only be painted on the unit and may not take up more than 30% of the surface area of each side, back or front of the unit.

(3)    No lighted signs or attractants of any kind including rotating or flashing lights are allowed at any time on the unit or approved location except a sign no larger than 24 inches by 24 inches which says "OPEN." Lights which light the ground patrons stand on may be used but no lights may be shined in the direction of traffic to draw attention to the business.

(B)    When the license is renewed the first time in 2015, and all renewals thereafter, the unit must be of a good and well-kept appearance and may not have any rust, substantial dents, missing lights or bumpers.

(C)    Starting April 1, 2023, all mobile food vendors may only operate out of a self-propelled van not longer than 26 feet in length. No trailers or other rolling stock may be used.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13)


116.10 SHORT-TERM MOBILE FOOD LICENSE.

(A)    Beginning September 28, 2018, the city shall make short-term licenses available for a maximum of 90 consecutive calendar days.

(B)    A maximum of four short-term licenses shall be issued concurrently.

(C)    A short-term license is not eligible for reissuance to the same vendor or the same location until 90 days from the date of license expiration have elapsed.

(D)    The approved location requirements in § 116.07 are in effect with the following modifications:

(1)    An approved location shall be more than 200 feet from any other mobile food vendor as measured from the closest property line of each approved location.

(2)    For a location to be approved it shall have sufficient parking immediately adjacent to the mobile food unit of at least two parking spaces specifically designated for use by the mobile vending unit.

(3)    For a location to be approved, the mobile food unit must be at least five feet from the property line of an adjoining property owner unless the possessor of the adjoining property consents in writing to allow the mobile food unit to be closer to his or her adjoining property.

(4)    For a location to be approved, it shall be 200 feet or more from the property line of a business having a restaurant license.

(E)    The operation and site requirements in § 116.08 are in effect.

(F)    The mobile food unit requirements in § 116.09 are in effect except for § 116.09(C). A mobile food unit applying for a short-term license is not required to be a self-propelled van. Push carts, trailers, and self-propelled vans shall all be eligible for a short-term license.

(G)    The City Council shall establish a fee for issuance of a short-term license.

(H)    All provisions for operating a mobile food unit as specified in this chapter remain in effect except where specifically modified by this section.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 2261, passed 8-27-18)


116.11 EXEMPTIONS.

(A)    This chapter does not apply to mobile food vending on public property, or property controlled by a public entity, it being the intent of this chapter that those public entities are entitled to control vending on their properties as they deem appropriate. This includes all local, state and federal government property.

(B)    This chapter does not apply to mobile food vending at private events of brief duration including banquets, weddings and other catered events, so long as the food is not for sale to the public.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 2261, passed 8-27-18)


116.12 HEARING PROCEDURES.

(A)    Any mobile food vendor or license applicant who disputes a decision by the city about the denial of a license or notice of termination of a license may file his or her written complaint with the City Manager. If not satisfied by the City Manager’s decision, the mobile food vendor or applicant has seven days from the date of the City Manager’s written decision to appeal to the City Council.

(B)    The Council, acting as the review authority for disputes, may:

(1)    Hear and determine appeals of decisions of the City Manager, prescribe the forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals, and take other actions consistent with the appeal function. In reviewing a decision or dispute, the Council may take evidence and make an investigation. The Council shall give notice of determinations and shall file its determination with the City Recorder. A determination of the Council becomes final upon its filing with the City Recorder.

(2)    Review of the final determination of Council under this chapter by any aggrieved party, including the city, shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Umatilla County, Oregon, as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100.

(Ord. 2206, passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 2261, passed 8-27-18)


116.99 VIOLATION PENALTIES.

Any person, persons, firms, organizations, associations or corporations in violation of this chapter commit a Class C violation. For continuing violations, each day of a violation is a separate offense.

(Ord. 2261, passed 8-27-18)


CHAPTER 117 Taxicabs

Section

117.01    Purpose

117.02    Definitions

117.03    Taxicab company certificate required; exemptions

117.04    Taxicab company certificate applications; issuance

117.05    Annual taxicab company certificate; renewal

117.06    Minimum standards for taxicab companies

117.07    Equipment

117.08    Insurance and indemnification

117.09    Approval of drivers

117.10    Operating regulations of taxicab companies and drivers

117.11    Cancellation, suspension, revocation, or appeal of certificate or permit

117.12    Rates

117.13    Complaints

117.14    Violation; penalty


117.01 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter to require that those persons operating taxicabs do so in a safe, fair and efficient manner. The taxicab industry constitutes an essential part of the city’s transportation system, and transportation so fundamentally affects the well-being of the city’s citizens that some regulation is necessary to ensure that the public safety is protected, the public need provided for, and the public convenience promoted. The provisions contained herein should be applied and enforced in such a manner as to require the taxicab industry to regulate itself, under city supervision, to promote innovation and adaption to changing needs, and respond to economics of the marketplace, so long as the public interest is served thereby. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.02 DEFINITIONS.

(A)    CERTIFICATE OR PERMIT. A current certificate or permit issued under this chapter to operate a taxicab company.

(B)    CITY MANAGER. The City of Hermiston City Manager or his/her designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the City Manager.

(C)    POLICE CHIEF. The person holding the position of Chief of Police of the Hermiston Police Department, or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the Police Chief.

(D)    DRIVER. Any person who operates taxicabs as a driver for any permitted taxicab company, regardless of whether the vehicles operated are owned by the company, leased, or owned by individual members of the company.

(E)    OPERATE. To drive a taxicab, to use a taxicab in the conduct of business, to receive money from the use of a taxicab, or cause or allow another person to do the same.

(F)    PERSON. Any individual, partnership, trust, estate, corporation, or other form of business organization recognized by Oregon law.

(G)    TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle which carries passengers for hire when the journey originates in the city and where the destination and route may be controlled by a passenger and the fare is calculated on the basis of any combination of an initial fee, distance traveled, waiting time, or a flat fee. Any vehicle which has an appearance deceptively similar to a taxicab is a taxicab for the purposes of this chapter.

(H)    TAXICAB COMPANY. Any person that operates taxicabs that either has a place of business within the city limits or conducts taxicab business within the city limits that is authorized by the city as a taxicab company under this chapter.

(I)    TAXIMETER. A mechanical or electronic device which calculates and displays a fare based on an initial fee, distance traveled, waiting time, or any combination thereof. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.03 TAXICAB COMPANY CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.

(A)    No person shall operate any taxicab in the City of Hermiston without possessing, in addition to any license required by any other law, a valid taxicab company certificate issued pursuant to this chapter. A certificate may not be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred.

(B)    Exemptions to certificate requirement.

(1)    Public transportation provided and funded in whole or in part by public organizations shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter.

(2)    Services provided for the exclusive purpose of providing transportation to and from medical facilities.

(3)    Courtesy shuttles provided by hotels, motels, and residential care facilities as a convenience for registered guests or residents, where no additional charges apply. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.04 TAXICAB COMPANY CERTIFICATE APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE.

(A)    Application. An application for a taxicab company certificate shall be submitted to the City Manager, and the application must be signed under penalty of perjury. The application documents must contain the following:

(1)    The name, business address and residence address of the applicant.

(2)    The make, type, year of manufacture, VIN number, and seating capacity of each vehicle that will be operated as a taxicab under the taxicab company certificate.

(3)    A description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, trademark, or any other distinguished characteristics of the proposed vehicle design.

(4)    A list from the applicant of any violation, misdemeanor, or felony convictions, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed for the owner(s) and/or any officers of the taxicab company.

(5)    Proof of insurance in the manner and form required by this chapter from a responsible, solvent insurance carrier authorized to issue public liability and property damage insurance in the state of Oregon.

(6)    A receipt issued by the city showing payment of the nonrefundable application fee. The fee is to be set by resolution of the City Council.

(7)    Before any taxicab company application is acted upon by the City Manager, the Police Chief is to make an investigation within 60 days from the date the application is filed. Upon completion of such investigation the Police Chief is to report his findings, in writing, to the City Manager.

(B)    Issuance of certificate. The City Manager will issue a certificate to operate a taxicab upon finding that the applicant has met the requirements of this chapter. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.05 ANNUAL TAXICAB COMPANY CERTIFICATE; RENEWAL.

Taxicab company certificates may be renewed upon submission of a new taxicab company certificate application. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.06 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR TAXICAB COMPANIES.

Any taxicab company operating under a certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the following minimum standards:

(A)    A dispatch system in operation 18 hours each day capable of providing reasonably prompt service in response to requests received.

(B)    Facilities and personnel sufficient to ensure that every taxicab operated by the taxicab company complies with the requirements of this chapter.

(C)    Insurance policies in force sufficient to meet the requirements of this chapter and to protect the taxicab company to the same limits of liability. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.07 EQUIPMENT.

Every taxicab is to be equipped with the following:

(A)    Except for taxicabs charging flat rates, a taximeter in accurate operating condition with a lighted face which can be read at all times by the customer.

(B)    Taxicabs charging flat rates must be equipped with a sign complying with § 117.12 that states "Flat Rate" in a conspicuous location visible to the customer inside the taxicab.

(C)    Exterior markings or equipment identifying the vehicle as a taxicab.

(D)    The company name and telephone number where service can be requested displayed on the exterior of the taxicab.

(E)    A current copy of the taxicab company certificate with the approved vehicle’s vehicle identification number (VIN) displayed within the vehicle where it is visible to the customer.

(F)    A notice providing information necessary to file a complaint as required by § 117.13.

(G)    All safety equipment required by federal law, state law, or this chapter. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.08 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.

(A)    No person shall operate any vehicle as a taxicab unless that vehicle is covered by commercial liability insurance providing coverage of not less than the limit on liability of local public bodies for personal injury and death as established by the Oregon Tort Claims Act. Liability coverage shall be provided on an "occurrence" not "claims" basis. A certificate of insurance coverage, evidencing insurance coverage in compliance with this section, shall be filed with the City Manager. The City of Hermiston, its officers, employees, and agents shall be named as additional insureds.

(1)    The limits of insurance coverage required for taxicab companies under this section shall be subject to any changes regarding the minimum limits of liability insurance of local public bodies for personal injury and death as established by the Oregon Tort Claims Act.

(2)    Insurance policies for all vehicles operating as taxicabs shall contain a provision that the policy will not be reduced in coverage or canceled without 30 days prior written notice to the City Manager.

(3)    Failure to maintain adequate insurance as required under this section shall be cause for immediate suspension or revocation of a taxicab company certificate.

(B)    All taxicab companies and drivers that receive a certificate or a permit shall, to the extent permitted by law, agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from any claims for damages to property, or injury to persons, which may occur in connection with the operation of a taxicab company or a taxicab under the terms of the certificate or permit. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.09 APPROVAL OF DRIVERS.

It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab in the City of Hermiston without a taxicab driver permit issued by the Police Department in accordance with the terms of this chapter.

(A)    Application for a taxicab driver permit is to be made to the Police Chief, on a form provided by the city, accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the City Council. The applicant must attach a certified copy of the applicant’s department of motor vehicle records and a copy of the applicant’s driver’s license.

(B)    When the Police Chief receives the application, he/she shall make such investigation of the applicant’s background as necessary to verify that each taxicab driver issued a permit:

(1)    Is 21 years of age or older;

(2)    Within the last ten years, has not been convicted of any crimes involving moral turpitude or dishonesty except there is no time limit for any convictions involving sex crimes as defined by ORS 801.105, theft in the first degree, fraudulent use of a credit card, identity theft or any crime classified as a person felony as that term is defined in the rules of the Oregon Criminal Justice Commission unless the conviction has been set aside pursuant to ORS 137.225 or another state’s similar proceeding;

(3)    Possesses a valid Oregon driver’s license;

(4)    Has not had his or her driver’s license revoked by any state within the last five years; and

(5)    Did not make any false statements in the application.

(C)    If the Police Chief determines that the applicant meets the requirements of this section, the Police Chief may issue the permit. The permit expires one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed from year to year by filing a renewal application with the Police Department. The fee for a renewal permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council. Failure to renew a license before expiration of the current taxicab driver permit shall result in late fees.

(D)    Denial of permit. No permit shall be issued or renewed to any person if the city determines, after a review of a person’s traffic or criminal record, and any other information the city deems pertinent, that the public health, welfare, and safety would not be served by the issuance or renewal of a permit to that person. If the application is denied, the applicant may, within seven days of notification of the denial by the city, appeal the matter in writing to the City Council. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15; Am. Ord. 2231, passed 8-10-15)


117.10 OPERATING REGULATIONS OF TAXICAB COMPANIES AND DRIVERS.

(A)    Taxicab companies. A taxicab company shall not:

(1)    Allow persons to operate taxicabs who do not have a valid Oregon driver’s license, or who have had their driving privileges suspended any time within the past 12 months.

(B)    Taxicab drivers. A taxicab driver shall not:

(1)    Transport a passenger to his or her destination by any other than the most direct and safe route, unless requested to do so by the passenger;

(2)    Fail to give a correct receipt upon payment of the correct fare if requested to do so by the passenger;

(3)    Permit additional persons to occupy or ride in the taxicab without consent of the original passenger;

(4)    Refuse to transport to his requested destination any passenger of proper demeanor who requests services or is assigned by a taxicab service company when the taxicab is not already in service, and who is able to demonstrate the ability and willingness to pay the fare;

(5)    Charge a fare higher than the posted rates, or try to defraud a passenger in any way by manipulating devices to cause a registration to be made of a greater distance or more time. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.11 CANCELLATION, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR APPEAL OF CERTIFICATE OR PERMIT.

(A)    Any taxicab company certificate may be suspended or revoked by the City Manager if the City Manager finds after a reasonable investigation verifying that any one or more of the following conditions exists:

(1)    A taxicab company, or any of the company’s owners, employees, or agents, has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City of Hermiston, or any of the laws of the state of Oregon.

(2)    The taxicab company ceases to operate any taxicab for a period of 15 consecutive days without obtaining permission for the cessation of such operation from the city.

(3)    The taxicab company fails to pay any of the fees or payments required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter.

(4)    The suspension or revocation is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare generally, or the safety of the taxicab-riding public in particular.

(B)    Any suspension or revocation pursuant to this section shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons therefor and the right to appeal the decision to the City Council.

(C)    Except as provided below, any suspension or revocation shall be effective at least ten days after mailing a copy thereof by first class United States mail addressed to the taxicab company and/or taxicab driver at the business or residence address shown on the permit application or renewal.

(D)    Notwithstanding subsection (B) of this section, a suspension or revocation may be made effective immediately if the city finds reasonable grounds to believe that:

(1)    A person holding a taxicab driver’s permit is not covered by liability insurance as required by this chapter;

(2)    A vehicle being operated as a taxicab is not covered by liability insurance required by this chapter; or

(3)    Continued operation by the taxicab company or taxicab driver would cause, or is likely to cause, imminent danger to the public health, safety, or welfare. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.12 RATES.

A flat fare remains constant regardless of the distance traveled or the time involved. Except for a taxicab charging a flat rate, the rates to be charged to passengers are to be based on the factors of mileage from the point of origin to the point of destination by the most direct route, the time involved, and the number of passengers. No taxicab may charge any fees or rates other than those that are posted. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.13 COMPLAINTS.

(A)    Every taxicab shall have posted in a prominent place within the passenger compartment a notice entitled "Complaints" setting forth the address and telephone number of the taxicab company to which complaints should be directed and a notice that a record of all complaints shall be open to inspection and review by the city at any time on its request.

(B)    Taxicab companies shall maintain a record of all complaints received either in writing or by telephone. 

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


117.14 VIOLATION; PENALTY.

Any person who violates a provision of this chapter commits a Class B violation.

(Ord. 2230, passed 5-11-15)


TITLE XIII General Offenses

Chapter

130.    GENERAL OFFENSES

131.    GRAFFITI

132.    DRUG PARAPHERNALIA

133.    CURFEW

134.    CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY

135.    STRUCTURAL MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS

136.    CODE HEARINGS OFFICER


CHAPTER 130 General Offenses

Section

General Offenses

130.01    City Prosecutor

130.02    Controlled substances

130.03    Disturbing religious assemblies

130.04    Unauthorized posters

130.05    Endangering pedestrians

130.06    Failure to maintain water overflow drainage system

130.07    Drinking in public places

130.08    Spitting in public places

130.09    Urinating in public places

130.10    Obstructing building entrances

130.11    Failing to supervise a minor

130.12    Social games

Weapons

130.30    Discharging air guns and non-firearm weapons

130.31    Discharging of firearms

GENERAL OFFENSES


130.01 CITY PROSECUTOR.

Subject to statutory provisions, prosecution of offenses under this chapter and any city ordinance in Municipal Court shall be by the appointed City Prosecutor or appointed City Attorney, or deputies or assistants thereof, properly appointed, whose term shall continue until resignation or release, or by other proper authority as might be allowed by law. Where so appointed the City Prosecutor shall have the statutory authority of the City Attorney under Oregon law.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00)


130.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.

(A)    Any person who delivers, for no consideration, less than five grams of the dried leaves, stems, and flowers of the plant cannabis family moraceae is guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000.

(B)    Any person who knowingly or intentionally is in unlawful possession of a controlled substance in Schedule V is guilty of a Class A violation.

(C)    Any person who knowingly or intentionally is in unlawful possession of less than one avoirdupois ounce of the dried leaves, stems, and flowers of the plant cannabis family moraceae is guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000.

(D)    It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or conduct the business of a medical marijuana facility registered with the Oregon Health Authority in the City of Hermiston. (Unregistered medical marijuana facilities are subject to state law.)

(E)    Any person who violates subsection (D) of this section commits a Class A violation. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00; Am. Ord. 2216, passed 3-3-14)


130.03 DISTURBING RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLIES.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly lawfully met for religious worship or for any other lawful purpose by making loud and unnecessary noises or by rude and indecent behavior or profane language within any place of assembly, or so near to the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting.

(B)    The offense described in this section, disturbing religious assemblies, is a Class A violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.04 UNAUTHORIZED POSTERS.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to affix a placard, bill or poster upon any personal or real property, private or public, without first obtaining permission of the owner or proper public official.

(B)    A corporation, including a business sponsor, entertainer, facility, or other entity mentioned in any placard, bill or poster placed in violation of division (A) above shall be liable as to the placement of the placard, bill or poster, where the corporation, through its agents, officers, contracted advertisers, or employees, knew of the placement, authorized, solicited, requested, commanded or knowingly tolerated the placement thereof or failed to promptly cause to be removed any placards, bills, or posters upon receiving notice of the placement of such placards, bills or posters.

(C)    A non-corporate entity, through its owner or owners, such as a partnership, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship or other legally recognized business operating entity, mentioned in any placard, bill or poster placed in violation of division (A) above shall be liable as to the placement of the placard, bill or poster, where the entity, through its agents, officers, members, contracted advertisers, or employees, knew of the placement, authorized, solicited, requested, commanded or knowingly tolerated the placement or failed to promptly cause to be removed such placards, bills, or posters upon receiving notice of the placement of such placards, bills or posters.

(D)    A person shall be liable under division (A) above for placards, bills, or posters placed in violation thereof setting forth a place for an event, thing or happening, and the person apparently in charge of the event, thing or happening, or in apparent charge, or ownership of the location of the event, thing or happening, knew of the placement, authorized, solicited, requested, commanded or knowingly tolerated the placement or failed to promptly remove the placards, bills, or posters upon receiving notice of the placement of such placards, bills or posters.

(E)    The offense described in this section, unauthorized posters, is a Class D violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.05 ENDANGERING PEDESTRIANS.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or structure to suffer or permit rain water, ice or snow, which has accumulated on the building or structure of such owner, lessee or occupant, to fall from such structure onto a sidewalk or other public way.

(B)    The offense described in this section, endangering pedestrians, is a Class C violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.06 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN WATER OVERFLOW DRAINAGE SYSTEM.

(A)    Every owner, lessee or occupant of land shall at all times keep and maintain in a proper state of repair an adequate drainage system sufficient to maintain and to dispose on site, or in a facility approved by the city, any water accumulating on the roof of any structure and on or about the premises.

(B)    The offense described in this section, failure to maintain water overflow drainage system, is a Class D violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.07 DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.

(A)    No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or on a street, alley, mall, parking lot, including private parking lots open to the public, or structure, motor vehicle, public grounds, or other public place unless the place has been licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission; provided, however, consumption of alcoholic liquor is permitted in McKenzie Park in accordance with rules and regulations established in Chapter 93, Parks and Recreation, of this Code.

(B)    The offense described in this section, drinking in public places, is a Class D violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00; Am. Ord. 2134, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 2136, passed 7-11-07) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.08 SPITTING IN PUBLIC PLACES.

Any person who spits or expectorates upon any public sidewalk, street, parking lot, building, drinking fountain, or in any public place, except in receptacles and recognized places provided for those purposes, commits a Class D violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.09 URINATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.

Any person who urinates upon any public sidewalk, street, parking lot or building, or in any public place, except in receptacles and recognized places provided for those purposes, commits a Class B violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.10 OBSTRUCTING BUILDING ENTRANCES.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner the entrance to any building or stairway or hall leading to any building.

(B)    The offense described in this section, obstructing building entrances, is a Class A violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.11 FAILING TO SUPERVISE A MINOR.

(A)    A person commits the offense of failing to supervise a minor if the person is the parent, legal guardian or person with legal responsibility for the safety and welfare of a child under 18 years of age and the child violates a provision of this Code or of state statutes or state regulations.

(B)    Nothing in this section applies to a childcaring agency as defined in ORS 418.205 or to foster parents.

(C)    In a prosecution of a person for failing to supervise a child under division (A) of this section, it is an affirmative defense that the person:

(1)    Is the victim of the act that violated a provision of this Code;

(2)    Reported the act to the appropriate authorities; or

(3)    Took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child at the time the person is alleged to have failed to supervise the child.

(D)    The offense described in this section, failing to supervise a minor, is a Class A violation.

(E)    In addition to any fine or penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter, the court may order the person to pay any restitution to a victim of the minor’s conduct. The amount of restitution ordered pursuant to this section shall not exceed $2,500. The municipal court shall credit the person ordered to pay restitution the actual dollars paid by the minor pursuant to any juvenile court order or juvenile code agreement.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00; Am. Ord. 2163, passed 3-22-10)


130.12 SOCIAL GAMES.

Social games as defined in ORS 167.117 are hereby permitted in the city.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00)

WEAPONS


130.30 DISCHARGING AIR GUNS AND NON-FIREARM WEAPONS.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air gun, bow and arrow, bean shooter, blow gun, paint ball gun, slingshot or other similar weapon or device on public property or any premises open to the public.

(B)    The offense described in this section, discharging air guns and non-firearm weapons, is a Class C violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00) Penalty, see § 10.99


130.31 DISCHARGING OF FIREARMS.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any type of firearm; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall apply to any peace officer while acting in performance of duties or to any person lawfully using a firearm in defense of himself or the life of another or to any person firing on a target range which has been constructed to standards as determined by pertinent building codes of the city, providing absolute entrapment of all fired rounds and control of all offensive noises.

(B)    The offense described in this section, discharging of firearms, is a Class A violation.

(Ord. 2009, passed 8-28-00)


CHAPTER 131 Graffiti

Section

131.01    Definitions

131.02    Possession of graffiti implement

131.03    Seizure and impoundment

131.04    Parental responsibility

131.05    Parental civil liability

131.06    Community service

131.99    Penalty


131.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container adapted or made for spraying paint.

ETCHING DEVICE. A glass cutter, awl or any device capable of scratching or etching the surface of any structure or personal property.

FELT-TIP MARKER. Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth inch.

GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any surface that is not authorized by the owner or person in charge of the property.

GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. An aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, an etching device or a graffiti stick.

GRAFFITI STICK. A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-fourth of an inch in width.

(Ord. 1873, passed 1-23-95)


131.02 POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.

(A)    No person may possess, with the intent to unlawfully apply graffiti on any real or personal property of another, any graffiti implement.

(B)    It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish or cause to permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of 18 years.

(C)    It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess a graffiti implement.

(D)    It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under subsections (B) and (C) of this section when:

(1)    Transfer is from a parent or legal guardian and possession occurs upon real property with permission from the owner, occupant, or person having lawful control of such property;

(2)    Transfer is from an employer for employment activity of the minor;

(3)    Transfer is from a school official for a school sanctioned activity;

(4)    Transfer is from a city official for a city sanctioned activity.

(E)    Unlawfully possessing or furnishing a graffiti implement is a Class C violation.

(Ord. 1873, passed 1-23-95; Am. Ord. 2198, passed 3-25-13) Penalty, see § 131.99


131.03 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.

In addition to any citation issued, a graffiti implement possessed in violation of § 131.02 may be immediately seized and impounded by the Police Department. The court, upon disposition of the issued citation, shall determine whether the instrument shall be returned to the defendant or deemed contraband and disposed of according to state law.

(Ord. 1873, passed 1-23-95)


131.04 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.

(A)    No parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of a minor person under the age of 18 years may allow or permit the minor to be in violation of § 131.02 above.

(B)    Upon a subsequent violation by a minor, the parent, guardian or person having legal custody shall be served with a subpoena to appear before the court with the minor and show cause why § 131.02 above has been violated a second time.

(Ord. 1873, passed 1-23-95) Penalty, see § 131.99

Cross-reference:

Parental responsibility for minors, see § 130.11


131.05 PARENTAL CIVIL LIABILITY.

In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the parents of an unemancipated minor child shall be liable for actual damages to person or property in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by the child in accordance with the provisions of ORS 30.765.

(Ord. 1873, passed 1-23-95; Am. Ord. 2198, passed 3-25-13)


131.06 COMMUNITY SERVICE.

In lieu of any fine that may be imposed for violation of § 131.02, the court may order community service as follows:

(A)    Upon conviction for unlawfully possessing a graffiti implement, the person shall perform at least 20 hours of community service;

(B)    The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the court; and

(C)    Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject person to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the person. To the extent that the offense giving rise to the offer of community service constitutes a violation of § 131.02, reasonable effort shall be made by the court to assign the person to community service which constitutes in significant part the removal of the graffiti.

(Ord. 1873, passed 1-23-95)


131.99 PENALTY.

A conviction for the violation of § 131.02, or violating parental responsibility under § 131.04, is punishable as a Class A violation. Upon conviction for unlawfully possessing a graffiti implement, the court shall impose a mandatory minimum specific fine violation of $100.

(Ord. 1873, passed 1-23-95; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)


CHAPTER 132 Drug Paraphernalia

Section

132.01    Definition

132.02    Determinations of objects

132.03    Possession, manufacture and sale

132.99    Penalty


132.01 DEFINITION.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug or its immediate precursor classified in Schedules I through V under the federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 811 to 812, as modified under ORS 475.035. The use of the term “precursor” in this paragraph does not control and is not controlled by the use of the term “precursor” in ORS 475.752 to 475.980.

DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. It includes, but is not limited to:

(1)    Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

(2)    Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;

(3)    Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

(4)    Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;

(5)    Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

(6)    Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;

(7)    Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana;

(8)    Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;

(9)    Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

(10)    Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

(11)    Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:

(a)    Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;

(b)    Water pipes;

(c)    Carburetion tubes and devices;

(d)    Smoking and carburetion masks;

(e)    Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

(f)    Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;

(g)    Chamber pipes;

(h)    Carburetor pipes;

(i)    Electric pipes;

(j)    Air-driven pipes;

(k)    Chillums;

(l)    Bongs;

(m)    Ice pipes or chillers.

(Ord. 1408, passed 4-12-82; Am. Ord. 2202, passed 7-8-13)


132.02 DETERMINATIONS OF OBJECTS.

In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

(A)    Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

(B)    Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any city, state, or federal law relating to any controlled substance;

(C)    The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this chapter;

(D)    The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

(E)    The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;

(F)    Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this chapter; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;

(G)    Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

(H)    Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

(I)    National and local advertising concerning its use;

(J)    The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

(K)    Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;

(L)    Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;

(M)    The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;

(N)    Expert testimony concerning its use.

(Ord. 1408, passed 4-12-82)


132.03 POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE AND SALE.

(A)    It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.

(B)    It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess, with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.

(C)    It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.

(D)    It is unlawful for any business selling drug paraphernalia to locate within 1,000 feet of any public or private elementary, junior high or high school;

(E)    This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with appropriate statutes;

(F)    Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this section shall be seized and forfeited to the city.

(Ord. 1408, passed 4-12-82; Am. Ord. 2202, passed 7-8-13) Penalty, see § 132.99


132.99 PENALTY.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter commits a Class A violation. For each day that a violation shall continue, every person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense.

(Ord. 1408, passed 4-12-82)


CHAPTER 133 Curfew

Section

133.01    Unlawful hours

133.02    Duties of the officer

133.03    Delinquency

133.99    Penalty


133.01 UNLAWFUL HOURS.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to be upon the streets or in any public place in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. during any day of the year, unless the child be in the custody of or accompanied by a parent or guardian. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to apply to any child while actually engaged in traveling to and from a place of employment, school classes, religious meetings or while upon any errand of mercy, emergency or under direction of his parent, guardian or other adult person having the immediate care, custody or control of the child.

(B)    It shall be unlawful for any child over the age of 16 years and under the age of 18 years, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of the child, to be on any of the streets, alleys, public squares, parks or sidewalks of the city after the hour of 12:00 a.m. or before the hour of 5:30 a.m. on any day of the year unless the child is in possession of a special written permit from parent or guardian.

(Ord. 319, passed 3-7-56) Penalty, see § 133.99


133.02 DUTIES OF THE OFFICER.

If any child be found upon the streets or in any public place in violation of this chapter, and the violation be his or her first offense, it shall be the duty of any peace officer to forthwith place the child under custody and to take, or cause the child to be taken to his or her home and the parent, guardian or other person having the custody and care of the child shall be notified of the violation.

(Ord. 319, passed 3-7-56)


133.03 DELINQUENCY.

Whenever a peace officer learns that a child has violated the provisions of this chapter under circumstances which tend to render him delinquent, the officer shall place an appropriate complaint with the juvenile court for further proceedings as the court deems appropriate.

(Ord. 319, passed 3-7-56)


133.99 PENALTY.

When a parent, guardian or other adult person in custody of a child, after having been notified that the child has violated this chapter, permits the child to violate the provisions of this chapter a second time, the parent commits a Class A violation.

(Ord. 319, passed 3-7-56; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1976, passed 10-26-98)

Cross-reference:

Parental responsibility for minors, see § 130.11


CHAPTER 134 Chronic Nuisance Property

Section

134.01    Definitions

134.02    Violation

134.03    Procedure

134.04    Commencement of actions; remedies; burden of proof

134.05    Summary closure

134.06    Enforcement

134.07    Attorney fees


134.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.

(1)    Property on which three or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any 90-day period; or

(2)    Property on which or within 400 feet of which any person associated with the property has engaged in three or more nuisance activities during any 90-day period; or

(3)    Property which, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of a determination by a court that probable cause does exist that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285 and/or ORS 475.940 through 475.995 has occurred within the previous 90 days, and the city Police Department has determined that the search warrant was based on evidence of continuous or repeated nuisance activities at the property; or

(4)    Property on which continuous or repeated "nuisance activities" as defined in divisions (7), (8), (13) and (14) of that definition, exist or have occurred.

CONTROL. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property, or conduct that occurs on a property.

NUISANCE ACTIVITIES. Any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct:

(1)    Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(l)(a).

(2)    Intimidation as defined in ORS 166.155 through 166.165.

(3)    Disorderly conduct as defined in ORS 166.025.

(4)    Assault or menacing as defined in ORS 163.160 through 163.190.

(5)    Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor or sexual misconduct as defined in ORS 163.415 through 163.445.

(6)    Public indecency as defined in ORS 163.465.

(7)    Prostitution or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.007 through 167.017.

(8)    Alcoholic liquor violations as defined in ORS Chapter 471.105 through 471.482.

(9)    Offensive littering as defined in ORS 164.805.

(10)    Criminal trespass as defined in ORS 164.243 through 164.265.

(11)    Theft as defined in ORS 164.015 through 164.140.

(12)    Arson or related offenses as defined in ORS 164.315 through 164.335.

(13)    Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, ORS 475.005 through 475.285, and/or ORS 475.940 through 475.995.

(14)    Illegal gambling as defined in ORS 167.117, and/or ORS 167.122 through 167.127.

(15)    Criminal mischief as defined in ORS 164.345 through 164.365.

(16)    Any attempt to commit (as defined in ORS 161.405), and/or conspiracy to commit (as defined in ORS 161.450), any of the above activities, behaviors or conduct.

(17)    Fire or discharge of a firearm as defined in § 130.31.

(18)    Unlawful operation of sound producing or reproducing equipment as defined in § 92.28(L).

(19)    Curfew as defined by ORS 419C.680.

(20)    Curfew as defined in § 133.01.

PERSON. Any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity capable of owning, occupying or using property in the city.

PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH. Any person who, on the occasion of a nuisance activity, has entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit a property or person present on a property, including without limitation any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or any independent contractor of a property, person in charge, or owner of a property.

PERSON IN CHARGE. Any person, in actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to an owner or occupant of property under his or her ownership or control.

PROPERTY. Any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any business or residence, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether or not permanent. For property consisting of more than one unit, property may be limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any nuisance activity has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used in common by all units of property including without limitation other structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading and landscaping.

(Ord. 2077, passed 10-27-03; Am. Ord. 2262, passed 9-24-18)


134.02 VIOLATION.

(A)    Any property determined by the Police Department to be chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.

(B)    Any person in charge of property determined by the Police Department to be chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.

(Ord. 2077, passed 10-27-03)


134.03 PROCEDURE.

(A)    When the Police Department receives two or more reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activities on or within 400 feet of a property, the reports shall be reviewed to determine whether they describe the activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated under § 134.01 "nuisance activities" (1) through (20). Upon such a finding, the Police Department may notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger of becoming chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information:

(1)    The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

(2)    A statement that the Police Department has information that the property may be chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities that exist, or that have occurred. The Police Department shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action that the Police Department agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.

(3)    Demand that the person in charge respond to the city Police Department within ten days to discuss the nuisance activities.

(B)    When the Police Department receives a police report documenting the occurrence of additional nuisance activity on or within 400 feet of a property after notification as provided by division (A); or, in the case of "chronic nuisance property" as defined in § 134.01, division (3) or (4), for which notice under division (A) is not required, the Police Department shall notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property.

(1)    The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

(2)    A statement that the Police Department has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to his/her determination.

(3)    Demand that the person in charge respond within ten days to the city Police Department and propose a course of action that the Police Department agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.

(4)    Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property determined to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the Police Department.

(5)    A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at the address shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or the occupant at the address of the property, if these persons are different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid.

(C)    If the person in charge fails to respond as required by division (B)(3), the Police Department may refer the matter to the City Attorney. Prior to referring the matter to the City Attorney, the notice required by division (B) shall also be posted at the property.

(D)    If the person in charge responds as required by division (B)(3) and agrees to abate nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the Police Department may postpone referring the matter to the City Attorney. If an agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activities within 60 days; or, if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within 60 days, the Police Department may refer the matter to the City Attorney.

(E)    When a person in charge makes a response to the Police Department as required by divisions (A)(3) or (B)(3) any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring. This section does not require the exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose.

(F)    The failure of any person to receive notice as provided by divisions (A) or (B) shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this chapter.

(Ord. 2077, passed 10-27-03)


134.04 COMMENCEMENT OF ACTIONS; REMEDIES; BURDEN OF PROOF.

(A)    The city Police Department may request the City Attorney to commence legal proceedings in a court to abate chronic nuisance property and to seek closure, the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of the persons in charge thereof, and, any other relief deemed appropriate.

(B)    If the court determines the property to be chronic nuisance property, the court shall order that the property be closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than 30 days, nor more than one year. The order shall be entered as part of the final judgment. The court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure.

(C)    If the court determines a property to be chronic nuisance property, the court may impose a civil penalty of up to $100 per day for each day nuisance activities occurred on the property, following notice pursuant to § 134.03(B); or the cost to the city to abate the nuisance activities at the property whichever is greater. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed against the person in charge and/or the property and may be included in the city’s money judgment.

(D)    If satisfied of the good faith of the person in charge, the court shall not award civil penalties if the court finds that the person in charge at all material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become chronic nuisance property.

(E)    In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider any of the following factors and shall cite those found applicable:

(1)    The actions taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activities at the property;

(2)    The financial condition of the person in charge;

(3)    Repeated or continuous nature of the problem;

(4)    The magnitude or gravity of the problem;

(5)    The cooperation of the person in charge with the city;

(6)    The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the nuisance activities;

(7)    Any other factor deemed relevant by a court.

(F)    The city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.

(G)    Evidence of a property’s general reputation and/or the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting it shall be admissible.

(Ord. 2077, passed 10-27-03)


134.05 SUMMARY CLOSURE.

Any summary closure proceeding shall be based on evidence showing that nuisance activities exist or have occurred on the property and that emergency action is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety. Proceedings to obtain an order of summary closure shall be governed by the provisions of ORCP 79 for obtaining temporary restraining orders. In the event of summary closure, the city is not required to comply with the notification procedures set forth in § 134.03(A) and (B).

(Ord. 2077, passed 10-27-03)


134.06 ENFORCEMENT.

(A)    The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property against all unauthorized access, use or occupancy in the event that the person in charge fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the property, the city shall recover all costs reasonably incurred by the city to physically secure the property as provided by this section. The city department(s) physically securing the property shall prepare a statement of costs, and the city shall thereafter submit that statement to the court for its review as provided by ORCP 68.

(B)    The person in charge shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant as defined by ORS 90.100(28), if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after either:

(1)    A person in charge received notice of the determination of the Police Department pursuant to § 134.03(B); or

(2)    A person in charge received notice of an action brought pursuant to § 134.05.

(C)    A lien shall be created against the property for the amount of the city’s money judgment. In addition, any person who is assessed penalties under § 134.04(C) and/or costs under § 134.06(A) shall be personally liable for payment thereof to the city. Judgments imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at the statutory rate.

(Ord. 2077, passed 10-27-03)


134.07 ATTORNEY FEES.

The court may, in its discretion, award attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party.

(Ord. 2077, passed 10-27-03)


CHAPTER 135 Structural Maintenance Regulations

Section

General Provisions

135.001    Title

135.002    Purpose

135.003    Scope

135.004    Application of building codes and ordinances

135.005    Definitions

Property Nuisances

135.020    Outdoor maintenance requirements

135.021    Other endangering conditions

135.022    Nuisance defined, summary abatement authorized

Housing Maintenance Requirements

135.030    Compliance

135.031    Display of address number

135.032    Accessory structures

135.033    Insect and rodent harborage

135.034    Cleanliness and sanitation

135.035    Plumbing facilities

135.036    Exterior walls and exposed surfaced

135.037    Overcrowding

135.038    Hazardous materials

135.039    Maintenance of facilities and equipment

135.040    Swimming pool enclosures

Dangerous and Derelict Structures

135.050    Repair or demolition required

135.051    Derelict buildings

135.052    Dangerous structures

135.053    Abatement of dangerous structures

Other Requirements

135.060    Permits required

135.061    Inspections required

135.062    Occupancy of residential property after notice of violation

135.063    Illegal residential occupancy

135.064    Interference with repair, demolition, or abatement prohibited

Administration and Enforcement

135.070    Administration authority and responsibility

135.071    Authorization to inspect

135.072    Enforcing compliance

135.073    Right of entry; inspection warrants

135.074    Notice and order

135.075    Nuisance abatement; warrants

135.076    Vacating structures

135.077    Referral to the Hearings Officer for repair or demolition of dangerous structures

135.078    Demolition; warrants

135.079    Exceptions

Costs and Penalties

135.090    City Manager shall impose penalties

135.091    Enforcement fees for housing and dangerous and derelict buildings

135.092    Costs and penalties for abatement of nuisances, disabled vehicles, and re-occupancy in violation

135.093    Building demolition costs and penalties

Appeals

135.100    Administrative review

135.101    Appeals to the Code Hearings Officer

135.102    Further appeals

GENERAL PROVISIONS


135.001 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as "Property Maintenance Regulations" and is referred to herein as "this chapter."

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.002 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens, to prevent deterioration of existing housing, and to contribute to vital neighborhoods by:

(A)    Establishing and enforcing minimum standards for residential structures regarding basic equipment, facilities, sanitation, fire safety, and maintenance.

(B)    Establishing and enforcing minimum standards of maintenance for outdoor areas and adjacent rights of way.

(C)    Regulating and abating dangerous and derelict buildings.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.003 SCOPE.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property in the city except as otherwise excluded by law.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.004 APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODES AND ORDINANCES.

Any alterations to buildings, or changes of their use, which may be a result of the enforcement of this chapter shall be done in accordance with applicable state building codes and the city codes and ordinances.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.005 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply. "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in combination. Terms, words, phrases and their derivatives used, but not specifically defined in this chapter, either shall have the meanings defined in the city building codes, or if not defined, shall have their commonly accepted meanings. The definitions of words with specific meaning in this chapter are as follows:

ABATEMENT OF A NUISANCE. The act of removing, repairing, or taking other steps as may be necessary in order to remove a nuisance.

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Any structure not intended for human occupancy which is located on residential property. Accessory structures may be attached to or detached from the residential structure. Examples of accessory structures include: garages, carports, sheds, and other non-dwelling buildings; decks, awnings, heat pumps, fences, trellises, flag poles, tanks, towers, exterior stairs and walkways, and other exterior structures on the property.

ADJACENT RIGHT-OF-WAY. The sidewalks and planting strips that border a specific property as well as the near half of the streets, alleys, or other public rights of way that border a specific property.

APARTMENT HOUSE. See "Dwelling Classifications."

APPROVED. Meets the standards set forth by applicable Hermiston City Code including any applicable regulations for electric, plumbing, building, or other sets of standards included by reference in this chapter.

BASEMENT. The usable portion of a building which is below the main entrance story and is partly or completely below grade.

BOARDED. Secured against entry by apparatus which is visible off the premises and is not both lawful and customary to install on occupied structures.

BUILDING. Any structure used or intended to be used for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

BUILDING, EXISTING. Existing building is a building erected prior to the adoption of this chapter, or one for which a legal permit has been issued.

BUILDING REGULATIONS. City building codes, or any other safety or health statute, ordinance, regulation, rule standard, or order the City Manager or Building Official is authorized to enforce.

CEILING HEIGHT. The clear distance between the floor and the ceiling directly above it.

CITY MANAGER. City Manager or his/her designee, charged with the enforcement and administration of this chapter.

COURT. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building.

DANGEROUS BUILDING. See "Dangerous Structure."

DANGEROUS STRUCTURE. Any structure which has any of the conditions or defects described in § 135.052, to the extent that life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered.

DEMOLITION WARRANT. An order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the demolition of a dangerous structure as authorized by this chapter, including disposal of all debris in an approved manner, and returning the lot to a clean and level condition.

DERELICT BUILDING. Any structure which has any of the conditions or defects described in § 135.051(A).

DISABLED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is or appears to be inoperative, wrecked or dismantled, or partially dismantled.

DUPLEX. See "Dwelling Classifications, two-family dwelling."

DWELLING. Any structure containing dwelling units, including all dwelling classifications covered by the chapter.

DWELLING CLASSIFICATIONS. Types of dwellings covered by this chapter include:

(1)    SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A structure containing one dwelling unit.

(2)    TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A structure containing two dwelling units, also known as a "duplex."

(3)    APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or portion of a building containing three or more dwelling units, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied for residential living purposes.

(4)    HOTEL. Any structure containing six or more dwelling units that are intended, designed, or used for renting or hiring out for sleeping purposes by residents on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis.

(5)    MOTEL. For purposes of this chapter, a motel shall be defined the same as a hotel.

(6)    SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY HOUSING UNIT. A one-room dwelling unit in a hotel providing sleeping, cooking, and living facilities for one or two persons in which some or all sanitary or cooking facilities (toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower, kitchen sink, or cooking equipment) may be shared with other dwelling units.

(7)    MANUFACTURED DWELLING. The term "manufactured dwelling" includes the following types of single-family dwellings:

(a)    Residential Trailer. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for, or is intended to be used for, residential purposes, and that was constructed before January 1, 1962.

(b)    Mobile Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for, or is intended to be used for, residential purposes, and that was constructed between January 1, 1962 and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

(c)    Manufactured Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for, or is intended to be used for, residential purposes, and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations.

(d)    Manufactured dwelling does not include any unit identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

(8)    FLOATING HOME. A floating structure used primarily as a dwelling unit. Application of this chapter shall be modified for floating homes, when appropriate, by nautical application.

DWELLING UNIT. One of more habitable rooms that are occupied by, or designed or intended to be occupied by, one person or by a family or group of housemates living together as a single housekeeping unit that includes facilities for living and sleeping and also includes facilities for cooking, eating, and sanitation.

EXIT (MEANS OF EGRESS). A continuous, unobstructed means of escape to a public way, including intervening doors, doorways, exit balconies, ramps, stairways, smoke-proof enclosures, horizontal exits, passageways, exterior courts and yards.

EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREA. The sections of residential property which are outside the exterior walls and roof of the dwelling.

EXTERMINATION. The elimination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests at or about the affected building.

FEE-PAID INSPECTION. Any requested inspection which is not a part of the city’s code enforcement program including but not limited to inspections done prior to moving houses, for establishing tax exempt status, for housing and urban development properties.

FLOOR AREA. The area of clear floor space in a room exclusive of fixed or built-in cabinets or appliances.

HABITABLE ROOM (SPACE). Habitable room or space is a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.

HOTEL. See "Dwelling Classifications."

IMMEDIATE DANGER. Any condition posing a direct immediate threat to human life, health, or safety.

INFESTATION. The presence within or around a dwelling of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests to a degree that is harmful to the dwelling or its occupants.

INSPECTION. The examination of a property by the City Manager whose primary function is the inspection of properties and the enforcement of this chapter.

INSPECTION WARRANT. An order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing a safety or health inspection or investigation to be conducted at a designated property.

INSPECTOR. An authorized representative of the City Manager whose primary function is the inspection of properties and the enforcement of this chapter.

INTERESTED PARTY. Any person or entity that possesses any legal or equitable interest of record in a property including but not limited to the holder of any lien or encumbrance of record on the property.

KITCHEN. A room used or designed to be used for the preparation of food.

LAVATORY. A fixed wash basin connected to hot and cold running water and the building drain and used primarily for personal hygiene.

LAWN AREA. Any area of a property where lawn grasses are used as ground cover, or any area of a property where the ground covering vegetation does not permit passage to substantial portions of the property without walking directly on the vegetation.

LAWN GRASS. Varieties of grass that were planted, or are commonly sold, for the purpose of maintaining a mowed lawn.

MAINTAINED COMPOST AREA. A small portion of a property set aside for the purpose of encouraging the rapid decomposition of yard debris and other vegetable matter into a suitable fertilizer for the soil on the property. A maintained compost area shows clear indicators that the yard debris placed there is being actively managed to encourage its rapid decomposition. Possible signs of such active management may include evidence of regular turning, a mixture of yard debris types, any woody material present having been chopped into small sizes, and the presence of internal heat in the composting mixture. A location where yard debris is placed primarily as a means to store it or dump it without reasonable expectation of rapid decomposition is not a maintained compost area.

MAINTENANCE. The work of keeping property in proper condition to perpetuate its use.

MANUFACTURED DWELLING. See "Dwelling Classifications."

MOTE. See "Dwelling Classifications."

NATURESCAPE. Landscaping and gardening approaches that use predominately native plants for the purpose of creating improved outdoor habitat for native insects, birds, and mammals and reducing the need for pesticides, chemical fertilizers, and summer watering.

NUISANCE ABATEMENT WARRANT. An order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the removal and abatement of any nuisance as authorized by this chapter, including disposal of the nuisance items removed in an appropriate manner.

OCCUPANCY. The lawful purpose for which a building or part of a building is used or intended to be used.

OCCUPANT. Any person (including an owner or operator) using a building, or any part of a building, for its lawful, intended use.

OCCUPIED. Used for an occupancy.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part of a building in which dwelling units are let or offered for occupancy.

OUTDOOR AREA. All parts of property that are exposed to the weather including the exterior of structures built for human occupancy. This includes, but is not limited to, vehicles parked on the property; open and accessible porches, carports, garages, and decks; accessory structures, and any outdoor storage structure.

OWNER. The person whose name and address is listed as the owner of the property by the County Tax Assessor on the county assessment and taxation records.

PLUMBING or PLUMBING FIXTURES. Plumbing or plumbing fixtures mean any water heating facilities, water pipes, vent pipes, garbage or disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines or other similar equipment, catch basins, drains, vents, or other similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connection to water, gas, sewer, or vent lines.

PROPERTY. Any real property and all improvements, buildings or structures on real property, from property line to property line.

PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any sidewalk, planting strip, alley, street, or pathway, improved or unimproved, that is dedicated to public use.

RESIDENT. Any person (including owner or operator) hiring or occupying a room or dwelling unit for living or sleeping purposes.

RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Real property and all improvements or structures on real property used or intended to be used for residential purposes including any residential structure, dwelling, or dwelling unit as defined in this chapter and any mixed-use structures which have one or more dwelling units. Hotels that are used exclusively for transient occupancy, as defined in this chapter, are excluded from this definition of residential property.

RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY. Any property within the city on which exist one or more dwelling units which are not occupied as the principal residence of the owner.

RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. Any building or other improvement or structure containing one or more dwelling units as well as any accessory structure. This includes any dwelling as defined in this chapter.

SHALL. As used in this chapter, is mandatory.

SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. See "Dwelling Classifications."

SINGLE-FAMILY OCCUPANCY HOUSING UNIT. See "Dwelling Classifications."

SINK. A fixed basin connected to hot and cold running water and a drainage system and primarily used for the preparation of food and the washing of cooking and eating utensils.

SLEEPING ROOM. Any room designed, built, or intended to be used as a bedroom as well as any other room used for sleeping purposes.

REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure for the purpose of its maintenance.

SMOKE DETECTOR. An approved detector which senses visible or invisible particles of combustion and which plainly identifies the testing agency that inspected or approved the device.

STAGNANT WATER. Any impoundment of water in which there is no appreciable flow of water through the impoundment and the level of water does not vary during any 48 hour period.

STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece or work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.

SUBSTANDARD. In violation of any of the minimum requirements as set out in this chapter.

SUMMARY ABATEMENT. Abatement of a nuisance by the city, or by a contractor hired by the city, without obligation to give prior notice of the abatement action to the owner or occupant of the property.

SUPPLIED. Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.

SWIMMING POOL. An artificial basin, chamber, or tank constructed of impervious material, having a depth of 18 inches or more, and used or intended to be used for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing.

TOILET. A flushable plumbing fixture connected to running water and a drainage system and used for the disposal of human waste.

TOILET COMPARTMENT. A room containing only a toilet or only a toilet and lavatory.

TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY. Occupancy of a dwelling unit in a hotel where the following conditions are met:

(1)    Occupancy is charged on a daily basis and is not collected more than six days in advance.

(2)    The lodging operator provides maid and linen service daily or every two days as part of the regularly charged cost of occupancy.

(3)    The period of occupancy does not exceed 30 days; and

(4)    If the occupancy exceeds five days, the resident has a business address or a residence other than at the hotel.

TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. See "Dwelling Classifications."

UNOCCUPIED. Not used for occupancy.

UNSECURED. Any structure in which doors, windows, or apertures are open or broken so as to allow access by unauthorized persons.

VEHICLE. Any device in, on, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, including but not limited to a body, an engine, a transmission, a frame, or other major part.

YARD. An open, unoccupied space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, and located between a structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is situated.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)

PROPERTY NUISANCES


135.020 OUTDOOR MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.

It is the responsibility of the owner of any property, improved or unimproved, to maintain the outdoor areas of the property and adjacent rights of way in a manner that complies with the following requirements:

(A)    Holes, tanks, and child traps. Remove, or fill where filling will abate the nuisance, all holes, cisterns, open cesspools, open or unsanitary septic tanks, excavations, open foundations, refrigerators, freezers, or iceboxes with unlocked attached doors and any other similar substance, material or condition which may endanger neighboring property or the health or safety of the public or the occupants of the property.

(B) Unsecured structures. Board over or otherwise secure, and keep boarded over or otherwise secured, all open or broken exterior doors, windows, or apertures of any structure so as to prevent access by unauthorized persons through such openings.

(C)    Rat harborage. Remove or repair, and keep removed or repaired, any condition that provides a place where rats gain shelter, feed, or breed.

(D)    Emergency access routes. Remove and keep removed all brush, vines, overgrowth and other vegetation located within ten feet of a structure or within ten feet of a property line which is likely to obstruct or impede the necessary passage of fire or other emergency personnel.

(E)    Thickets that conceal hazards. Cut and remove and keep cut and removed all blackberry vines and other thickets when such growth is found to be:

(1)    Concealing trash and debris; or

(2)    Creating rat harborage; or

(3)    Creating harborage for people involved in criminal activity or for products used for criminal activity.

(F)    Overgrown lawn areas. Cut and remove and keep cut and removed all weeds and grass that are located in lawn areas and have a prevailing height of more than 15 inches.

(G)    Trash and debris. Remove, and keep removed, unless specifically authorized by ordinance to do otherwise:

(1)    All household garbage, offal, dead animals, animal and human waste, and waste materials (All household garbage shall be stored as specified in § 135.034);

(2)    Accumulations of litter, glass, scrap materials (such as wood, metal, paper, and plastics), junk, combustible materials, stagnant water, or trash;

(3)    All dead bushes, dead trees, and stumps with the exception of such material which:

(a)    Is being maintained as part of a naturescaped property;

(b)    Does not result in a nuisance as otherwise defined in this chapter; and

(c)    Is located on a property which is otherwise substantially in compliance with this chapter;

(4)    All trees or bushes which are dying and are determined to require removal in order to safeguard people or property;

(5)    Accumulations of dead organic matter and yard debris, with the exception of small accumulations of such material in a maintained compost area on the property and only if such material does not result in a nuisance, such as creating rat harborage, as otherwise defined in this chapter; and

(6)    Accumulations of clothing and any other items not designed for outdoor storage.

(7)    All irrigation water or water used for domestic or other purposes to run across or upon any city street as specified in § 94.04.

(H)    Storage of non-trash items. Remove, and keep removed, unless specifically authorized by this code to do otherwise:

(1)    Accumulations of wood pallets.

(2)    All firewood that is not stacked and usable. "Usable" firewood has more wood than rot and is cut to lengths that will fit an approved fireplace or wood stove on the property.

(3)    Accumulations of vehicle parts or tires.

(4)    All construction materials, except those that are stored in a manner to protect their utility and prevent deterioration and are reasonably expected to be used at the site.

(5)    All appliances or appliance parts except for storage of appliances that are reasonably expected to be used at the site and are stored in a manner to protect their utility and prevent deterioration.

(6)    All indoor furniture except that which is stored in a manner to protect its utility and prevent deterioration and is reasonably expected to be used at the property.

(7)    All recycling materials except for reasonable accumulations (amounts consistent with a policy of regular removal) that are stored in a well-maintained manner.

(8)    All other non-trash items which:

(a)    Are a type or quantity inconsistent with normal and usual use; or

(b)    Are likely to obstruct or impede the necessary passage of fire or other emergency personnel.

(I)    Disabled vehicles. Neither store nor permit the storing of a disabled vehicle for more than seven days unless the vehicle is enclosed within a legally permitted building or unless it is stored by a licensed business enterprise dealing in junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the city. Removal and disposition of such disabled vehicles shall be in accordance with all applicable city codes to the extent that such provisions are applicable.

(J)    Obstructions to sidewalks, streets, and other rights of way. Keep the adjacent rights of way free of anything that obstructs or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, unless specifically authorized by ordinance to do otherwise. This responsibility includes, but is not limited to, removal of earth, rock, and other debris, as well as projecting or overhanging bushes and limbs that may obstruct or render unsafe the passage of persons or vehicles. This responsibility also includes, but is not limited to, the obligation to maintain all rights-of-way referenced in this subsection to meet the following minimum clearances:

(1)    Sidewalks. All sidewalks must be clear of obstructions by earth, rock, or vegetation from edge to edge and to an elevation of ten feet above sidewalk level. For example, bushes that encroach on or over any part of a sidewalk area must be cut back or removed and limbs of trees that project over the sidewalk area at an elevation of less than ten feet above the sidewalk level must be removed.

(2)    Improved streets. All improved streets must be clear of obstructions to vehicle movement and parking from edge to edge and to an elevation of 14 feet above street level. For example, bushes that encroach on or over any part of a street must be cut back or removed; limbs of trees that project over a street at an elevation of less than 14 feet above street level must be removed; and no wires or other things shall be maintained over the street level at any elevation less than 11 feet.

(3)    Alleys and unimproved rights-of-way. All alleys, unimproved streets, and other public rights of way must be clear of obstructions that may hinder the normal flow of traffic or render the right of way unsafe for its current and necessary use.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.021 OTHER ENDANGERING CONDITIONS.

It is the responsibility of the owner of any property, improved or unimproved, to remove or repair:

(A)    Any damage to or failure of an on-site sewage disposal system, private sewer line, or rain drain system, and

(B)    Any other substance, material or condition which is determined by the City Manager to endanger neighboring property, the health or safety of the public, or the occupants of the property.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.022 NUISANCE DEFINED, SUMMARY ABATEMENT AUTHORIZED.

All conditions in violation of §§ 135.020 and 135.021 of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance. Any person whose duty it is to correct such conditions and who fails to do so shall be subject to the penalties provided for by this chapter. In cases where the City Manager determines that it is necessary to take immediate action in order to meet the purposes of this chapter, summary abatement of such nuisances is authorized.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)

HOUSING MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS


135.030 COMPLIANCE.

No owner shall maintain or permit to be maintained any residential property which does not comply with the requirements of the code. All residential property shall be maintained to the building code requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration, or repair and shall meet the requirements described in §§ 135.030 through 135.040.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.031 DISPLAY OF ADDRESS NUMBER.

Address numbers posted shall be the same as the number listed on the county assessment and taxation records for the property. All dwellings shall have address numbers posted in a conspicuous place so they may be read from the listed street or public way. Units within apartment houses shall be clearly numbered, or lettered, in a logical and consistent manner.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.032 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.

All accessory structures on residential property shall be maintained structurally safe and sound and in good repair.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.033 INSECT AND RODENT HARBORAGE.

Every dwelling shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation, and where insects and rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.034 CLEANLINESS AND SANITATION.

(A)    All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any excessive accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All household garbage shall be stored in receptacles which are free from holes and covered with tight fitting lids.

(B)    The owner or occupant of any residential rental property shall provide in a location accessible to all dwelling units at least one 30-gallon receptacle for each dwelling unit, or receptacles with a capacity sufficient to prevent the overflow of garbage and rubbish from occurring, into which garbage and rubbish from the dwelling units may be emptied for storage between days of collection. Receptacles and lids shall be watertight and provided with handles. All receptacles shall be maintained free from holes and covered with tight-fitting lids at all times. The owner or occupant of the units shall subscribe to and pay for weekly garbage removal service for the receptacles required by this section, by a refuse collection permittee or franchisee as defined in the code.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.035 PLUMBING FACILITIES.

(A)    Every plumbing fixture or device shall be properly connected to a public or an approved private water system and to a public or an approved private sewer system.

(B)    All required sinks, lavatory basins, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with both hot and cold running water. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained, and properly connected with hot water lines to all required sinks, lavatory basins, bathtubs and showers. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water enough to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required facility at a temperature of at least 120E at any time needed.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.036 EXTERIOR WALLS AND EXPOSED SURFACED.

(A)    Every exterior wall and weather-exposed surface or attachment shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or the occupied spaces of the building.

(B)    All exterior wood surfaces shall be made substantially impervious to the adverse effects of weather by periodic application of an approved protective coating of weather-resistant preservative, and be maintained in good condition. Wood used in construction of permanent structures and located nearer than six inches to earth shall be treated wood or wood having a natural resistance to decay.

(C)    Exterior metal surfaces shall be protected from rust and corrosion.

(D)    Every section of exterior brick, stone, masonry, or other veneer shall be maintained structurally sound and be adequately supported and tied back to its supporting structure.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.037 OVERCROWDING.

No dwelling unit shall be permitted to be overcrowded. A dwelling unit shall be considered overcrowded if there are more residents than one plus one additional resident for every 100 square feet of floor area of the habitable rooms in the dwelling unit.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.038 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.

(A)    When paint is applied to any surface of a residential structure, it shall be lead free.

(B)    Residential property shall be free of dangerous levels of hazardous materials, contamination by toxic chemicals, or other circumstances that would render the property unsafe. Where a governmental agency authorized by law to make the determination has verified that a property is unfit for use due to hazardous conditions on the property, the property shall be in violation of this chapter. Any such property shall remain in violation of this chapter until such time as the agency has approved the abatement of the hazardous conditions. The City Manager may order such property vacated pursuant to § 135.076.

(C)    No residential property shall be used as a place for the storage and handling of highly combustible or explosive materials or any articles which may be dangerous or detrimental to life or health. No residential property shall be used for the storage or sale of paints, varnishes or oils used in the making of paints and varnishes, except as needed to maintain the dwelling.

(D)    Residential property shall be kept free of friable asbestos.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.039 MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.

In addition to other requirements for the maintenance of facilities and equipment described in §§ 135.030 through 135.040:

(A)    All required facilities in every dwelling shall be constructed and maintained to properly and safely perform their intended function.

(B)    All non-required facilities or equipment present in a dwelling shall be maintained to prevent structural damage to the building or hazards of health, sanitation, or fire.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.040 SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES.

Each swimming pool not totally enclosed by a structure shall be enclosed by a substantial fence at least four feet in height and equipped with a self-closing and latching gate except where bordered by a wall of an adjacent structure at least four feet in height. No swimming pool shall be nearer than three feet from any lot line, and no enclosing fence or wall shall be constructed nearer than three feet to the outer walls of the swimming pool. Pool enclosures shall meet the city building code, and the city’s code of ordinances.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)

DANGEROUS AND DERELICT STRUCTURES


135.050 REPAIR OR DEMOLITION REQUIRED.

No property shall contain any dangerous structure or derelict building as described in §§ 135.051 and 135.052. All such structures shall be repaired or demolished.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.051 DERELICT BUILDINGS.

(A)    A derelict building shall be considered to exist whenever any building, structure, or portion thereof which is unoccupied meets any of the following criteria or any residential structure which is at least 50% unoccupied meets any of the following criteria:

(1)    Has been ordered vacated by the City Manager pursuant to § 135.076;

(2)    Has been issued a correction notice by the City Manager pursuant to § 135.074;

(3)    Is unsecured;

(4)    Has been posted for violation of §§ 135.021 through 135.022 more than once in any two year period; or

(5)    Has, while vacant, had a nuisance abated by the city pursuant to this chapter.

(B)    Any property which has been declared by the City Manager to include a derelict building shall be considered in violation of this chapter until:

(1)    The building has been lawfully occupied;

(2)    The building has been demolished and the lot cleared and graded under building permit, with final inspection and approval by the City Manager; or

(3)    The owner has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager that the property is free of all conditions and in compliance with all notices listed in the definition of a derelict building in this section.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.052 DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.

Any structure which has any or all of the following conditions or defects to the extent that life, health, property, or safety of the public or the structure’s occupants are endangered, shall be deemed to be a dangerous structure and such condition or defects shall be abated pursuant to §§ 135.074 and 135.075 of this chapter.

(A)    High loads. Whenever the stress in any materials, member, or portion of a structure, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 1 1/2 times the working stress or stresses allowed in the Oregon Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(B)    Weakened or unstable structural members or appendages.

(1)    Whenever any portion of a structure has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(2)    Whenever appendages including parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuaries, or other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or part of a building, and which are in a deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in the Oregon State Structural Specialty and Fire and Life Safety Code.

(C)    Buckled or leaning walls, structural members. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.

(D)    Vulnerability to earthquakes, high winds.

(1)    Whenever any portion of a structure is wrecked, warped, buckled, or has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction; or

(2)    Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation of the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the Oregon Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code for such buildings.

(E)    Insufficient strength or fire resistance. Whenever any structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances:

(1)    Has in any non-supporting part, member, or portion, less than 50% of the strength or the fire-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law for a newly constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location; or

(2)    Has in any supporting part, member, or portion less than 66% of the strength or the fire-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location.

(3)    This section does not apply to strength required to resist seismic loads.

(F)    Risk of failure or collapse.

(1)    Whenever any portion or member of appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; or

(2)    Whenever the structure, or any portion thereof, is likely to partially or completely collapse as a result of any cause, including but not limited to:

(a)    Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;

(b)    Faulty construction;

(c)    The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such structure; or

(d)    The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation.

(G)    Excessive damage or deterioration. Whenever the structure exclusive of the foundation:

(1)    Shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members;

(2)    50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members; or

(3)    50% damage or deterioration of its enclosing or outside wall coverings.

(H)    Demolition remnants on site. Whenever any portion of a structure, including unfilled excavations, remains on a site for more than 30 days after the demolition or destruction of the structure.

(I)    Lack of approved foundation. Whenever any portion of a structure, including unfilled excavations, remains on a site, including:

(1)    Where a structure is not placed on an approved foundation and no valid permit exists for a foundation for that structure; or

(2)    For more than 90 days after issuance of a permit for a foundation for a structure, where the structure is not placed on an approved foundation.

(J)    Fire hazard. Whenever any structure is a fire hazard as a result of any cause, including but not limited to: dilapidated condition, deterioration, or damage; inadequate exits; lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction; or faulty electric wiring, gas connections, or heating apparatus.

(K)    Other hazards to health, safety, or public welfare.

(1)    Whenever, for any reason, the structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is lawfully constructed or currently is being used; or

(2)    Whenever a structure is structurally unsafe or is otherwise hazardous to human life, including but not limited to whenever a structure constitutes a hazard to health, safety, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, unsanitary conditions, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage, or abandonment.

(L)    Public nuisance.

(1)    Whenever any structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence; or

(2)    Whenever the structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or floor or any other cause, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:

(a)    An attractive nuisance, or

(b)    A harbor for vagrants or criminals.

(M)    Chronic dereliction. Whenever a derelict building, as defined in this chapter, remains unoccupied for a period in excess of six months or period less than six months when the building or portion thereof constitutes an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(N)    Violations of codes, laws. Whenever any structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such structure provided by the building regulations of this city, as specified in the Oregon State Structural Code and Fire and Life Safety Code or any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location, or structure or buildings.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.053 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.

All structures or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the City Manager to be dangerous as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures specified herein. If the City Manager determines that a structure is dangerous, as defined by this chapter, the City Manager may commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, or demolition of the structure.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)

OTHER REQUIREMENTS


135.060 PERMITS REQUIRED.

No person, firm or corporation shall construct, alter, repair, move, improve, or demolish any structure without first obtaining applicable building permits as required by the code and the Oregon Code of Ordinances and the Oregon State Specialty Codes as adopted by the state and the city.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.061 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.

All buildings, structures, or other improvements within the scope of this chapter and all construction work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official and shall meet all pertinent Oregon State Codes and this code.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.062 OCCUPANCY OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY AFTER NOTICE OF VIOLATION.

(A)    If a notice of violation of §§ 135.030 through 135.040 or §§ 135.050 through 135.053 has been issued, and if the affected structure or any portion thereof is or becomes vacant, it shall be:

(1)    Unlawful to re-enter the affected structure or any portion thereof between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. for any use of, or presence in, the affected structure or portion thereof unless authorized in writing by the City Manager.

(2)    Unlawful to re-enter the affected structure or portion thereof between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for any purpose other than work associated with the correction of violations noted in the notice of violation.

(3)    Except as provide above in division (2), it is unlawful to occupy the affected structure or portion thereof without prior written approval from the City Manager.

(B)    In addition to any civil penalties imposed pursuant to § 135.092 (D), and as collected through a municipal lien process, any person unlawfully occupying any such affected structure or portion thereof shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $500.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.063 ILLEGAL RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY.

When a property has an illegal residential occupancy, including but not limited to occupancy of tents, campers, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or other structures or spaces not intended for permanent residential use or occupancy of spaces constructed or converted without permit, the use shall be abated or the structure brought into compliance with the present regulations for a building of the same occupancy.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.064 INTERFERENCE WITH REPAIR, DEMOLITION, OR ABATEMENT PROHIBITED.

It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with any person lawfully engaged in:

(A)    The work of repairing, vacating, warehousing, or demolishing any

(B)    The abatement of a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; or

(C)    The performance of any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized by this chapter or directed pursuant to it.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


135.070 ADMINISTRATION AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.

The City Manager is hereby authorized to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. In accordance with approved procedures, the City Manager may employ qualified officers, inspectors, assistants, and other employees as shall be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The authority of the City Manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter is independent of and in addition to the authority of other city officials to enforce the provisions of any other chapter of the city code.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.071 AUTHORIZATION TO INSPECT.

The City Manager is authorized to make inspection of property for the purposes of enforcing this chapter. Wherever possible, inspections made by the personnel of the city Building Department or the city Fire and Emergency Services will be coordinated to avoid the issuance of multiple or conflicting orders.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.072 ENFORCING COMPLIANCE.

To enforce any of the requirements of this chapter, the City Manager may gain compliance by:

(A)    Instituting an action before the Code Hearings Officer as outlined by Chapter 136;

(B)    Causing appropriate action to be instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction; or

(C)    Taking other action as the City Manager in the exercise of the City Manager’s discretion deems appropriate.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.073 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION WARRANTS.

(A)    Right of entry. The City Manager may enter property, including the interior of structures, at all reasonable times whenever an inspection is necessary to enforce any building regulations, or whenever the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any property any condition which makes such property substandard as defined in any building regulations. In the case of entry into area of property that are plainly enclosed to create privacy and prevent access by unauthorized persons, the following steps shall be taken:

(1)    Occupied property. If any structure on the property is occupied, the City Manager shall first present credentials and request entry. If entry is refused, the City Manager may attempt to obtain entry by obtaining an inspection warrant.

(2)    Unoccupied property.

(a)    If the property is unoccupied, the City Manager shall contact the property owner, or other persons having charge or control of the property, and request entry. If entry is refused, the City Manager may attempt to obtain entry by obtaining an inspection warrant.

(b)    If structures on the property are unoccupied, the City Manager shall first make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property and request entry. If entry is refused, the City Manager may attempt to obtain entry by obtaining an inspection warrant.

(3)    Open, unoccupied property. If any structure on the property is unoccupied and open:

(a)    The City Manager shall notify the owner of the property’s condition and order the owner, or other persons having charge or control of the property, to immediately secure the premises against the entry of unauthorized persons. If the property is not secured within 15 days from the date notice is sent, the City Manager may secure the property as provided in §§ 135.020 through 135.022.

(b)    If the City Manager believes that a hazardous condition exists, the City Manager may immediately secure the property as provided in §§ 135.020 through 135.022. Following the summary abatement, the City Manager shall notify the owner, or other persons having charge or control of the property, of the condition of the property and request entry. If entry is refused, the

(B)    Grounds for issuance of inspection warrants; affidavit.

(1)    Affidavit. An inspection warrant shall be issued only upon cause, supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant’s status in applying for the warrant, the statute, ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the inspection or investigation, the property to be inspected or investigated and the purpose for which the inspection or investigations is to be made including the basis upon which cause exists to inspect. In addition, the affidavit shall contain either a statement that entry has been sought and refused, or facts or circumstances reasonably showing that the purposes of the inspection or investigations might be frustrated if entry were sought without an inspection warrant.

(2)    Cause. Cause shall be deemed to exist if reasonable legislative or administrative standards for conducting a routine, periodic or area inspection are satisfied with respect to any building or upon any property, or there is probable cause to believe that a condition of nonconformity with any building regulation exists with respect to the designated property, or an investigation is reasonably believed to be necessary in order to discover or verify the condition of the property for conformity with building regulations.

(C)    Procedure for issuance of inspection warrant.

(1)    Examination. Before issuing an inspection warrant, the judge may examine under oath the applicant and any other witness and shall be satisfied of the existence of grounds for granting such application.

(2)    Issuance. If the judge is satisfied that cause for the inspection or investigation exists and that the other requirements for granting the application are satisfied, the judge shall issue the warrant, particularly describing the person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the property to be entered and the purpose of the inspection or investigation. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed on any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where the judge has specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night.

(3)    Police assistance. In issuing an inspection warrant on unoccupied property, including abatement warrants pursuant to § 135.075, the judge may authorize any peace officer, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes, to enter the described property to remove any person or obstacle and assist the City Manager or representative of the department inspecting the property in any way necessary to complete the inspection.

(D)    Execution of inspection warrant.

(1)    Occupied property. Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, in executing an inspection warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before entry into the occupied premises, make a reasonable effort to present the person’s credentials, authority and purpose to an occupant or person in possession of the property designated in the warrant and show the occupant or person in possession of the property designated in the warrant and show the occupant or person in possession of the property and warrant or a copy thereof upon request.

(2)    Unoccupied property. In executing an inspection warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of the person’s authority and purpose, as prescribed in division (D)(1) of this section, but may promptly enter the property if it is at the time unoccupied or not in the possession of any person or at the time reasonable believed to be in such condition. In such a case a copy of the warrant shall be conspicuously posted upon the property.

(3)    Return. An inspection warrant must be executed within ten working days of its issue and returned to the judge by whom it was is issued within ten working days from its date of execution. After the expiration of the time prescribed by this section, the warrant unless executed is void.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.074 Notice and Order

(A)    Notification required.

(1)    Except in the case of summary abatement or immediate danger, if the City Manager finds one or more violations of the provisions of this chapter on a property or adjacent right of way, the City Manager shall notify the property owner to repair, remove or take any other action as necessary to correct the violations. Notification to the property owner shall be accomplished by mailing a notice to the owner, at the owner’s address as recorded in the county assessment and taxation records for the property. The notice may be sent via first class mail or certified mail at the City Manager’s discretion. Notice to the property owner may also be accomplished by posting notice on the property.

(2)    In addition to the above notice to the property owner, prior notice before towing a disabled vehicle must be provided by mailing a notice to the registered owner and any other persons who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle within 48 hours, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded, after the notice has been posted on the property.

(B)    Content of the notice. The notice shall include:

(1)    The date of posting (if notice was posted at the property);

(2)    The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the property;

(3)    A statement that one or more violations of this chapter exist at the property with a general description of the violation;

(4)    Disclosure that penalties, charges, and liens may result from a failure to remedy the violations, and in the case of a disabled vehicle, a statement that the city intends to tow and remove the vehicle if the violation is not corrected;

(5)    Specification of a response period during which the property may be brought into compliance with this chapter before penalties, charges, or liens will be assessed; and

(6)    Disclose the owner’s right to appeal the findings of the notice of violation and a description of the time limits for requesting an administrative review or a hearing, as described in §§ 135.100 through 135.102 of this chapter.

(C)    Notification by mail. An error in the name of the property owner or address listed in the county assessment and taxation records for the property shall not render the notice void, but in such case the posted notice, if a notice was posted on the property, shall be deemed sufficient.

(D)    Notification following summary abatement. When summary abatement is authorized by this chapter, the decision regarding whether or not to use summary abatement shall be at the City Manager’s discretion. In the case of summary abatement, notice to the owner or occupant of the property prior to abatement is not required. However, following summary abatement, the City Manager shall post upon the property liable for the abatement a notice describing the action taken to abate the nuisance violation. In addition, a notice of summary abatement shall be mailed to the property owner. The notice of summary abatement shall include:

(1)    The date the nuisance on the property was abated;

(2)    The street address or description sufficient for identification of the property;

(3)    A statement of the violations of Chapter 135 that existed at the property and were summarily abated;

(4)    Disclosure that penalties, charges and liens will result from the summary abatement;

(5)    Disclosure of the owner’s right to appeal the findings of the notice.

(E)    Compliance inspections and penalties. The City Manager shall monitor compliance with the notice through periodic tracing and inspection. Once a notice has been mailed, the owner shall be responsible for all enforcement penalties associated with the property, as described in §§ 135.090 through 135.093, until the violations are corrected and the City Manager has been so notified. Except in the case of summary abatement, whenever the owner believes that all violations listed in the first or any subsequent notice of violation have been corrected, they shall notify the City Manager.

(F)    Time limits for repair. The City Manager may set time limits in which the violations of this chapter are to be corrected. Failure to comply with the time limits shall be a violation of this chapter.

(G)    Effective date of notice. All notices served pursuant to this section shall be considered served as of the date and time of mailing the notice described in divisions (A) and (C) of this section.

(H)    Information filed with county recorder. If the City Manager finds violations of this chapter on any property, the City Manager may record with the County Recorder information regarding City code violations and possible liens on the property.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.075 Nuisance Abatement; Warrants

(A)    Abatement. If, within the time limit set by the City Manager in the notice of violation, any nuisance described in the notice has not been removed and abated, or cause shown, as specified in §§ 135.100 through 135.102 of this chapter, why such nuisance should not be removed or abated, or where summary abatement is authorized, the City Manager may cause the nuisance to be removed and abated, including disposal in an approved manner.

(B)    Warrants. The City Manager may request a judge from a court of competent jurisdiction to issue a nuisance abatement warrant whenever entry onto private property is necessary to remove and abate any nuisance, or whenever the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any property any nuisance which makes such property substandard as defined in any building regulations.

(C)    Grounds for issuance of nuisance abatement warrants; affidavit.

(1)    Affidavit. A nuisance abatement warrant shall be issued only upon cause, supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant’s status in applying for the warrant, the statute, ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the removal and abatement of the nuisance, the building or property to be entered, the basis upon which cause exists to remove or abate the nuisance, and a statement of the general types and estimated quantity of the items to be removed or conditions abated.

(2)    Cause. Cause shall be deemed to exist if reasonable legislative or administrative standards for removing and abating nuisances are satisfied with respect to any building or upon any property, or if there is cause to believe that a nuisance violation exists, as defined in this chapter, with respect to the designated property.

(D)    Procedure for issuance of a nuisance abatement warrant.

(1)    Examination. Before issuing a nuisance abatement warrant, the judge may examine the applicant and any other witness under oath and shall be satisfied of the existence of grounds for granting such application.

(2)    Issuance. If the judge is satisfied that cause for the removal and abatement of any nuisance exists and that the other requirements for granting the application are satisfied, the judge shall issue the warrant, particularly describing the person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the property to be entered, and a statement of the general types and estimated quantity of the items to be removed or conditions abated. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed on any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where the judge has specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night.

(3)    Police assistance. In issuing a nuisance abatement warrant, the judge may authorize any peace officer, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes, to enter the described property to remove any person or obstacle and to assist the representative of the bureau in any way necessary to enter the property and remove and abate the nuisance.

(E)    Execution of nuisance abatement warrants.

(1)    Occupied property. Except as provided in division (E)(2) of this section, in executing a nuisance abatement warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before entry into the occupied premises, make a reasonable effort to present the person’s credentials, authority and purpose to an occupant or person in possession of the property designated in the warrant and show the occupant or person in possession of the property the warrant or a copy thereof upon request.

(2)    Unoccupied property. In executing a nuisance abatement warrant on unoccupied property, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of the person’s authority and purpose, as prescribed in division (E)(1) of this section, but may promptly enter the designated property if it is at the time unoccupied or not in the possession of any person or at the time reasonably believed to be in such condition. In such case a copy of the nuisance abatement warrant shall be conspicuously posted on the property.

(3)    Return. A nuisance abatement warrant must be executed within ten working days of its issue and returned to the judge by whom it was issued within ten working days from its date of execution. After the expiration of the time prescribed by this subsection, the warrant unless executed is void.

(F)    Disposal of nuisance items removed. The City Manager may cause the nuisance items removed pursuant to the nuisance abatement warrant to be disposed of in an approved manner whenever the City Manager, in the City Manager’s sole discretion, finds that the fair and reasonable value of the items at resale would be less than the cost of storing and selling the items. In making the above determination, the City Manager may include in the costs of sale the reasonable cost of removing the items to a place of storage, of storing the items for resale, of holding the resale including reasonable staff allowances, and all other reasonable and necessary expenses of holding the sale.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.076 VACATING STRUCTURES.

(A)    Any structure found to be in violation of §§ 135.030 through 135.040 to such an extent as to be a hazard or declared a dangerous structure under §§ 135.050 through 135.053 may be vacated, secured, and maintained against entry by order of the Code Hearings Officer.

(B)    If the City Manager finds violations to the extent that an immediate danger is posed to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants, or that of the general public, the City Manager may order part of the structure, or all of the structure, to be vacated or demolished forthwith, if in the City Manager’s discretion, circumstances are found that do not allow time for prior application to the Hearings Officer.

(1)    The owner or any tenant of the property, who has been affected by the City Manager’s determination to vacate may appeal that determination to the Code Hearings Officer by following the procedure as outlined by the city code.

(2)    Upon receipt of a request for a hearing the Code Hearings Officer shall schedule and hold an appeal hearing within with ten days after the receipt of the request.

(C)    Upon vacation of the structure a notice shall be posted at or on each exit of the building. Whenever such notice is posted, the City Manager shall include in such notice a statement declaring the building unsafe to occupy and specifying the conditions that necessitate the posting.

(D)    Unless authorized by the City Manager, it is unlawful for any person knowingly to enter or remain in any structure that the City Manager has ordered vacated pursuant to this section. In addition to any civil penalties imposed pursuant to §§ 135.090 through 135.093, any person knowingly entering or remaining in such a structure shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $500.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.077 REFERRAL TO THE HEARINGS OFFICER FOR REPAIR OR DEMOLITION OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.

At any time after the City Manager identifies a property as containing a dangerous structure and has notified the owner as specified in § 135.074, the City Manager may cause an action to be instituted before the Code Hearings Officer as provided in the city code.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.078 DEMOLITION; WARRANTS.

(A)    Abatement. If, within the time limit set by the Hearings Officer’s order for demolition, the dangerous structure described in the order has not been removed and abated, or cause shown, as specified in §§ 135.100 through 135.102 of this chapter, why such dangerous structure should not be removed or abated, or where summary abatement is authorized, the City Manager may cause the dangerous structure to be removed and abated, including disposal in an approved manner.

(B)    Warrants. The City Manager may request any judge from a court of competent jurisdiction to issue a demolition warrant whenever entry onto private property is necessary to demolish a dangerous structure.

(C)    Grounds for issuance of demolition warrants; affidavit.

(1)    Affidavit. A demolition warrant shall be issued only upon cause, supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant’s status in applying for the warrant, the statute, ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the demolition of the dangerous structure, the building or property to be entered, the basis upon which cause exists to demolish the dangerous structure and a general statement describing the structure to be demolished. In addition, the affidavit shall contain a statement describing the conditions under which the demolition is to be completed, including completion of all work on the property within a 30-day period.

(2)    Cause. Cause shall be deemed to exist if reasonable legislative or administrative standards are satisfied with respect to the demolition of the dangerous structure.

(D)    Procedure for issuance of a demolition warrant.

(1)    Examination. Before issuing a demolition warrant, the judge may examine the application and any other witness under oath and shall be satisfied of the existence of grounds for granting such application.

(2)    Issuance. If the judge is satisfied that cause for the demolition of any dangerous structure exists and that the other requirements for granting the application are satisfied, the judge shall issue the demolition warrant, particularly describing the person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the property to be entered, and a statement describing the structure to be demolished and the work to be performed. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed on any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where the judge has specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night.

(3)    Police assistance. In issuing a demolition warrant, the judge may authorize any peace officer, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes, to enter the described property to remove any person or obstacle and to assist the representative of the bureau in any way necessary to enter the property and demolish the dangerous structure.

(E)    Execution of demolition warrant.

(1)    Execution. In executing the demolition warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of the person’s authority or purpose but may promptly enter the designated property if it is or at the time reasonably appears to be a) unoccupied, or b) not in the possession of any person. A copy of the demolition warrant shall be conspicuously posted on the property.

(2)    Return. A demolition warrant must be executed with ten working days of its issuance by the judge. The authority to enter into the property and perform the demolition work shall continue for a period of up to 30 days after the date of execution, unless the judge extends this time before it has expired. The executed warrant shall be returned to the judge upon the completion of the demolition or the expiration of the authorized time, whichever occurs first. If the warrant is not executed within ten days after the issuance by the judge, the warrant shall be void.

(F)    Disposal of demolition debris. The City Manager may cause the debris to be removed pursuant to the demolition warrant and disposed of in an approved manner whenever the City Manager, in the City Manager’s sole discretion, finds that the fair and reasonable value of the debris would be less than the cost of storing and selling the items. In making the above determination, the City Manager may include in the costs of sale the reasonable cost of removing debris to a place of storage, of storing the items of resale, of holding the resale including reasonable allowances for costs of staff, and any other reasonable and necessary expenses of holding a sale.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.079 EXCEPTIONS.

(A)    The City Manager may grant an exception when the enforcement of the requirements of this chapter would cause undue hardship to the owner or occupants of the affected property, or whenever the City Manager deems it necessary in order to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.

(B)    To carry out the intent of this section the City Manager shall establish written policies in the form of waivers to explain the exceptions that are available to property owners. The waivers shall include the following information:

(1)    An explanation of the purpose of the waiver;

(2)    A list of the requirements the owner must meet in order to qualify for the waiver;

(3)    An explanation of the period of time during which the waiver will be in effect;

(4)    A list of the actions the owner must perform to fulfill their responsibilities to maintain the waiver and to prevent the waiver from being canceled.

(C)    The owner must apply for a waiver in writing.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)

COSTS AND PENALTIES


135.090 CITY MANAGER SHALL IMPOSE PENALTIES.

In order to defray the costs of enforcement of, and to encourage compliance with this chapter, the City Manager shall impose penalties on those properties which are found to be in violation of this chapter.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.091 ENFORCEMENT FEES FOR HOUSING AND DANGEROUS AND DERELICT BUILDINGS.

(A)    The city shall charge a penalty in the form of a monthly enforcement fee for each property found in violation of §§ 135.030 through 135.040 or §§ 135.050 through 135.053 of this chapter that meets the following conditions:

(1)    The property is a subject of a notice of violation of this chapter as described in § 135.074;

(2)    A response period of 30 days has passed since the effective date of the initial notice of violation; and

(3)    The property remains out of compliance with the initial notice of violation or any subsequent notice of violation.

(B)    (1)    The amount of the monthly enforcement fee shall be charged according to the Property Maintenance Regulations Fee Schedule as approved by resolution of the City Council.

(2)    If all violations are not corrected within six months from the date of the initial notice of violation, subsequent enforcement fees shall be twice the amount stated in the Property Maintenance Regulations Fee Schedule as approved by the City Council.

(C)    Whenever the owner believes that all violations listed in the first or any subsequent notice of violation have been corrected, they shall so notify the City Manager. Upon receipt of such notice, the City Manager shall promptly schedule an inspection of the property and shall notify the owner if any violations remain uncorrected.

(D)    Once monthly enforcement fees begin, they shall continue until all violations listed in the first or any subsequent notice of violation have been corrected, inspected and approved.

(E)    When a property meets the conditions for charging an enforcement fee as described in this section, the City Manager shall file a statement with the City Finance Director that identifies the property, the amount of the monthly fee, and the date from which the charges are to begin. The Finance Director shall then:

(1)    Notify the property owner of the assessment of the enforcement fees;

(2)    Record a property lien in the Docket of City Liens;

(3)    Bill the property owner monthly for the full amount of enforcement fees owing, plus additional charges to cover administrative costs of the City Auditor; and

(4)    Maintain lien records until:

(a)    The lien and all associated interest, penalties, and costs are paid in full; and

(b)    The City Manager certifies that all violations listed in the original or any subsequent notice of violation have been corrected.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.092 COSTS AND PENALTIES FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES, DISABLED VEHICLES, AND RE-OCCUPANCY IN VIOLATION.

(A)    Nuisances.

(1)    Whenever a nuisance is abated by the city, the City Manager shall keep an accurate account of all expenses incurred for each nuisance abated including but not limited to abatement costs, civil penalties, administrative costs, recorders fees and chapter report charges according to the Property Maintenance Regulations Fee Schedule as approved by City Council.

(2)    When the city has abated a nuisance maintained by any owner of real property, for each subsequent nuisance which is abated by the city within two consecutive calendar years concerning the real property, owned by the same person, an additional civil penalty according to the Property Maintenance Regulations Fee Schedule shall be added to the costs, charges and civil penalties provided for in division (A)(1) of this section. The additional civil penalty shall be imposed without regard to whether the nuisance abated by the city involved the same real property or are of the same character.

(3)    Costs and penalties resulting from nuisance abatement shall be assessed as a lien upon the real property as provided in division (D).

(B)    Disabled Vehicles.

(1)    Whenever a vehicle is removed from real property by the city, the City Manager shall keep an accurate account of all expenses and penalties incurred for each disabled vehicle removed including but not limited to abatement costs, civil penalties, administrative costs, recording fees, and chapter report charges according to the Property Maintenance Regulations Fee Schedule as approved by the City Council.

(2)    Whenever a disabled vehicle, which has been tagged by the city, is removed from real property and placed on the public right-of-way, the owner of the real property shall be responsible for that vehicle. The City Manager shall remove the disabled vehicle from the right-of-way and keep an accurate account of all expenses and penalties incurred for each disabled vehicle removed including but not limited to abatement costs, civil penalties, administrative costs, recording fees and chapter report charges according to the Property Maintenance Regulations Fee Schedule as approved by the City Council.

(3)    Costs and penalties resulting from the abatement of disabled vehicles shall be assessed as a lien upon the real property as provided in division (D).

(C)    Occupancy of property after notice of violation.

(1)    Whenever an owner causes or permits a vacant structure or portion thereof to be occupied in violation of this chapter, a penalty according to the Property Maintenance Fee Schedule as approved by the City Council shall be imposed per structure or portion thereof.

(2)    Costs and penalties resulting from the occupancy of property after notice of violation shall be assessed as a lien upon the real property as provided in division (D).

(D)    When a property meets the conditions for assessment of costs and/or penalties as described in divisions (A), (B), or (C) above, the city code enforcement officer shall file a statement of such costs and/or penalties with the Finance Director. Upon receipt of the statement, the Finance Director. Upon receipt of the statement, the Finance Director shall mail an assessment notice to the property owner. The notice shall include the amount due plus charges to cover the administrative costs of the City Finance Director. At the same time the notice is mailed by the Finance Director, the Finance Director shall enter the amount due or the amount of the unpaid balance, plus charges to cover the administrative cost of the City Finance Director, in the Docket of City Liens which shall thereafter constitute a lien against the property. The property owner is responsible for paying all liens assessed against the property.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.093 BUILDING DEMOLITION COSTS AND PENALTIES.

(A)    Whenever a building is demolished by the city, the City Manager shall keep an accurate account of all expenses incurred for each building demolished, including but not limited to abatement costs, civil penalties plus administrative costs according to the Property Maintenance Regulations Fee Schedule as approved by the City Council.

(B)    Costs and penalties resulting from the demolition by the city of any structure pursuant to this chapter plus charges to cover the administrative costs of the City Finance Director shall be assessed as a lien upon the real property on which the structure was located pursuant to the provisions of the code.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)

APPEALS


135.100 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.

(A)    Whenever an owner has been given a notice pursuant to this chapter and has been directed to make any correction or to perform any act and the owner believes the finding of the notice was in error, the owner may have the notice reviewed by the City Manager. If a review is sought, the owner shall submit a written request to the City Manager within 15 days of the date of the notice. Such review shall be conducted by the City Manager. The owner requesting such review shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to the City Manager. Following the review, the City Manager shall issue a written determination.

(B)    Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City Manager to initiate a proceeding under the code.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.101 APPEALS TO THE CODE HEARINGS OFFICER.

A determination issued pursuant to § 135.090 may be appealed to the Code Hearings Officer as provided by the code.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


135.102 FURTHER APPEALS.

All appeals from the Code Hearings Officer’s determination pursuant to § 135.091 shall be by writ of review as authorized by ORS 34.010 through 34.100.

(Ord. 2081, passed 4-12-04)


CHAPTER 136 Code Hearings Officer

Section

General Provisions

136.01    Established

136.02    Jurisdiction

136.03    Definitions

136.04    Enforcement

Code Enforcement Procedures

136.10    Initiation of proceeding

136.11    Setting of hearings

136.12    Notice of hearing

136.13    Notice; rights; procedure

136.14    Hearings procedure

136.15    Subpoenas

136.16    Discovery of documents and things

136.17    Evidence

136.18    Continuance of tenancy

136.19    Proposed and final orders

136.20    Orders

136.21    Petitions for reconsideration, rehearing

136.22    Judicial review

136.23    Order to comply; abatement, and repair

136.24    Assessments

Appeals to the Code Hearings Officer

136.30    Definitions

136.31    Jurisdiction

136.32    Initiation of appeal

136.33    Hearings

136.34    Hearings procedure

136.35    Nature of determination

GENERAL PROVISIONS


136.01 ESTABLISHED.

The office of Code Hearings Officer is hereby created. The Code Hearings Officer shall act on behalf of the Council in considering and applying regulatory enactments and policies pertaining to the matters set forth in other sections of this chapter. The Code Hearings Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager. The appointment of a Code Hearings Officer may be for a specific term, for a particular proceeding, or for a group of proceedings.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.02 JURISDICTION.

The Code Hearings Officer shall have jurisdiction over all cases submitted in accordance with the procedures and under the conditions set forth in this code.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.03 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CODE HEARINGS OFFICER. The Code Hearings Officer appointed pursuant to § 136.01.

PARTY

(1)    The City of Hermiston.

(2)    Any person named by the city as a respondent in the complaint.

(3)    Any person requesting and entitled to an appeal hearing pursuant to § 136.10.

RESPONDENT. The party or parties who the city alleges in the complaint to have committed a violation of city code or to be responsible for such violation.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.04 ENFORCEMENT.

(A)    The city may institute appropriate suit or legal action, in law or equity, in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of any order of the Code Hearings Officer, including, but not limited to, a suit or action to obtain judgment for any civil penalty imposed by an order of the Code Hearings Officer pursuant to § 136.23(A)(5) and/or any assessment for costs or penalties imposed pursuant to § 136.24(C).

(B)    Unless authorized by the Code Hearing Officer, it is unlawful for any person to knowingly enter or remain in any building or structure that the Code Hearings Officer has ordered vacated pursuant to § 136.23(C)(2). In addition to any civil penalties imposed pursuant to § 136.23(A)(5), any person knowingly entering or remaining in such building or structure shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $500, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)

CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES


136.10 INITIATION OF PROCEEDING.

(A)    A proceeding before the Code Hearings Officer may be initiated only as specifically authorized elsewhere in the code

(B)    Except as provided in § 136.32, a proceeding before the Code Hearings Officer shall be initiated only by the city filing a compliant with the office of the Code Hearings Officer on forms provided by that office. The complaint shall contain:

(1)    The name of the respondent.

(2)    The address or location at which the violation is alleged to have occurred.

(3)    A short and plain statement of the alleged violations, including a reference to the particular statutes, rules, or regulations involved.

(4)    The nature of the relief sought by the city.

(5)    The name, title, and signature of the person initiating the proceeding on behalf of the city.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.11 SETTING OF HEARINGS.

(A)    Upon filing of a complaint, the Code Hearings Officer shall specify a time, date, and place for a public hearing on the complaint and the matters alleged therein.

(B)    The date set for hearing shall be not less than 14 days nor more than 30 days after the date the complaint is filed, except that the Code Hearings Officer may specify a date for hearing less than 14 days after the complaint is filed where it appears that the alleged violation poses an immediate and serious hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the life, health, safety, welfare, or property of any person.

(C)    The Code Hearings Officer may postpone, continue, set over, or reschedule any hearing with the consent of all parties or on the motion of any party for good cause shown.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.12 NOTICE OF HEARING.

(A)    The City shall give notice of the hearing, together with a copy of the complaint, to the respondent and all other parties not less than five calendar days prior to the date set for hearing except that the Code Hearings Officer may set a shorter period when it appears that the alleged violation poses an immediate and serious hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare or the life, health, safety, welfare, or property of any person.

(B)    The notice of hearing shall specify the time, date, and place set for the hearing.

(C)    Notice may be given by any method or combination of methods which, under the circumstances, is reasonably likely to apprise the parties of the hearing. Notice may be given by:

(1)    Personally delivering the notice to the party, or

(2)    Mailing the notice by United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the residence or business address of the party, or

(3)    Any method authorized by the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure for the service of summons, or

(4)    Any other method authorized by the hearings officer, by rule or otherwise. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed given and received three days (Sundays and holidays not included) after the notice is deposited in the United States mail.

(D)    Notice of the hearing and a copy of the complaint shall also be given to:

(1)    The tenants, residents, and lessees of any building, property, or structure if the city has requested in the complaint the vacation, closure, or demolition of the building, property, or structure or if the Code Hearings Officer determines that such vacation, closure, or demolition is a reasonably possible outcome of the proceeding.

(2)    Any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the property involved or who reasonably appears may be adversely affected by any determination, decision, or order of the Code Hearings Officer.

(E)    The failure of any person to receive actual notice of the proceeding shall not invalidate the hearing or any determination, decision, or order of the Code Hearings Officer.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.13 NOTICE; RIGHTS; PROCEDURE.

(A)    Prior to the commencement of a contested hearing, the Code Hearings Officer shall inform each party to the hearing of the following matters:

(1)    A general description of the hearing procedure including the order of presentation of evidence, what kinds of evidence are admissible, whether objections may be made to the introduction of evidence and what kind of objections may be made, and an explanation of the burdens of proof or burdens going forward with the evidence.

(2)    That a record will be made of the proceedings and the manner of making the record and its availability to the parties.

(3)    The function of the record-making with respect to the perpetuation of the testimony and evidence and with respect to any appeal from the determination or order of the Code Hearings Officer.

(4)    Whether an Attorney will represent the city in the matters to be heard and whether the parties ordinarily and customarily are represented by an Attorney.

(5)    The Title and function of the Code Hearings Officer, including the effect and authority of the Code Hearings Officer’s determination.

(6)    In the event a party is not represented by an attorney, whether the party may, during the course of proceedings, request a recess if at that point the party determines that representation by an attorney is necessary to the protection of the party’s rights.

(7)    Whether there exists an opportunity for an adjournment at the end of the case and the party then determines that additional evidence should be brought to the attention of the Code Hearings Officer and the hearing is reopened.

(8)    Whether there exists an opportunity after the hearing and prior to the final determination or order of the Code Hearings Officer to review and object to any proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, summary of evidence, or order of the Code Hearings Officer.

(9)    A description of the appeal or judicial review process from the determination or order of the Code Hearings Officer.

(B)    The information required to be given to a party to a hearing under division (A) of this section may be given in writing or orally before commencement of the hearing.

(C)    The failure to give notice of any item specified in division (A) of this section shall not invalidate any determination or order of the Code Hearings Officer unless on appeal from or review of the determination or order a court finds that the failure affects the substantive rights of the complaining party. In the event of such a finding, the court shall remand the matter to the Code Hearings Officer for a reopening of the hearing and shall direct the Code Hearings Officer as to what steps shall be taken to remedy the prejudice to the rights of the complaining party.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.14 HEARINGS PROCEDURE.

(A)    Unless precluded by law, informal disposition of any proceeding may be made, with or without a hearing by stipulation, consent order, agreed settlement, or default. However, after issuance of notice of hearing, no building occupied as a residential structure may be vacated based on an informal disposition unless approved by the Code Hearings Officer.

(B)    Parties may elect to be represented by counsel and to respond to and present evidence and argument on all issues involved.

(C)    An order adverse to a party may be issued upon default only upon a prima facie case made on the record before the Code Hearings Officer.

(D)    Testimony shall be taken upon oath or affirmation of the witness from whom received. The Code Hearings Officer may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses.

(E)    The Code Hearings Officer shall place on the record a statement of the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications made to the Code Hearings Officer on a fact in issue during the pendency of the proceedings. The Code Hearings Officer shall notify the parties of the communication and of their right to rebut such communications.

(F)    The record in a proceeding before the Code Hearings Officer shall include:

(1)    All pleadings, motions, and intermediate rulings;

(2)    Evidence received or considered;

(3)    Stipulations;

(4)    A statement of matters officially noticed;

(5)    Questions and offers of proof, objections, and rulings thereon;

(6)    A statement of any ex parte communications on a fact in issue made to the Code Hearings Officer during the pendency of the proceedings;

(7)    Proposed findings and exceptions; and

(8)    Any proposed, intermediate, or final order prepared by the Code Hearings Officer.

(G)    A verbatim, written, mechanical, or electronic record shall be made on all motions, rulings, and testimony. A party may request transcription of the record for the purposes of court review pursuant to § 136.22 upon payment of the reasonable costs of preparing the transcript. If the party prevails on such review, the reasonable costs of preparing the transcript shall be allowed as a part of that party’s costs in such action. The City Council may determine the reasonable costs of preparing a transcript by Council resolution.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.15 SUBPOENAS.

(A)    The Code Hearings Officer shall issue subpoenas to any party upon showing of general relevance and reasonable scope of the evidence sought. Witnesses appearing pursuant to subpoena, other than the parties or officers or employees of the city, shall receive fees and mileage as prescribed by law for witnesses in civil actions.

(B)    If any person fails to comply with any subpoena so issued or any party or witness refuses to testify on any matters on which he may be lawfully interrogated, the judge of the Circuit Court of any county, on the application of the Code Hearings Officer, or of a designated representative of the Code Hearings Officer or of the party requesting the issuance of the subpoena, shall compel obedience by proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of subpoena issued from such court or a refusal to testify therein.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.16 DISCOVERY OF DOCUMENTS AND THINGS.

(A)    On petition of any party and a showing of the general relevance of the documents or things sought, the Code Hearings Officer may enter an order directing any party to produce and make available to the petitioning party to inspect and copy any documents or to inspect and copy, test, or sample any things which are in the possession of a party.

(B)    The order directing a party to produce and make available documents or things may require the petitioning party to pay the party producing documents and things that party’s reasonable costs associated with such production.

(C)    The Code Hearings Officer shall not enter an order requiring a party to produce any document or thing which is privileged under the rules of privilege recognized by law or which is exempt from disclosure under the Oregon Public Records Law.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.17 EVIDENCE.

(A)    Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. Erroneous rulings on evidence shall not preclude action by the Code Hearings Officer on the record unless shown to have substantially prejudiced the rights of a party. All other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their serious affairs shall be admissible. The Code Hearings Officer shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. Objections to evidence may be received in written form.

(B)    All evidence shall be offered and made a part of the record in the case, and except for matters stipulated to and except as provided in division (D) of this section, no other factual information or evidence shall be considered in the determination of the case. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies of excerpts, or by incorporation by reference.

The burden of presenting evidence to support a fact or position in a contested case rests on the proponent of the fact or position.

(C)    Every party shall have the right of cross-examination of witnesses who testify and shall have the right to submit rebuttal evidence.

(D)    The Code Hearings Officer may take notice of judicially recognizable facts, and the Code Hearings Officer may take official notice of general, technical, or scientific facts within the specialized knowledge of city employees. Parties shall be notified at any time during the proceeding, but in any event prior to the final decision, of material officially noticed and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the facts so noticed.

(E)    No sanction shall be imposed or order be issued except upon consideration of the whole record as supported by, and in accordance with reliable, probative, and substantial evidence.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.18 CONTINUANCE OF TENANCY.

After issuance of a notice of hearing, and until such time as the Code Hearings Officer issues a final decision, neither the respondent nor the city shall take any action that results in the vacation of a building used for residential occupancy without the permission of the Code Hearings Officer, except that in cases where buildings are found to be imminently hazardous, the building official or Chief Fire Marshal may order the building vacated if no other means are available to eliminate the imminent hazard.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.19 PROPOSED AND FINAL ORDERS.

The Code Hearings Officer shall prepare and mail to all parties, a proposed order including findings of fact and conclusions of law. The proposed order shall become final on the date specified in the order, which date shall not be less than 14 days after such mailing, unless the Code Hearings Officer finds that an existing violation is imminently dangerous to the health, safety, or property of any person or of the public, in which case the order may specify an earlier date.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.20 ORDERS.

(A)    Every order adverse to a party to the proceeding shall be in writing or stated in the record and may be accompanied by an opinion.

(B)    Unless otherwise stipulated, a final order shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law. The findings of fact shall consist of a concise statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings as to each contested issue of fact and as to each ultimate fact required to support the Code Hearings Officer’s order.

(C)    The Code Hearings Officer shall notify the parties to a proceeding of a final order by delivering or mailing a copy of the order and any accompanying findings and conclusions to each party or, if applicable, the party’s attorney of record.

(D)    Every final order shall include a citation of the ordinances under which the order may be judicially reviewed.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.21 PETITIONS FOR RECONSIDERATION, REHEARING.

(A)    A party may file a petition for reconsideration or rehearing on a final order with the Code Hearings Officer within 30 days after the order is mailed.

(B)    The petition shall set forth the specific ground or grounds for requesting the reconsideration or rehearing. The petition may be supported by written argument.

(C)    The Code Hearings Officer may grant a request for reconsideration if good and sufficient reason therefor appears. If the petition is granted, an amended order shall be issued.

(D)    The Code Hearing Officer may grant a rehearing petition if good and sufficient reason therefor appears. The rehearing may be limited by the Code Hearings Officer to specific matters. If a rehearing is held, an amended order may be issued.

(E)    The Code Hearings Officer, at any time, and upon a showing of due diligence, may set aside, modify, vacate, or stay any final order, or re-open any proceeding for additional hearing when necessary to prevent a clear and manifest injustice to a party or other person adversely affected by such order.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.22 JUDICIAL REVIEW.

Review of the final order of a Code Hearings Officer under this chapter by any aggrieved party, including the city, shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Umatilla County, Oregon, as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.23 ORDER TO COMPLY; ABATEMENT, AND REPAIR.

(A)    The Code Hearings Officer may order a party found in violation of the code of the city or any applicable rule or regulation issued thereunder to comply with the provisions of the code or the applicable rule or regulation within such time as the Code Hearings Officer may by order allow. The order may require such party to do any and all of the following:

(1)    Make any and all necessary repairs, modifications, and/or improvements to the structure, real property, or equipment involved;

(2)    Abate or remove any nuisance;

(3)    Change the use of the building, structure, or real property involved;

(4)    Install any equipment necessary to achieve compliance;

(5)    Pay to the city a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day or such greater amount as may be authorized by this code or any resolutions adopted thereunder.

(6)    Undertake any other action reasonably necessary to correct the violation or mitigate the effects thereof.

(B)    In the event any party fails to comply with any provision of an order of the Code Hearings Officer, except a provision requiring the payment of a civil penalty only, the Code Hearings Officer may authorize the city to undertake such actions as the Code Hearings Officer may determine are reasonably necessary to correct the violation and/or eliminate or mitigate the effects thereof. The city’s reasonable costs of such actions may be made a lien against the affected real property pursuant to § 136.24.

(C)    Where the Code Hearings Officer finds that there is a violation of any of the provisions of Chapters 134 or 135, the Code Hearings Officer, in addition to the powers set out in divisions (A) and (B) above, may:

(1)    Authorize the Code Enforcement Officer to act pursuant to §§ 135.050 to 135.053;

(2)    Provided notice has been given to tenants, residents, and lessees as required by § 136.12(D), order a building or structure vacated or demolished when it reasonably appears that such measures are reasonably required to protect the health, safety, or property of the general public, the residents of the structure, or that of adjacent landowners and residents. Where vacation or demolition is ordered, the Code Hearings Officer may direct that the person found in violation of the code undertake any and all interim measures as may be necessary;

(3)    Act as the Building Code Board of Appeals in a case already before him and which requires interpretation of Chapter 135;

(4)    Require the party found in violation of this code to prepare a cost estimate of the repairs made necessary to achieve compliance with the code and the impact of these repairs will have on the cost of doing business and, if applicable, future rent levels. In assessing the cost estimate under this section the Code Hearings Officer may require the person found in violation to contact public and private agencies, institutions, and other sources of property improvement funds to determine the availability of funds needed for repairs.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.24 ASSESSMENTS.

(A)    Costs incurred by the city for any actions authorized by the Code Hearings Officer pursuant to § 136.23(B) and (C) and any civil penalty imposed as a result of an order of the Code Hearings Officer shall be an assessment lien upon the property subject to the order.

(B)    If a residential structure is ordered vacated pursuant to §§ 136.23(C)(2) or 135.076 and the city relocates the tenants of such property, then the cost incurred by the city for relocating the tenants as provided by ORS 90.450 shall be an assessment lien upon the property vacated and from which the tenants are relocated.

(C)    The city shall furnish a statement of such costs on the owner, in person or by United States Mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner at the owner residence or place of business, and shall file a copy of such statement for the Code Hearings Officer with proof of service attached. If no objection to such statement is filed with the office of the Code Hearings Officer within 15 days from the date of service or mailing, the Code Hearings Officer shall certify such statement and forward the same to the City Recorder/Finance Officer who shall forthwith enter the same in the city lien docket.

(1)    If an objection to the statement is received within the 15-day period, the Code Hearings Officer shall schedule and hold an appeal hearing pursuant to §§ 136.32 to 136.35. After the hearing, the Code Hearing Officer shall certify such statement, or so much of it as he determines is correct and proper, and forward it to the City Recorder/Finance Officer who shall enter it into the city lien docket.

(2)    The Code Hearings Officer shall certify to the City Recorder/Finance Officer the amount of any civil penalty imposed under any order of the Code Hearings Officer, and the City Recorder/Finance Officer shall enter it into the city lien docket. The lien imposed for the civil penalty shall be in addition to any lien imposed for costs actually incurred by the city.

(3)    The city may file separate statements for the costs and services furnished as each is incurred or provided.

(4)    Liens imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be collected in all respects as provided by law.

(D)    In addition to the lien imposed under this section, any person found to be in violation of the code shall be personally liable for costs incurred by the city pursuant to § 136.23(B) and (C) and for any civil penalty imposed by order of the Code Hearings Officer. In cases of person found to be in violation of the code as owners of property, the persons shall be personally liable hereunder only if they have control of the property, the legal authority to correct the violation, and knowingly have committed the violation.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)

APPEALS TO THE CODE HEARINGS OFFICER


136.30 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition will apply unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

DECISION or DETERMINATION. Any decision, determination, order, or other action of the city.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.31 JURISDICTION.

(A)    Whenever, pursuant to any portion of this code, a person has the right of appeal to the Code Hearings Officer from any city decision or determination, such appeal shall be in accordance with the procedures and under the conditions set forth in this chapter.

(B)    No person shall have a right of appeal to the Code Hearings Officer unless the right of appeal is expressly provided for in this code.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.32 INITIATION OF APPEAL.

(A)    Unless otherwise specified in this code, a request for an appeal hearing shall be filed within ten days after the date of the decision or determination. The Code Hearings Officer may waive this requirement for good cause shown.

(B)    The request for an appeal hearing shall be in writing and shall contain either a copy of, or a full and complete description of, the decision or determination appealed from and a statement of grounds upon which it is contended that the decision or determination is invalid, unauthorized, or otherwise improper, together with such other information as the Code Hearings Officer may by rule require. The Code Hearings Officer may specify and provide hearing request forms to be used by persons requesting hearings.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.33 HEARINGS.

(A)    Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the Code Hearings Officer shall schedule and hold an appeal hearing within 30 days after the receipt of such request.

(B)    Notice of the time, date, and place of hearing shall be given to the person requesting the hearing and to the city whose decision or determination is being appealed. Notice shall also be given to any person who reasonably appears may be adversely affected should the decision or determination not be sustained after hearing. The Code Hearings Officer may provide by rule for the manner of providing notice to such persons.

(C)    The time for hearing may be extended by the Code Hearings Officer for good cause shown, upon such terms and conditions as the Code Hearings Officer shall deem just and appropriate.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.34 HEARINGS PROCEDURE.

(A)    Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in §§ 136.13 through 136.21.

(B)    With the consent of all parties, the Code Hearings Officer may determine the matter without hearing upon the record.

(C)    The Code Hearings Officer may sustain, modify, reverse, or annul the decision or determination appealed from or the Code Hearings Officer may remand the decision or determination to the city for such reconsideration, additional consideration, or further action as the Code Hearings Officer may direct.

(D)    The decision or determination appealed from shall be reviewed de novo by the Code Hearings Officer.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


136.35 NATURE OF DETERMINATION.

The determination of the Code Hearings Officer is a quasi-judicial decision and is not appealable to Council; appeals from any determination by the Code Hearings Officer shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Umatilla County, Oregon, as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100.

(Ord. 2083, passed 4-26-04)


TITLE XV Land Usage

Chapter

150.    ANNEXATION PROCEDURES

151.    AIRPORT HAZARD ZONING

152.    BUILDING REGULATIONS

153.    FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION

154.    SUBDIVISIONS

155.    SIGN PLACEMENT AND REQUIREMENTS

156.    COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

157.    ZONING


CHAPTER 150 Annexation Procedures

Section

150.01    Application procedure

150.02    Land use matters

150.03    Public hearings on annexations

150.04    Public notice

150.05    Criteria

150.06    Official action; retained authority

Cross-reference:

Annexations, see T.S.O. I


150.01 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.

A property owner or the owner’s authorized agent may initiate a request by filing an application with the City Planner using forms prescribed for this purpose. The application shall include a legal description of the property, a plot plan showing any existing improvements thereon and a narrative statement by the owner describing the proposed land use and future development for the property. The owner shall pay a fee as established by the City Council at the time the application is filed.

(Ord. 1477, passed 8-15-83; Am. Ord. 1987, passed 3-22-99)


150.02 LAND USE MATTERS.

Before the City Council may act on an application for annexation, the application shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for a recommendation as to land use matters consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan.

(Ord. 1477, passed 8-15-83; Am. Ord. 1987, passed 3-22-99)


150.03 PUBLIC HEARINGS ON ANNEXATIONS.

After the City Council has received the Planning Commission’s recommendation as to land use matters consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan and the City Council elects to dispense with submitting the question of the proposed annexation to the electors of the city, the City Council shall fix a day for the public hearing so the electors of the city may appear and be heard on the question of annexation.

(Ord. 1477, passed 8-15-83; Am. Ord. 1987, passed 3-22-99)


150.04 PUBLIC NOTICE.

In addition to any other public notice required by law, notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation once each week for two successive weeks prior to the hearing date and notices of the hearing shall be posted in four public places in the city for a like period.


150.05 CRITERIA.

After its public hearing and receipt of the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall ensure the application meets the following criteria:

(A)    The proposal is consistent with all applicable state annexation law requirements.

(B)    The property is contained within the urban portion of the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.

(C)    The proposed zoning is consistent with the underlying Comprehensive Plan land use designations.

(D)    Finding of fact is developed in support or denial of the application.

(E)    All city services can be extended readily and the property owner(s) is willing to bear costs associated with extensions of sewer, water and roads except for major facilities - sewer pump station or major water main - necessary to facilitate later growth.

(Ord. 1477, passed 8-15-83; Am. Ord. 1987, passed 3-22-99)


150.06 OFFICIAL ACTION; RETAINED AUTHORITY.

(A)    The City Council shall pass all necessary ordinances required by state statutes after approval of the application.

(B)    The City Council hereby retains its authority under ORS Chapter 222.

(Ord. 1477, passed 8-15-83)


CHAPTER 151 Airport Hazard Zoning

Section

General Provisions

151.01    Short title

151.02    Definitions

151.03    Use restrictions

Airport Zones; Height Limitations

151.15    Establishment of zones

151.16    Approach Zone

151.17    Clear Zone

151.18    Transitional Zones

151.19    Horizontal Zone

151.20    Conical Zone

151.21    Excepted height limits

Nonconforming Uses

151.35    Regulations not retroactive

151.36    Marking and lighting

151.37    Abandoned or destroyed uses

Administration and Enforcement

151.50    Permit procedure

151.51    Variances

151.52    Amendments

151.53    Enforcement

151.54    Appeals

151.55    Filing fees

151.56    Public hearings

151.57    Conflicting regulations

151.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


151.01 SHORT TITLE.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Hermiston Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

AIRPORT. The Hermiston Municipal Airport.

AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of an airport’s usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level.

AIRPORT HAZARD. Any man-made structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of the airport, or any use of land near an airport which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or takeoff of aircraft.

APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES. These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces defined in FAR Part 77 and reproduced in 151.15 through 151.21 of this chapter.

CLEAR ZONE. A fan-shaped area which can extend up to one-half mile from the ends of airport runways. CLEAR ZONES retain the same height restrictions as the approach zone but because of the high incidence of air crashes in this area, land use controls are more stringent.

HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.

NONCONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure, tree or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto.

NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance or utilizing area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on a FAA planning document or military service’s military airport planning document.

PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or governmental entity. Person includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of them.

PRIMARY SURFACE.

(1)    A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the PRIMARY SURFACE extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway.

(2)    The width of the PRIMARY SURFACE of a runway will be 500 feet, which is that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway.

(3)    The elevation of any point on the PRIMARY SURFACE is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.

RUNWAY. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.

STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by man including but not limited to buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.

TREE. Any object of natural growth.

UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.03 USE RESTRICTIONS.

Not withstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to:

(A)    Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft;

(B)    Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others;

(C)    Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport;

(D)    Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or

(E)    Otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.

(F)    No water impoundment of more than one-quarter acre in size within an approach corridor within 5,000 feet of the end of the runway will be permitted unless approved by the Oregon Department of Aviation as showing no hazard to aviation.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82; Am. Ord. 2222, passed 11-24-14) Penalty, see § 151.99

AIRPORT ZONES; HEIGHT LIMITATIONS


151.15 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES.

(A)    In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones and conical zones as they apply to the airport.

(B)    The zones are shown on the Hermiston Airport Hazard Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the Umatilla County Planning Commission and dated September 24, 1975, which is hereby made a part of this chapter. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation.

(C)    Except as otherwise approved in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for the zone.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82) Penalty, see § 151.99


151.16 APPROACH ZONE.

(A)    The inner edge of the Approach Zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide.

(B)    The Approach Zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. The slope of the Approach Zone is 34 feet horizontal for each foot vertical beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.17 CLEAR ZONE.

The inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The Clear Zone expands uniformly to a width of 1,010 feet at a horizontal distance of 1,700 feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. The slope of the Clear Zone is 34 feet horizontal for each foot vertical beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 1,700 feet along the extended runway centerline.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.18 TRANSITIONAL ZONES.

(A)    These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended.

(B)    The slope of the Transitional Zones is seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the Approach Zones, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation, that is to a height of 789 feet above mean sea level.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.19 HORIZONTAL ZONE.

The Horizontal Zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The Horizontal Zone does not include the Approach and Transitional zones. The height of the Horizontal Zone is 150 feet above the airport elevation, or 789 feet above mean sea level.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.20 CONICAL ZONE.

The Conical Zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the Horizontal Zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The slope of the Conical Zone is 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the Horizontal Zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.21 EXCEPTED HEIGHT LIMITS.

(A)    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land.

(B)    Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)

NONCONFORMING USES


151.35 REGULATIONS NOT RETROACTIVE.

The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter, and is diligently prosecuted.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.36 MARKING AND LIGHTING.

Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this chapter, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of airport hazards. Markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82) Penalty, see § 151.99


151.37 ABANDONED OR DESTROYED USES.

Whenever the Building Inspector determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow a structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82) Penalty, see § 151.99

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


151.50 PERMIT PROCEDURE.

(A)    Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and approved by the Building Inspector.

(1)    However, a permit for a tree of less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when the tree, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone.

(2)    Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with sufficient particulars to determine whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If the determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.

(3)    A permit shall be void after one year unless construction has commenced.

(B)    Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made.

(C)    Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if an action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question, at owner’s expense, to install, operate, and maintain markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.

(D)    Conditional use permit. Any use allowed under any other zoning chapter provision which will be located in an approach or clear zone shall be treated as a conditional use under that provision and shall be subject to all procedures required for conditional uses under that ordinance.

(E)    Places of public assembly. Places of public assembly proposing to locate in an approach or clear zone shall be discouraged and influenced to locate elsewhere. Most urban structures proposing to locate in a clear zone also shall be discouraged due to the danger of air crashes.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82) Penalty, see § 151.99


151.51 VARIANCES.

(A)    Authorization to grant or deny variances.

(1)    The Planning Commission may grant a variance to any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree or use property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty to the public interest and the granting of the variance will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this chapter.

(2)    In granting a variance, the Planning Commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or vicinity or otherwise achieve the purposes of this chapter.

(B)    Procedure for taking action on a variance application. The procedure for taking action on an application for a variance shall be as follows:

(1)    A property owner or the Planning Commission may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the City Manager, using forms prescribed.

(2)    Within 40 days of receipt of the application, the Planning Commission shall hold a hearing and render a decision thereon. The applicant shall be given written notice of the decision by the City Manager within five days of the decision.

(3)    A variance shall be void after one year unless the variance has been substantially completed. However, the Planning Commission may extend authorization for an additional period not to exceed one year, on request.

(4)    No application for a variance shall be considered by the Planning Commission within one year of the denial of a request unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence of a change of circumstances warrants it.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.52 AMENDMENTS.

(A)    Authorization to initiate amendments. An amendment to the text of this chapter or to the map may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission or by application of a property owner. The request by a property owner for an amendment shall be accomplished by filing an application with the City Manager, using forms prescribed.

(B)    Public hearings on amendments. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment according to the procedures of 151.56 of this chapter at its earliest practicable meeting after it is proposed and shall, within 40 days after the hearing, recommend to the City Council approval, disapproval or modification of the proposed amendment. After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendments.

(C)    Record of amendments. The Finance Director/Recorder shall maintain records of amendments to the text and map of this chapter.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.53 ENFORCEMENT.

It shall be the duty of the City Manager to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. The city staff shall have the duty to administer and approve permits. The Planning Commission shall conduct hearings on applications for variances.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.54 APPEALS.

(A)    An appeal from a ruling of the City Manager or city staff regarding a requirement of the chapter may be made only to the Planning Commission.

(B)    An action or ruling of the Planning Commission pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the City Council within ten days after the Planning Commission has rendered its decision. Written notice of the appeal shall be filed with the City Manager. If the appeal is not filed within the ten-day period, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final. If the appeal is filed, the City Council shall receive a report and recommendation thereon from the Planning Commission and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal.

(C)    The City Council may amend, rescind or affirm the action of the Planning Commission.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.55 FILING FEES.

An application required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the City Council.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.56 PUBLIC HEARINGS.

(A)    The procedures to be followed for each notice of hearing authorized by this chapter shall be substantially the same as those provided in Chapter 157, the city’s Zoning Code.

(B)    The Planning Commission and the City Council may recess a hearing in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons they decide may be interested in the proposal being considered. Upon recessing, the time and date when the hearing is to be resumed shall be announced.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.57 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.

Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


151.99 PENALTY.

Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than $100 for each day a violation is a continuing offense but the fine may not exceed $1,000. A fine may not exceed $500 where the offense is not a continuing offense.

(Ord. 1411, passed 4-27-82)


CHAPTER 152 Building Regulations

Section

General Provisions

152.01    Definitions

152.02    Assumption of building inspection program; scope

152.03    Powers and duties of the Building Official; adoption of codes by resolution

152.04    Building permits

152.05    Use of alternative materials, designs, and methods; exceptions; modifications

152.06    Right of entry

152.07    Orders to disconnect

152.08    Expiration of building permits

152.09    Extensions; reinstatements

152.10    Work commenced without a building permit

152.11    Transfer of building permit

152.12    Permittee required inspections

152.13    Fire plan review; fees

152.14    Fees

152.15    Prohibited acts

152.16    Stop work orders; permit revocation; enforcement

152.17    Building Official: authority to impose administrative civil penalty

152.18    Appeal procedures

152.19    Short title

Moving Buildings

152.25    Moving permit required

152.26    Permit procedure

152.27    Inspection

152.28    Insurance required

152.29    Moving wires, trees and the like prohibited

152.30    Obstructions prohibited

152.31    Cancellation of permits

152.99    Administrative civil penalties; remedies

GENERAL PROVISIONS


152.01 DEFINITIONS.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

BUILDING CODE means those provisions of the State Building Code, and any modifications thereof, adopted by the city pursuant to ORS 455.040(1), that are part of the building inspection program administered and enforced by the city, and the provisions for moving buildings.

BUILDING INSPECTION PROGRAM means the administration and enforcement of the Building Code pursuant to ORS 455.148 or 455.150.

BUILDING OFFICIAL means the head of the Building Department and Community Development for the city, or the Building Official’s designee.

PERMITTEE means the person holding any permit authorized by this chapter, or that person’s authorized representative.

PERSON has the meaning given that term in § 10.05.

STATE BUILDING CODE includes, but is not limited to, the specialty codes of the State of Oregon administered and enforced by the city: Oregon Structural Specialty Code, Oregon Residential Specialty Code, Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, Oregon Energy Efficiency Code and the Oregon Manufactured Home Specialty Code.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.02 ASSUMPTION OF BUILDING INSPECTION PROGRAM; SCOPE.

(A)    Pursuant to ORS 455.148 or 455.150, and through the provisions of this chapter, the city hereby implements and assumes a building inspection program for the city, which shall be comprised of the administration and enforcement of the Building Code.

(B)    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the building inspection program shall be administered and enforced according to the procedures set forth in the State Building Code.

(C)    If there is a conflict between any provision of the State Building Code and any provision of this chapter, the provision adopted pursuant to ORS 455.040(1) shall govern.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL; ADOPTION OF CODES BY RESOLUTION.

(A)    Building inspection shall be under the administrative and operational control of the Building Official. The Building Official shall attend to all aspects of code enforcement, including the issuance of all building permits and permits for moving buildings. The Building Official shall have the power to render written and oral interpretations of the state and city codes and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. The interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purposes of the state and city codes. The Building Official is hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 

(B)    The codes which are to be administered and enforced as part of the city’s building inspection program shall be adopted by resolution of the Council or by ordinance. Codes may be adopted by reference. A copy of the resolutions and ordinances adopting the code(s) and the code(s) adopted thereby will be kept on file in the Building Department.

(Ord. 2036, passed 5-21-01; Am. Ord. 2061, passed 11-4-02; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.04 BUILDING PERMITS.

(A)    A person shall obtain a building permit before undertaking, or causing to be undertaken, any work for which a permit is required under any provision of the Building Code.

(B)    The application for a permit and plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for a building permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official and may be reviewed by other departments of the city to verify compliance with the Building Code and any other applicable laws. If the Building Official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications, computations and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of the Building Code and any other applicable laws, and that all required fees have been paid, the Building Official shall issue a building permit to the applicant.

(C)    An application for a building permit shall be deemed abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless the applicant continues to pursue the application in good faith. The Building Official may grant not more than one extension, for an additional period not to exceed 180 days. The applicant must request the extension, in writing, setting forth good and sufficient cause for the extension to the satisfaction of the Building Official before the date the application is deemed abandoned pursuant to this subsection.

(D)    If plans and specifications are required for the issuance of a building permit, the Building Official shall, at the time the permit is issued, approve the plans and specifications by endorsement in writing or official stamp. All work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, and shall not be changed, modified or altered without prior authorization from the Building Official.

(E)    One set of approved plans and specifications shall be retained by the Building Official for the period specified under rules promulgated by the Oregon State Archivist, and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant and kept on the work site at all times while the work authorized by the building permit is in progress.

(F)    The Building Official may issue phased permits that allow for the construction of part of a building before the plans and specifications for the entire building have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed with the Building Official that comply with all applicable requirements of the Building Code. The holder of a phased permit shall not, by virtue of a permit issued for any single phase, have any guarantee that plans and specifications for subsequent phases will be approved, or that permits for subsequent phases will be issued.

(G)    The approval of plans and specifications or the issuance of a building permit shall not be construed or deemed to be approval of, or a permit for, any construction, work or activity that violates any of the provisions of the Building Code, any other provision of the Hermiston Municipal Code or any other federal, state or local law, statute, rule, regulation or ordinance.

(H)    The issuance of a building permit shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring correction of errors in plans and specifications, or from issuing a stop work order or undertaking enforcement action if any work being carried on violates the Building Code or any other provision of the Hermiston Municipal Code, or any other federal, state or local law, statute, rule, regulation or ordinance.

(Ord. 2042, passed 9-24-01; Am. Ord. 2060, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2061, passed 11-4-02; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.05 USE OF ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS, DESIGNS, AND METHODS; EXCEPTIONS; MODIFICATIONS.

(A)    The Building Official may authorize the use of alternative materials, designs or methods of construction provided the material, design or method is, for the purpose intended, the equivalent in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation to the materials, designs or methods prescribed by the Building Code and the use otherwise complies with the provisions of the Building Code. Any person seeking to use alternative materials, designs or methods shall first establish to the satisfaction of the Building Official that the alternative materials, designs or methods are equivalent to those prescribed by the Building Code. The Building Official shall document, in writing, the details of the approval of any such alternative materials, designs or methods prior to the issuance of a building permit.

(B)    The Building Official may authorize exceptions to the Building Code, if the Building Official determines that there are substantial practical difficulties in carrying out the provisions of the Building Code, that the exception does not lessen any fire protection requirement or lessen the structural integrity of the building, and the proposed construction will satisfy the intent and purpose of the Building Code. The Building Official shall document in writing that the exception meets the criteria set forth in this subsection before the issuance of a building permit.

(C)    If the Building Official determines that an applicant has provided insufficient evidence to authorize the use of any alternative material, method or design, or to support the exception, the Building Official shall deny the request for the use of the alternative material, method or design, or the exception, or may require tests prior to making the determination, to be made at the applicant’s sole cost and expense. Any such test shall be performed by a testing agency approved by the Building Official. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the Building Official for the period required for the retention of such public records.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY.

(A)    When the Building Official deems it necessary to make an inspection to enforce the Building Code, or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe a condition exists in a building or on a premises that is in violation of the Building Code or that otherwise makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may, in accordance with this section, enter the building or premises at reasonable times to make inspections or to perform other duties imposed under the Building Code.

(B)    If the building or premises is occupied, the Building Official shall first present the Building Official’s credentials to the occupant and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official may use any other lawful means to obtain entry.

(C)    If the building or premises is unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person with control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official may use any other lawful means to obtain entry. If the Building Official is unable, after making a reasonable effort, to locate the owner or other person with control of the building or premises, the Building Official may enter the building or premises, but shall, as soon as is practicable, document the efforts made to locate the owner or other person, and inform the owner or other person of the entry.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.07 ORDERS TO DISCONNECT.

(A)    The Building Official may order any fuel-gas or utility disconnected from a building or premises and may cause such fuel-gas or utility to be disconnected, when the Building Official determines the continued connection poses a potential or imminent hazard to life, health, or property. The Building Official shall, if possible, provide 24-hour written notice of the order to disconnect to the utility, to the owner and the occupants of the building or premises; if 24-hour notice is not possible or if providing notice would result in a delay that would unduly endanger life, health or property, the Building Official may cause disconnection to occur without notice, but shall provide written notice to the utility, the owner and occupants of the building or premises as soon as practicable. No person may use a building or premises, or part thereof, after receiving an order pursuant to this subsection.

(B)    When the Building Official determines any mechanical system or equipment regulated by the Building Code, or any part thereof, poses a potential or imminent hazard to life, health or property, the Building Official may order the system or equipment, or any part thereof, be removed from its location, be restored to a safe and sanitary condition or be disconnected, and may cause such system, equipment, or part thereof, to be disconnected. An order to remove and restore a system or equipment, or any part thereof, shall be in writing, shall contain the reasons for the order, and shall give the owner or person in charge of the building or premises a time certain within which compliance must occur. An order to disconnect a mechanical system or equipment, or part thereof, shall be in writing, shall contain the reasons for the order, and shall give the owner or person in charge of the premises and any utility necessary for the operation of the system or equipment 24 hours to disconnect the system or equipment, or part thereof, unless continued connection would unduly endanger life, health or property, in which case the Building Official may order, or cause, the immediate disconnection to occur. No person may use a mechanical system or equipment, or part thereof, after receiving an order pursuant to this subsection.

(C)    Any disconnection that is ordered or caused to be made by the Building Official pursuant to this section shall be at the sole cost and expense of the owner of the building or structure.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.08 EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMITS.

(A)    A building permit shall expire if the work authorized is not commenced within 180 days from the date the permit was issued, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days at any time after the work is commenced. Work shall not be considered suspended or abandoned if the permittee continues to undertake activities that are deemed by the Building Official to indicate an intent to complete the work, including, but not limited to, site preparation or the purchase of materials or services related to the work. The Building Official may require the permittee to document activity undertaken by the permittee that indicates an intent to complete the work.

(B)    A building permit shall expire 24 months after the date the permit was issued. If the work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection prior to the expiration date, all work shall cease, and a new permit shall be obtained for the value of the work remaining unfinished.

(C)    The Building Official may issue a building permit with a period exceeding 24 months if the applicant demonstrates the complexity or size of the work makes completing the work within 24 months impracticable or demonstrates other good cause why the work cannot be completed within 24 months. Any building permit issued for a period in excess of 24 months shall expire at the end of the period authorized by the permit. If the work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection prior to the expiration date, all work shall cease, and a new permit shall be obtained for the value of the work remaining unfinished.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.09 EXTENSIONS; REINSTATEMENTS.

(A)    Any permittee holding an unexpired building permit may apply for an extension of time to complete the work, when the permittee is unable to complete work within the time set forth in § 152.08. The Building Official may grant extensions of time for periods not to exceed 180 days upon written request by the permittee, demonstrating circumstances beyond the control of the permittee that prevented work from being completed within the time allowed by the permit, or any immediately prior extension thereof. The permittee shall pay an investigation fee at the time the request for extension is submitted.

(B)    The holder of an expired building permit may apply for a reinstatement of the permit. An expired permit may be reinstated if the permittee can establish the following criteria are met and pays a reinstatement fee, otherwise the permittee shall obtain a new permit, and pay the applicable permit fees. A permit may be reinstated if:

(1)    The Building Code and other laws enforced by the city have not been amended in any manner that affects the work authorized by the expired permit;

(2)    No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for the work authorized by the expired permit; and

(3)    The permit expired less than one year prior to the date of the application to reinstate the permit.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.10 WORK COMMENCED WITHOUT A BUILDING PERMIT.

Whenever work for which a building permit is required has been commenced without a permit having first been obtained, a special investigation shall be made by the Building Official before a permit may be issued for the work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be required whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The payment of the investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of the Building Code, any other provision of the Hermiston Municipal Code, any other applicable law, or from any penalty prescribed by law.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.11 TRANSFER OF BUILDING PERMIT.

A building permit shall only be transferable when authorized by the owner of the property, in writing, and with the approval of the Building Official.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.12 PERMITTEE REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.

The permittee shall request all required inspections in a timely manner, shall provide access to the work site, and shall provide all equipment deemed necessary or appropriate by the Building Official to perform the inspection. The permittee shall not proceed with construction activity until authorized to do so by the Building Official. The permittee shall cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Any expense incurred by the permittee to remove or replace any material required for proper inspection shall be at the sole cost of the permittee.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.13 FIRE PLAN REVIEW; FEES.

The Building Official shall forward to the Fire Code Official all plans accompanying applications for building permits for work to be performed that requires a certificate of occupancy under the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The Fire Code Official shall cause those plans to be inspected for compliance with the provisions of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code and Oregon Fire Code. Fire plan review shall be in addition to any other plan review required by the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The fee for plan review under this section shall be an additional fee as required by the state of Oregon.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.14 FEES.

Fees charged under the Building Code shall be in the amounts established by resolution of Council and as required by the state of Oregon. Fees charged under the provisions for moving buildings shall be in the amounts established by resolution of Council.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.15 PROHIBITED ACTS.

(A)    No person shall make a connection to or from an energy, fuel, or power supply, or any equipment regulated by the Building Code that has been disconnected or ordered disconnected by the Building Official, until the Building Official specifically authorizes the reconnection or use of such equipment.

(B)    No owner shall allow any building, or any part thereof, to be in an unsafe or unsanitary condition, or to allow any devices or safeguards which are required by the Building Code to be maintained in a manner not in conformance with the Building Code in effect on the date when installed.

(C)    No person shall perform or cause to be performed work for which a building permit is required under any provision of the Building Code without first obtaining a permit.

(D)    No person applying for a building permit required by the Building Code shall knowingly make any false, incomplete, or misleading statements on the application.

(E)    No person shall violate any provision of the Building Code.

(F)    No person shall disobey any lawful notice or order of the Building Official.

(G)    No person shall fail or refuse to obtain a building permit when a building permit was originally required by law, and the Building Official requires that a building permit be obtained in order to cure the original violation.

(H) A violation of this section is subject to a civil penalty.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.16 STOP WORK ORDERS; PERMIT REVOCATION; ENFORCEMENT.

(A)    Stop work orders. When any work is being done contrary to the provisions of the Building Code or other laws, ordinances or regulations adopted to enforce the Building Code, or to a permit or orders issued hereunder, the Building Official may issue a stop work order that the person cease and desist all such violations and commanding the person to immediately comply with all requirements of this chapter or the requirements of the permit or order; and take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address the violation, including halting operations and undertaking corrective action. The Building Official may order the work stopped by written notice served on any person or persons doing or causing such work to be done. Upon receipt of such notice, the person doing or causing such work to be done shall immediately cease such work, until such time as an authorization to proceed is issued by the Building Official.

(B)    Suspension or revocation of permit.

(1)    The Building Official may suspend work or revoke a permit issued under this chapter whenever it appears that:

(a)    The permit was issued in error;

(b)    The work is not authorized by a valid permit;

(c)    Inaccurate, incomplete, or fraudulent information was used to obtain the permit;

(d)    The permit was issued in violation of any law or regulation, or the activity authorized by the permit is in violation of any law or regulation;

(e)    The applicant is not complying with the terms of the permit, or the work being performed is beyond the scope of work authorized by the permit, or is violating the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law; or

(f)    The work is, or threatens to become, a hazard to property or public safety; is adversely affecting or about to adversely affect adjacent property or rights-of-way, a drainage way, waterway, wetlands, fish or wildlife habitat, or a storm water facility; or is otherwise adversely affecting the public health, safety, or welfare.

(2)    The Building Official shall issue a written notice specifying the nature of the violation or problem which must be remedied prior to resuming other work on the project.

(C)    Orders to vacate. Whenever any building, premises, mechanical system or equipment regulated by the Building Code, or part thereof, is used contrary to the provisions of the Building Code, the Building Official may order such use discontinued and the building and premises, or part thereof, vacated.

(D)    Persons violating responsible for restoring. Persons violating this chapter, or a permit issued hereunder, shall be responsible for restoring damaged areas in conformance with a plan approved by the Building Official which provides for repair of any environmental or property damage and restoration of the site. The plan shall result in conditions upon the site which, to the greatest extent practical, equal the conditions that would have existed had the violation not occurred, as verified by a certified professional.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.17 BUILDING OFFICIAL: AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTY.

(A)    In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other enforcement mechanism authorized by this code, upon a determination by the Building Official that any person has violated a provision of this chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the Building Official may issue a notice of civil penalty and impose upon the violator and/or any other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided by subsections (A) through (K) of this section. For purposes of this subsection, a responsible person includes the violator and, if the violator is not the owner of the building or property at which the violation occurs, may include the owner as well.

(B)    Before issuing a notice of civil penalty and imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the Building Official shall pursue reasonable attempts to secure voluntary correction.

(C)    Before issuing a notice of civil penalty and imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the Building Official shall issue an order to correct a violation to one or more of the responsible persons. Except where the Building Official determines that the violation poses an immediate threat to health, safety, environment, or public welfare, the time for correction shall be not less than five calendar days.

(D)    Following the date or time by which the correction must be completed as required by an order to correct a violation, the Building Official shall determine whether such correction has been completed. If the required correction has not been completed by the date or time specified in the order, the Building Official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty to each responsible person or persons to whom an order to correct was issued.

(E)    Notwithstanding subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the Building Official may issue an administrative civil penalty without having issued an order to correct violation or made attempts to secure voluntary correction where the Building Official determines that the violation was knowing or intentional or a repeat of a similar violation.

(F)    In imposing an administrative civil penalty authorized by this section, the Building Official shall consider:

(1)    The person’s history in taking all feasible steps or procedures necessary or appropriate to correct the violation;

(2)    Any prior violations of statutes, rules, orders, and permits;

(3)    The gravity and magnitude of the violation;

(4)    Whether the violation was repeated or continuous;

(5)    Whether the cause of the violation was an unavoidable accident, negligence, or an intentional act;

(6)    The violator’s cooperativeness and efforts to correct the violation; and

(7)    Any relevant rule of the Building Official.

(G)    The notice of a civil penalty shall either be served by personal service or by certified mail and by first class mail. Any such notice served by mail shall be deemed received for purposes of any time computations hereunder three days after the date mailed if to an address within this state, and seven days after the date mailed if to an address outside this state. Every notice shall include:

(1)    Reference to the specific code provision, ordinance number, or rule involved;

(2)    A short and plain statement of the matters asserted or charged;

(3)    A statement of the amount of the penalty or penalties imposed;

(4)    The date on which the order to correct was issued and time by which correction was to be made or, if the penalty is imposed pursuant to subsection (E) of this section, a short and plain statement of the basis for concluding that the violation was knowing, intentional, or repeated; and

(5)    A statement of the party’s right to appeal the civil penalty to the City Manager or the Manager’s designee.

(H)    Any person who is issued a notice of civil penalty may appeal the penalty to the Code Hearing Officer. The provisions of § 136.31 et seq. shall govern any requested appeal hearing.

(I)    A civil penalty imposed hereunder shall become final upon expiration of the time for filing an appeal, unless the responsible person appeals the penalty to the Code Hearing Officer pursuant to, and within the time limits established by, § 136.32. If the responsible person appeals the civil penalty to the Code Hearing Officer the penalty shall become final, if at all, upon issuance of the Code Hearing Officer’s decision affirming the imposition of the administrative civil penalty.

(J)    Each day the violator fails to remedy the code violation shall constitute a separate violation.

(K)    The civil administrative penalty authorized by this section shall be in addition to:

(1)    Assessments or fees for any costs incurred by the city in remediation, cleanup, or abatement; and

(2)    Any other actions authorized by law; provided, that the city shall not issue a citation to Municipal Court for a violation of this chapter.

(L)    Failure to pay an administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this code within 14 days after the penalty becomes final shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The Building Official is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by subsection (M) of this section, other provisions of this code, or state statutes.

(M)    If an administrative civil penalty is imposed on a responsible person because of a violation of any provision of this code resulting from prohibited use or activity on real property, and the penalty remains unpaid 30 days after such penalty become final, the Building Official shall assess the property the full amount of the unpaid fine and shall enter such an assessment as a lien in the docket of city liens. At the time such an assessment is made, the Building Official shall notify the responsible person that the penalty has been assessed against the real property upon which the violation occurred and has been entered in the docket of city liens. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as all city liens. Interest of nine percent per annum shall commence from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(N)    In addition to enforcement mechanisms authorized elsewhere in this code, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this code shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or certificates of occupancy.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.18 APPEAL PROCEDURES.

(A)    A person aggrieved by an administrative action of the Building Official taken pursuant to a section of this code authorizing an appeal under this section may, within 15 days after the date of notice of the action, appeal in writing to the Building Official. The appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee as established by resolution of the City Council and shall state:

(1)    The name and address of the appellant;

(2)    The nature of the determination being appealed;

(3)    The reason the determination is incorrect; and

(4)    What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives the objections, and the appeal shall be dismissed. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, the appeal fee is not refundable.

(B)    If a notice of revocation of a license or permit is the subject of the appeal, the revocation does not take effect until final determination of the appeal. Notwithstanding this subsection, an emergency suspension shall take effect upon issuance of, or such other time stated in, the notice of suspension.

(C)    Unless the appellant and the city agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the Code Hearing Officer and such appeal shall be in accordance with the procedures and under the conditions set forth in Chapter 136.

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.19 SHORT TITLE.

§§ 152.01 through 152.19 shall be known and may be cited as "Building Regulations" and may also be referred to herein as "this chapter."

(Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)

MOVING BUILDINGS


152.25 MOVING PERMIT REQUIRED.

(A)    No person, firm, or corporation shall move any building or a part of any building within the city without first obtaining a moving permit from the Building Official; provided, however, that this section will not apply when moving a building within the confines of a lot or contiguous lots when not necessary to move the same over public property, public streets or alleys, or property belonging to another person, firm, or corporation.

(B)    In addition to the permit to move the building, the applicant, contractor, or owner shall be required to obtain a building permit for any construction required to relocate the building within the city limits, and to bring the construction of the building up to the requirements for a new building in the same location within 60 days from the time that the permit is issued.

(C)    The applicant shall at the time of applying for each moving permit, submit to the Building Inspector a letter or other written notification from the public utilities companies and/or others stating that they have been informed and have approved the proposed route. The Building Inspector shall personally examine the route proposed and the application for the permit shall be made at least 48 hours before the proposed moving date, holidays, Saturdays and Sundays excluded. 

(Ord. 615, passed 2-28-68; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18) Penalty, see § 152.99


152.26 PERMIT PROCEDURE.

Any person desiring a permit required by the preceding section shall file a written application with the Building Official, which application shall set forth the size and dimensions of the building to be moved, the time when the applicant desires to move the building, the location of the building, the location to which it will be moved, and shall designate the streets, avenues, or alleys through, over, and along which the building shall be moved and other information as the Building Official may require. An inspection fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid at the time of the application on each permit. All permits shall be issued only upon the personal application of the permittee.

(Ord. 615, passed 2-28-68; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.27 INSPECTION.

The Building Official shall inspect the building to be moved, and if he or she finds that the building is of substantial construction and in a condition that it may be moved without collapsing or falling apart and further finds that the building is designed and adaptable for the purpose, use or occupancy to which it is proposed to be put the same at the new location, and that it conforms to the requirements of the Building and Zoning codes at the new location, then he or she shall approve the permit application. He or she shall further determine that the applicant has safe and sufficient equipment and facilities for moving the building. In addition the Building Official shall require compliance with all provisions of this chapter before issuing a moving permit.

(Ord. 615, passed 2-28-68; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.28 INSURANCE REQUIRED.

(A)    Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall obtain insurance with an insurance company acceptable to the Building Official with sufficient insurance coverage to meet or exceed the limitations on liability of local public bodies for personal injury, death, and property damage or destruction as identified in ORS 30.271(4), 30.272(4), and 30.273(3).

(B)    The applicant shall post a surety bond in the amount of $10,000 executed by a corporate surety authorized to transact surety business in the state conditioned among other things that the applicant will conform to all requirements relating thereto; that he will promptly repair or pay any and all damages or injury which may result from his moving operations within the city; and to hold the city harmless from any claim or liability by or because of the issuance of a permit.

(Ord. 615, passed 2-28-68; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18) Penalty, see § 152.99


152.29 MOVING WIRES, TREES AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.

The issuing of a moving permit shall not be construed to authorize the holder thereof to move or remove any utility poles, wires, trees, traffic signals or signs or other public or private property without first obtaining permission from the owner thereof. If, in moving a building, damage is inflicted upon any public or private property, repairs or restitution shall be promptly made to the satisfaction of the owner.

(Ord. 615, passed 2-28-68) Penalty, see § 152.99


152.30 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.

While moving a building, sufficient passage way for vehicles upon one or both sides of the building shall be maintained upon any street, avenue, or alley, or provide a detour which is adequate to handle the existing traffic, and that the detour shall be approved by the Police Department. Movements shall not be permitted during peak traffic hours, during hours of darkness, storm, or unsafe driving conditions.

(Ord. 615, passed 2-28-68) Penalty, see § 152.99


152.31 CANCELLATION OF PERMITS.

Any permit granted hereunder may be cancelled at any time by the Building Official upon proof satisfactory to it that the permittee has violated any of the terms of the permit, or that the permit was obtained through misrepresentation in the application therefor, or when in the judgment of the Building Official the public interest requires cancellation.

(Ord. 615, passed 2-28-68; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


152.99 ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES; REMEDIES.

(A)    No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain a building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of this chapter.

(B)    Violation of a provision of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative civil penalty not to exceed more than $5,000 for each offense or, in the case of a continuing offense, not more than $1,000 for each day of the offense and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

(C)    Each day that a violation of a provision of this chapter exists constitutes a separate violation.

(D)    In addition to the above penalties, a condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth under law.

(E)    The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and are in addition to other penalties and remedies available to the city under the city code of ordinances, state statutes or federal law.

(Ord. 615, passed 2-28-68; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 2061, passed 11-4-02; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-18)


CHAPTER 153 Flood Hazard Prevention

Section

General Provisions

153.01    Purpose

153.02    Definitions

153.03    Lands to which chapter applies

153.04    Establishing areas of special flood hazard

153.05    Abrogation and greater restrictions

153.06    Interpretation

153.07    Disclaimer of liability

Flood Hazard Protection

153.20    General standards

153.21    Specific standards

153.22    Floodways

Administration and Requirements

153.35    Enforcement by City Manager; duties

153.36    Development permit required

153.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


153.01 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by methods and provisions designed for:

(A)    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(B)    Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve the uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(C)    Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

(D)    Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

(E)    Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)


153.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

APPEAL. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.

AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letter "A."

BASEMENT. The portion of a structure with its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.

BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year also referred as the "100-year flood." Designation on maps always includes the letter "A."

CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility that is critical for the health and welfare of the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical facilities include essential and occupancy structures, special occupancy structures, essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline utility systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous material storage facilities.

DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings or columns.

EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations

EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(1)    The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

(2)    The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source.

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRMS). The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that the enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non elevation design requirements of this chapter found at § 153.21.

MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.

NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of adopted floodplain management regulations.

START OF CONSTRUCTION. Substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparations such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building or mobile home including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of its market value before the damage occurred.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:

(1)    Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(2)    If the structure has been damaged and is being restored before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this chapter, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

VARIANCE. A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this chapter.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)


153.03 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)


153.04 ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Umatilla County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas, dated September 3, 2010, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the Hermiston City Hall, 180 N.E. 2nd Street, Hermiston, Oregon 97838.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)


153.05 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenant, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, deed restriction or code provision conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)


153.06 INTERPRETATION.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(A)    Considered as minimum requirements;

(B)    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(C)    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)


153.07 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)

FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION


153.20 GENERAL STANDARDS.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

(A)    Anchoring.

(1)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.

(2)    All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA’s Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas guidebook for additional techniques).

(B)    Construction material and methods.

(1)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(2)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(3)    Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(C)    Utilities.

(1)    All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;

(2)    New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and

(3)    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

(D)    Subdivision proposals.

(1)    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(2)    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

(3)    All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(4)    Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

(E)    Review of building permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source, as described in § 153.35, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10) Penalty, see § 153.99


153.21 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.

In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevations data has been provided as set forth in §§ 153.04 or 153.35, the following provisions are required:

(A)    Residential construction.

(1)    New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation.

(2)    Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(a)    A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.

(b)    The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(c)    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

(B)    Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(1)    Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(2)    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

(3)    Be certified by a registered engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards or practices for meeting provisions of this division based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in § 153.35(C)(2);

(4)    Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in division (A)(2) of this section;

(5)    Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g. a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level).

(C)    Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved with Zones A1 30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of § 153.20(A)(2).

(D)    Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

(1)    Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,

(2)    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions;

(3)    Meet the requirements of division (C) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes; or

(4)    Meet all requirements of § 72.09 of this Code of Ordinances regarding the parking of recreational vehicles outside of recreational vehicle parks.

(E)    Critical facilities. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100 year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or to the height of the 500 year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10) Penalty, see § 153.99


153.22 FLOODWAYS.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 153.04 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(A)    Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(B)    If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§ 153.20 through 153.22.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10) Penalty, see § 153.99

ADMINISTRATION AND REQUIREMENTS


153.35 ENFORCEMENT BY CITY MANAGER; DUTIES.

(A)    Designation. The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement floodplain administration and the other standards of this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.

(B)    Duties and responsibilities. Duties of the City Manager or his or her designee shall include but not be limited to:

(1)    Permit review.

(a)    Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

(b)    Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

(c)    Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of § 153.22(A) are met.

(2)    Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with § 153.04, the city shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of § 153.21.

(3)    Information to be obtained and maintained.

(a)    Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study or required as in division (B)(2) above, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(b)    For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:

1.    Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level);

2.    Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 153.21(B)(3); and

3.    Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

(4)    Alteration of watercourses.

(a)    Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Land Conservation and Development prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(b)    Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

(5)    Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeals shall be granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the Rules and Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59-76).

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)


153.36 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 153.04. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in the definitions, and for all other development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the definitions. Prior to issuance of a development permit the following information is required:

(A)    Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

(B)    Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(C)    Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in § 153.21(B); and

(D)    Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10) Penalty, see § 153.99


153.99 PENALTY.

(A)    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.

(B)    Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements commits a Class A violation for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

(Ord. 2167, passed 8-23-10)


CHAPTER 154 Subdivisions

Section

General Provisions

154.01    Purpose

154.02    Preliminary actions

154.03    Definitions

154.04    Jurisdiction and procedure

Design Standards

154.15    Relation to adjoining street system

154.16    Street and alley width

154.17    Easements

154.18    Blocks

154.19    Lots

154.20    Character of development

154.21    Parks, school sites and the like

154.22    Access management

Preliminary Plat

154.35    Preliminary plat requirements

Final Plat

154.45    Submission to City Council

154.46    Final plat requirements

Required Minimum Improvements

154.60    Permanent markers

154.61    General improvements

154.62    Water lines

154.63    Sanitary sewers

154.64    Drainage

154.65    Sidewalks

154.66    Bikeways

Administration and Enforcement

154.75    Variations and exceptions

154.76    Appeals

154.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


154.01 PURPOSE.

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. These regulations are to provide for the harmonious development of the city and its environs; for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets or with other features of the city for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience or property.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75)


154.02 PRELIMINARY ACTIONS.

Each subdivider of land shall confer with the city staff before preparing a preliminary subdivision plat or map in order to become thoroughly familiar with the subdivision requirements and with the proposals of the Comprehensive Plan affecting the territory in which the proposed subdivision lies.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75)


154.03 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

FLAG LOT. A lot lacking the requisite minimum lot width or frontage on an existing or proposed street, having direct access to the street through a narrow leg of land.

LOT. A unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land. A lot line or boundary line adjustment is a minor modification to a boundary line between two individual lots or parcels of land. No new lots or parcels are created in a boundary line adjustment. The revised lots or parcels meet the requirements of the city zoning code. The procedure for a lot line or boundary line adjustment is an administrative one through the city staff.

MAJOR PARTITION. A partition which includes the creation of a road or street.

MAP. A final diagram, drawing or other writing concerning a major partition.

MINOR PARTITION. A partition that does not include the creation of a road or street but is subject to approval by the city.

PARCEL. A unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.

PARTITION. Either an act of partitioning land or an area or tract of land partitioned as defined in this section.

PARTITION LAND. To divide land into two or three parcels of land within a calendar year but does not include:

(1)    A division of land resulting from a lien foreclosure, foreclosure of a recorded contract for the sale of real property or the creation of cemetery lots;

(2)    An adjustment of a property line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional unit of land is not created and where the existing unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies with any applicable zoning provision; or

(3)    A sale or grant by a person to a public agency or public body for state highway, county road, city street or other right-of-way purposes provided that the road or right-of-way complies with the Comprehensive Plan and ORS 215.213 (2)(q) through (s).

PARTITION PLAT. A final map, other writing containing all descriptions, locations, specifications, revisions, and information concerning a major or minor partition.

PLAT. A final subdivision plat, replat or partition plat.

REPLAT. A final map of reconfiguration of lots and easements of a recorded subdivision or recorded plat and other writings containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, and provisions and information concerning a recorded subdivision.

STREET or ALLEY. A public way that is created to provide ingress or egress for persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land.

SUBDIVIDE LAND. To divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when an area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of the year.

SUBDIVISION. Either an act of subdividing land or an area or a tract of land subdivided as defined in this section.

SUBDIVISION PLAT. A final map and other writings containing all descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning a subdivision.

ZERO LOT LINE LOT. A lot lacking the requisite minimum size and/or width for the underlying zone which is intended for common wall or zero lot line attached housing.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 1769, passed 9-28-92; Am. Ord. 2180, passed 7-25-11)


154.04 JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE.

(A)    It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner, agent or person having control of any land within the city to divide land by a major or minor partition not in accordance with the laws of the state and the regulations contained herein. The proposed partition shall first be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval or disapproval. After report and approval of the Planning Commission is made and filed, all minor partitions shall be permitted, but all major partitions shall be submitted to the City Council for its approval or disapproval. No plat or map shall be recorded and no lots shall be sold from a plat or map until approved by the City Council and recorded with the county.

(B)    The design and layout of all subdivisions shall conform with the requirements of §§ 154.15 through 154.21. The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat or map in accordance with the specifications of § 154.35 hereof. The final plat or map shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.45 and 154.46 hereof.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75) Penalty, see § 154.99

DESIGN STANDARDS


154.15 RELATION TO ADJOINING STREET SYSTEM.

(A)    The function, location, width, and grade of streets shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land to be served by the streets.

(B)    The street system shall assure an adequate and safe traffic circulation system with intersection angles, grades, tangents, and curves appropriated for the traffic to be carried, considering the terrain.

(C)    Off-set streets should be avoided.

(D)    The angle of intersection between minor streets and major streets should not vary by more than 10 degrees from a right angle unless special intersection design is provided.

(E)    Streets obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. All proposed street names should be checked to avoid duplication of other street names.

(F)    If the subdivision abuts a present or proposed major arterial street, marginal interceptor streets running parallel to the arterial street may be required.

(G)    Streets shall be interconnected and provide for continuation or appropriate extension to surrounding properties. Cul-de-sac streets shall be allowed only when one or more of the following conditions exist:

(1)    Physical or topographic conditions make a street connection impracticable. Such conditions include but are not limited to freeways, railroads, steep slopes, wetlands, or other bodies of water where a connection could not reasonably be provided.

(2)    Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically precludes a connection now or in the future, considering the potential for redevelopment.

(3)    Where street connection would violate provisions of leases, easements, covenants, restrictions or other agreements existing as of the date of adoption of the TSP which preclude a required street connection.

(4)    Where cul-de-sacs are planned, multi-use paths connecting the end of the cul-de-sac to other streets or neighborhood activity centers shall be provided if feasible.

(5)    Cul-de-sac streets shall be as short as possible and should not exceed a length of 400 feet. A cul-de-sac shall terminate with a turn-around.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 2004, passed 12-13-99)


154.16 STREET AND ALLEY WIDTH.

(A)    The width of streets and alleys shall be adequate to fulfill city standards as provided for in the Transportation System Plan (TSP). The standard cross-sections provide some flexibility in the right-of-way and paved width, depending on factors such as whether on-street parking and bike lanes are provided. Standards for streets and alleys are adopted in the TSP and incorporated into this section by reference:

Table 1: Urban Arterial Cross Sections

Table 2: Urban Collector Cross Sections

Table 3: Urban Local Street Cross Sections

Table 4: Rural Arterial/Collector/Local Road Cross Sections

(B)    Where alleys are provided in residential blocks, a minimum width of 20 feet shall be required. Alleys are required in the rear of all business lots and shall be at least 25 feet wide. A five-foot cutoff shall be made at all acute angle alley intersections.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 2004, passed 12-13-99) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.17 EASEMENTS.

(A)    Width requirements. Easements of at least six feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines and along side lot lines, where necessary, for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water or other mains. Easements of greater width may be required along or across lots where necessary for the extension of main sewers or other utilities or where both water and sewer lines are located in the same easement.

(B)    Along streams. Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located in an area which is being subdivided, the subdivider shall provide an adequate easement along each side of the stream for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving or protecting the stream or for drainage, parkway or recreational use.

(C)    For irrigation. Whenever any irrigation system is located and/or proposed to be created in an area which is being subdivided, the subdivider shall provide an adequate easement as approved by the Planning Commission and the Hermiston Irrigation District.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.18 BLOCKS.

(A)    In residential zones, block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet in length between intersecting through streets, except where topography or existing development creates conditions requiring longer blocks.

(B)    Where block lengths exceed 600 feet, the Planning Commission may require a six- to ten-foot-wide paved bicycle/pedestrian access way through the block to enhance bicycle and pedestrian circulation by providing short, direct connections between destinations.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 2004, passed 12-13-99) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.19 LOTS.

(A)    The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to topography and the character of surrounding development.

(B)    All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines, except where a variation to this rule will provide a better street and lot layout. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided.

(C)    The minimum width of residential lots shall be 60 feet at the building lines. No lot shall have a depth in excess of three times its width. Minimum sizes of lots shall conform to the standards established by the zoning code of the city for the zone in which the lots are located. Where zero lot line lots are proposed, the minimum lot width shall be a minimum of 60 feet for the aggregate of all attached housing with a minimum of 2,000 square feet for each individual lot.

(D)    Where corner lots rear upon lots facing the side street, the corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the establishment of front building lines on both the front and side of the lots adjoining the streets.

(E)    Corner lots at street intersections which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are likely to be dangerous to traffic movement shall have the corner of the lot cut off either by a chord or circular arc sufficient to allow a minimum of six feet between the curb line and the lot corner when and if the streets are curbed with the curb installed on a radius of 20 feet.

(F)    Where a flag lot is proposed, the following design standards shall apply:

(1)    The access portion shall be at least 25 feet wide.

(2)    Where two flag lots are proposed, the 25-foot access lane may be shared between the two lots, with each lot having 12.5 feet of access.

(a)    When two lots share a 25-foot access the city will require access easements to be prepared granting each parcel full access to the entire 25-foot access for ingress and egress.

(b)    No fencing shall be installed in a shared access which inhibits the right of access for either parcel.

(3)    The access portion of an access lane shall be paved to a width of at least 20 feet.

(4)    The access shall include sufficient easements and paved improvements to allow adequate maneuvering space for fire and emergency vehicles.

(5)    The minimum parcel size, setback and lot coverage requirements of the underlying zone will apply to all flag lots.

(a)    When determining minimum parcel size, the access lane shall not be included in the calculation of lot size or lot coverage.

(b)    When determining setback requirements, the front lot line shall be established by projecting an extension of the access lane through the property.

(c)    The minimum lot width shall be the same as that established in the underlying zone and shall be parallel to the extension of the access lane through the property.

(d)    The minimum lot depth shall be the same as that established in the underlying zone and shall be perpendicular to the extension of the access lane through the property.

(6)    No more than two parcels shall be created utilizing a single access flag. When more than two parcels are proposed, a new public street must be created.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 2180, passed 7-25-11) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.20 CHARACTER OF DEVELOPMENT.

(A)    The Planning Commission shall confer with the subdivider regarding the type and character of development that will be permitted in the subdivision and may agree with the subdivider as to certain minimum restrictions to be placed upon the property to prevent the construction of substandard buildings, control the type of structures or the use of the lots which, unless so controlled, would clearly depreciate the character and value of the proposed subdivision and of adjoining property. Deed restrictions or covenants should be included to provide for the proper protection and maintenance of the development in the future; provided, however, that the deed restrictions or covenants shall not contain (reversionary) clauses wherein any lot shall return to the subdivider because of violation thereon of the terms of the restrictions or covenants.

(B)    Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas, streets, trees or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area and which are of common use or benefit and are not or cannot be satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provision shall be made by trust agreements made a part of the deed restrictions, acceptable to any agency having jurisdiction over the location and improvement of such facilities, for the proper and continuous maintenance and supervision of the facilities.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75)


154.21 PARKS, SCHOOL SITES AND THE LIKE.

In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other common areas for public use so as to conform to any recommendation of the City Comprehensive Plan. Any provision for schools, parks and playgrounds should be indicated on the preliminary plan in order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be provided or acquired by the appropriate taxing agency.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75)


154.22 ACCESS MANAGEMENT.

Access spacing policies set forth in the City Transportation System Plan and the Oregon Highway Plan will apply to an proposals for new access or change of existing access.

(Ord. 2004, passed 12-13-99)

SUBDIVISIONS PRELIMINARY PLAT


154.35 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.

(A)    Whenever any person desires to subdivide land into building lots and to dedicate streets, alleys or land for public use, the person shall submit four copies of the preliminary sketch plat conforming to the requirements of 154.15 through 154.21 to the Planning Commission before submission of the final plat.

(B)    The preliminary plat must be filed with the City Planner at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission. Minor partitions containing three lots or less may be exempted from the provisions of this section.

(C)    The preliminary plat shall show:

(1)    The location of present property lines, section lines and the lines of incorporated areas, streets, buildings, water courses, tree masses and other existing features within the area to be subdivided and similar information regarding existing conditions on land immediately adjacent thereto;

(2)    The proposed location and width of streets, alleys, lots, building and setback lines and easements;

(3)    Existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest water main and sewer or outlet are to be indicated in a general way upon the plat;

(4)    The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded and the name of the subdivider platting the tract;

(5)    The names and adjoining boundaries of all adjoining subdivisions and the names of recorded owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land;

(6)    Contours referred to a City Engineer’s bench mark with intervals sufficient to determine the character and topography of the land to be subdivided, but in no case shall the intervals be more than one foot;

(7)    North point, scale and date;

(8)    Grades and profiles of streets and plans or written and signed statements regarding the grades of proposed streets; and the width and type of pavement, location, size and type of sanitary sewer or other sewage disposal facilities; water mains and other utilities; facilities for storm water drainage and other proposed improvements such as sidewalks, planting and parks, and any grading of individual lots; and

(9)    All the above information unless waived by the Planning Commission.

(D)    After the preliminary plat has been submitted to the Planning Commission in accordance with these regulations, a final plat, together with copies of any deed restrictions, shall be prepared and submitted to the City Planner. The plat shall be filed in the office of the City Planner at least 14 days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which approval thereof is asked. This final plat shall be submitted and prepared in accordance with the provisions of 154.45 through 154.46 hereof.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75) Penalty, see § 154.99

SUBDIVISIONS FINAL PLAT


154.45 SUBMISSION TO CITY COUNCIL.

The final plat shall be submitted to the City Council in a form as prescribed by the statutes of the state and as acceptable to the city. In addition to the requirements of the law, the subdivider shall provide the city with three prints on transparencies acceptable to the City Planner, and three prints thereof, together with copies of any deed restrictions where such restrictions are too lengthy to be shown on the plat; provided, however, that these transparencies need not be submitted until the final plat has been approved by the City Council.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.46 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.

The final plat shall show:

(A)    The boundary lines of the area being subdivided, with accurate distances and bearings;

(B)    The lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their width and names;

(C)    The accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to be dedicated or granted for public use;

(D)    The line of departure of one street from another;

(E)    The lines of all adjoining property and the lines of adjoining streets and alleys with their widths and names;

(F)    All lot lines together with an identification system for all lots and blocks;

(G)    The location of all building lines and easements provided for public use, services or utilities;

(H)    All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, alleys, easements, and other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to the nearest 1/10 of a foot;

(I)    All necessary curve data;

(J)    The location of all survey monuments and bench marks together with their descriptions;

(K)    The name of the subdivision, the scale of the plat, points of the compass, and the name of owners or subdivider;

(L)    The certificate of the surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the survey and the correct location of all monuments shown;

(M)    Private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of existence. Should these restrictions or trusteeships be of such length as to make their lettering on the plat impracticable and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat;

(N)    Acknowledgment of the owner or owners to the plat and restrictions, including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks or other open spaces shown thereon, and the granting of easements required; and

(O)    Certificates of approval for endorsement by the City Council and certificate indicating its submission to the Planning Commission, together with approval for endorsement by other local, county and/or state authority as required by Oregon statutes.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75) Penalty, see § 154.99

REQUIRED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS


154.60 PERMANENT MARKERS.

All subdivisions, major partitions and minor partitions are required to be surveyed in accordance with ORS 92.050 through 92.080.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 1769, passed 9-28-92) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.61 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.

As a condition to the approval of the final plat, the city shall require installation of certain grading, drainage, curb and gutter, sidewalk and street paving and all service utilities. A developer’s agreement shall be drafted guaranteeing installation of said improvements to standard city specifications. In lieu of completion of the work, the city may accept a bond, a letter of credit or other securities in an amount and under conditions to be specified. In case of forfeiture of securities, the city will do the work and will be reimbursed in the amount of the securities.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 3-14-77) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.62 WATER LINES.

Where the city public water supply is reasonably accessible or procurable, each lot within the subdivided area shall be planned for connection to the water supply. In all other areas a private water supply shall be provided in accordance with regulations and recommendations of the State Department of Environmental Quality and under the supervision of and approval by same. Fire hydrants shall also be installed in all subdivisions within the city.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.63 SANITARY SEWERS.

Within the city limits, and in all areas beyond the city limits, but lying within the potential sewerage limits as shown by the Comprehensive Plan, the preliminary plat shall show the sanitary sewer layout for the area being subdivided. This layout shall comply with regulations of the State Department of Environmental Quality and shall be approved by the City Engineer.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.64 DRAINAGE.

(A)    All necessary facilities shall be installed sufficient to prevent the collection of surface water in any low spot and to maintain any natural water course.

(B)    All major and minor partitions of land shall meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 and as amended, as applied to lands within the city.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.65 SIDEWALKS.

(A)    All development for which land use applications are required must include sidewalks adjacent to public streets. This requirement also applies to new single-family homes and duplexes if there is an existing sidewalk within 500 feet on the same side of the street.

(B)    In the case of arterial or collector streets, sidewalks shall be built during their construction and considered during their reconstruction.

(C)    If an interim street standard is being constructed which does not include bike lanes or sidewalks, a paved shoulder at least six feet wide shall be provided as an interim walkway.

(D)    The provisions of sidewalks may be waived where the street serves fewer than 50 trips per day (based on ITE standards) and cannot be continued or extended to other properties.

(E)    Standards for the design, width, and location of sidewalks are set forth in the Transportation System Plan and are adopted by reference.

(Ord. 2004, passed 12-13-99) Penalty, see § 154.99


154.66 BIKEWAYS.

(A)    The city’s adopted Bicycle Plan is included in the Transportation System Plan, and adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan by reference.

(B)    In the case of arterial or collector streets, bike lanes shall be built during their construction, and considered during their reconstruction.

(C)    Standards for the design, width, and location of bike lanes are set forth in the Transportation System Plan and are adopted by reference.

(Ord. 2004, passed 12-13-99) Penalty, see § 154.99

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


154.75 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.

Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in real difficulties or substantial hardship or injustice, the City Council may vary or modify requirements so that the subdivider may develop the property in a reasonable manner but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the city and surrounding area are protected and the general intent and spirit of these regulations preserved.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75)


154.76 APPEALS.

An action or ruling of the Planning Commission authorized by this chapter may be appealed to the City Council, within ten days after the Planning Commission has rendered its decision, by filing written notice with the City Planner. If no appeal is taken within the ten-day period, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75)


154.99 PENALTY.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter commits a Class A violation. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished.

(Ord. 858, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 6-22-87)


CHAPTER 155 Sign Placement And Requirements

Section

General Provisions

155.01    Purpose

155.02    Definitions

Regulations and Requirements

155.15    General regulations

155.16    Installation requirements

155.17    Exempt signs

155.18    Prohibited signs

155.19    Free-standing signs

155.20    Projection signs

155.21    Roof signs

155.22    Wall signs

155.23    Nonconforming signs

155.24    Grandfather clause

155.25    Fees and charges

District and Location Requirements

155.35    Residential; low and medium

155.36    Residential; multi-family and multi-structure

155.37    Commercial and industrial; airport

155.38    Individual businesses

155.39    Shopping center signs

Enforcement

155.50    Variances

155.51    Violations

155.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


155.01 PURPOSE.

This Comprehensive Sign Code has been prepared by and for the citizens of the city in order to provide a safe, consistent, equitable and legal system of signing. The regulations of such factors as size, location, construction, etc., will encourage the communication of information and orientation for both visitors and citizens, provide for the effective identification and advertisement of business establishments, eliminate visual blight and provide standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90)


155.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

BUILDING FRONTAGE. The linear frontage of a building measured along a street or alley between two lines projecting perpendicular from the street to the corners of the building.

CANOPY. A structure made of cloth, metal or other material with frames affixed to a building.

CONSTRUCTION SIGN. Any informational sign which identifies the architect, engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction of a building, or announcing the character of the building or enterprise, which is erected during the building construction period.

ELECTRONIC CHANGING SIGN. An electronic sign upon which the entire copy or message may appear or change from time to time, upon a lamp bank, such as time and temperature displays, which by its nature and intensity is not a flashing sign.

FLASHING or MOVING SIGN. Any sign which contains or is illuminated by a light source which produces a brilliant flash and darkness on an alternating basis, which results in a pulsating effect designed primarily to attract attention, or any sign which produces apparent motion of the visual image, including but not limited to illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, expanding or contracting shapes, rotation or any similar effect of animation which is designed or operated in a manner primarily to attract attention.

FREE-STANDING SIGN. Any sign set apart with no structural attachments to a building structure and is meant to include ground-mounted or pole signs for the purpose of these regulations.

GRADE. The relative ground level in the immediate vicinity of the sign.

GROUND SIGN. A sign which is mounted on the ground and supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces in or upon the ground other than a pole sign as defined. The bottom of such signs shall be no higher than three feet, and they shall extend no higher than eight feet.

HEIGHT or HEIGHT OF SIGN. The vertical distance from the average grade within 20 feet of the structure to the highest point of a sign or any vertical projection thereof, including its supporting columns.

INCIDENTAL SIGN. Small signs, less than two square feet in surface area, of noncommercial nature, intended primarily for the convenience of the public. Included are signs designating restrooms, address numbers, hours of operation, entrances to buildings, directions, help wanted, public telephone, etc. Also included in this group of signs are those designed to guide or direct pedestrians or vehicular traffic to an area or place on the premises of a business, building or development by means of a directory designating names and addresses only.

LIGHTING, INDIRECT or INTERNAL. Any illuminated sign constructed so that the immediate source of illumination is not visible when the sign is lighted and which does not exceed ten candle power per square foot measured at ten feet from the sign.

PLAZA. Two or more commercial or industrial uses that share common accesses and common private off-street parking.

POLE SIGN. A single- or multiple-faced sign eight or more feet above grade, supported by one or more uprights in the ground and detached from any building or structure.

POLITICAL SIGN. A sign advertising a candidate or candidates for public elective office, or a political party, or a sign urging a particular vote on a public issue decided by ballot.

PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not meeting the anchorage requirements of the Uniform Sign Code.

PROJECTING SIGN. A single- or multiple- faced sign which is designed, and constructed to be mounted to the a building and which will extend more than 12 inches wall.

PROPERTY LINE. The line denoting the limits of ownership of property.

READERBOARD. A sign or part of a sign on which the letters are readily replaceable so that the copy is changed from time to time at will.

ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or on top of or above the parapet of a building, including a sign affixed to any equipment attached to the building.

SANDWICH ("A") BOARD. A double-faced sign hinged or connected at the top which is spread for stabilization and set upon the ground.

SIGN. Any medium, including its structure and component parts, other than paint on a building, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for communication purposes. Sign Area. The surface contained within a continuous perimeter which encloses the entire sign cabinet but excluding any support or framing structure that does not convey a message. Where signs are of a three-dimensional, round or other solid shape, the largest section cross-viewed as a flat projection shall be used for the purpose of determining the Sign Area. Signs visible from more than one direction or without clearly defined sign shall be considered as having two faces and each face calculated in the total allowable area.

STREET FRONTAGE. Street(s), alley(s) or right(s)-of-way parallel to the property line used to compute the area of sign(s) intended to be located in such a manner as to have primary exposure on that street or right-of-way.

TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, pendant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light material intended to be displayed for a period of less than 60 days in any calendar year.

VISION CLEARANCE AREA. A triangular area on at the intersection of two public rights-of-way, a street and a railroad, or point of vehicular access and a right-of-way, two sides of which are lines measured from the corner intersection to a distance of 30 feet in residential districts, 15 feet in commercial districts and ten feet at all alleys. The third side of a triangle is a line across the corner of the lot connecting the lines of the other two sides. The Vision Clearance Area contains no signs higher than 2 1/2 feet or lower than eight feet measured from the grade of the street centerline, though a single pole having a diameter of 18 inches or less is permitted.

WALL SIGN. A single-face sign which does not extend more than 12 inches from the wall and the copy of which runs parallel to the wall to which it is attached.

WINDOW SIGN. A sign which is applied to or located within three feet of the interior of a window, which sign may be seen through the window from the exterior of the structure.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90; Am. Ord. 1930, passed 6-9-97)

REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS


155.15 GENERAL REGULATIONS.

No signs governed by the provisions of this chapter, shall be erected, structurally altered or relocated without first receiving a sign permit from the city.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see § 155.99


155.16 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.

All signs shall comply with the following requirements and those specified by zoning district:

(A)    Construction shall satisfy the requirements of the Uniform Sign Code.

(B)    Electrical requirements for signs shall be governed by the National Electrical Code and Oregon Electrical Specialty Code Amendments.

(C)    Except for exempt signs, all signs shall be permanently attached to a building or the ground.

(D)    All signs shall conform to all vision clearance requirements.

(E)    All signs together with their supports, braces and guys shall be maintained in a safe and secure manner.

(F)    All illuminated signs shall be internally or indirectly illuminated.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.17 EXEMPT SIGNS.

The following signs shall be exempt from the application, permit and fee requirements of this chapter:

(A)    Impermanent construction and subdivision signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area;

(B)    Directional, warning or information signs or structures required or authorized by law, or by federal, state, county or city authority;

(C)    Historical site plaques;

(D)    Incidental signs;

(E)    Official and legal notices issued by any court, public body, person or officer in performance of a public duty or in giving any legal notice;

(F)    Official flags of the United States of America, states of the United States, counties, municipalities, official flags of foreign nations and flags of internationally and nationally recognized organizations;

(G)    On-premise signs not readable from the public right-of-way, i.e., menu boards, etc.;

(H)    Political signs, provided the signs shall not exceed four square feet in area;

(I)    Real estate signs not exceeding four square feet in area in residential districts or 32 square feet in commercial or industrial districts;

(J)    Residential identification signs;

(K)    Structures intended for a separate use such as phone booths, Goodwill containers, etc.;

(L)    Temporary signs;

(M)    Wall signs less than one inch deep with no electrical permits required; and

(N)    Window signs.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90)


155.18 PROHIBITED SIGNS.

The following signs are prohibited:

(A)    Flashing and moving signs, except time and temperature;

(B)    Portable signs;

(C)    Sandwich ("A") board;

(D)    Signs attached to utility, streetlight, or traffic control standard poles or otherwise located in the public right-of-way without a permit;

(E)    Signs in a dilapidated or hazardous condition;

(F)    Signs on doors, windows or fire escapes that restrict free ingress or egress;

(G)    Signs which purport to be, are an imitation of or resemble an official traffic sign or signal, could cause confusion with any official sign, or which obstruct the visibility of any traffic sign or signal; and

(H)    Swinging projecting signs.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.19 FREE-STANDING SIGNS.

All free-standing signs shall comply with the following provisions:

(A)    One free-standing sign shall be permitted along each street frontage, or each 300 feet of street frontage, with one additional free-standing sign allowed on the property.

(B)    A free-standing sign shall be placed behind the property line and no closer than ten feet to any adjacent private property line.

(C)    Free-standing signs may project over the public property line provided they conform to the standards established for projecting signs.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.20 PROJECTION SIGNS.

All projecting signs shall comply with the following provisions:

(A)    No projecting sign shall extend above the highest structural component of the building to which it is attached.

(B)    Signs over the public right-of-way, including free-standing signs, shall conform to the following standards:

	Clearance	Maximum Projection

	Less than 8 ft.	Not permitted

	8 ft.	1 ft.

	8 ft. to 16 ft.	1 ft. plus 6 in. for each foot of clearance in excess of 8 ft.

	Over 16 ft.	5 ft.

(C)    No sign shall project within two feet of a curb line.

(D)    In addition, no sign or sign structure shall project into any public alley below a height of 14 feet above grade, nor project more than 12 inches where the sign structure is located 14 feet to 16 feet above grade. The sign or sign structure may project not more than 36 inches into the public alley where the sign or sign structure is located more than 16 feet above grade.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.21 ROOF SIGNS.

All roof signs shall comply with the following provisions:

(A)    All roof signs shall be installed or erected in such a manner that no support structure is visible from any abutting public right-of-way.

(B)    Roof signs may be erected so as to appear from all sides as a wall sign applied to an existing penthouse which appears to be a part of the building itself.

(C)    Roof signs shall not exceed the maximum allowable height of the building within the zone in which it is located.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.22 WALL SIGNS.

All wall signs shall conform to the following provisions:

(A)    Wall signs may be attached flat to, or pinned away from the wall, but shall not project more than 12 inches from the wall.

(B)    For proposes of this chapter, wall signs shall be exempt from the area limitations in calculating allowable sign area.

(C)    Wall signs shall not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.23 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.

(A)    Alteration, relocation or replacement. Nonconforming signs which are structurally altered, relocated or replaced shall comply immediately with all provisions of this chapter.

(B)    Destruction of a nonconforming sign. If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by any cause to the extent of more than 60% of its value, then and without further action by the Planning Commission, the sign shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, the value of any sign shall be the estimated cost to replace the sign in kind, as determined by the Building Inspector.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.24 GRANDFATHER CLAUSE.

If a sign did not conform to the provisions of this chapter on or before March 27, 2000, the sign may be continued and maintained in reasonable repair. Nothwithstanding §155.23(A), a permit may be issued for the relocation for nonconforming, freestanding, outdoor advertising signs which were issued a permit by the Oregon Department of Transportation before 1979, and are recurrently erected in the city as of March 8, 2004. The relocation site inside the city must be on either side of a state highway and between 400 feet and 650 feet of the prior site of the sign. The sign may be upgraded or replaced at the time of relocation. Flashing signs are not permissible and the size of the sign area of the relocated sign must not be larger than the size of the prior sign’s sign area. No permit may be issued to relocated nonconforming, freestanding, outdoor advertising signs to a site within 400 feet of a site used by or formerly used by a nonconforming sign. This "grandfather status," however, shall not prevent the city from taking action under §155.51 where a clear and immediate threat to the public safety and welfare exist.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90; Am. Ord. 2080, passed 3-8-04)


155.25 FEES AND CHARGES.

A fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be charged for all regulated signs erected within the city. The fee may be changed or reset by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90)

DISTRICT AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS


155.35 RESIDENTIAL; LOW AND MEDIUM.

(A)    Application. This section shall apply to all residential districts designated as Low Density Residential (R-1) and Medium Density Residential (R-2).

(B)    Size and height. One nameplate or identification sign with a maximum of two faces not exceeding two square feet per face per dwelling unit is permitted. Uses allowed conditionally may be allowed to erect one sign per street frontage not to exceed 32 square feet.

(C)    Location. Signs permitted outright in the R-1 and R-2 districts may be located anywhere on the premises; however, no free-standing sign may exceed eight feet in height or project beyond a property line. Building-mounted signs shall be wall-mounted and shall not be erected on any building roof.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.36 RESIDENTIAL; MULTI-FAMILY AND MULTI-STRUCTURE.

(A)    Application. This section shall apply to all residential districts designated as Multi-Family Residential (R-3) and Multi-Structure Residential (R-4).

(B)    Size and height. Signs permitted in the R-1 and R-2 districts are permitted in the R-3 and R-4 zones. For multiple-family dwellings, permitted mobile home parks and conditional uses in the R-3 and R-4 zones, one identification sign totaling 32 square feet in area shall be permitted for each street frontage.

(C)    Location. Signs permitted in these residential districts may be located anywhere on the premises; however, no free-standing sign shall exceed eight feet in height or extend beyond a property line. Building-mounted signs shall be wall-mounted and shall not be erected on any building roof.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.37 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL; AIRPORT.

(A)    Application. This section shall apply to all commercial, industrial and airport districts.

(B)    Size. The size of allowable area of signs shall be as follows:

(1)    A total sign area of 1 1/2 square feet for each lineal foot of building frontage or one square foot for each lineal foot of lot frontage, whichever results in the larger sign area.

(2)    Free-standing or projecting signs shall be limited to 150 square feet per face. The signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height from grade to the highest element of the signs unless otherwise restricted.

(C)    Location.

(1)    Except as provided in division (2) below, permitted signs may be located anywhere on the premises.

(2)    Where frontage is on more than one street, only the sign computed with the frontage of that street shall be located on that street. Free-standing or projecting signs shall be turned no more than 44 degrees from the street for which it is calculated.

(D)    Plaza concept. So long as two or more commercial or industrial uses share common accesses and common private off-street parking, they may be considered as a "plaza" concept. As such, one free-standing sign meeting all chapter requirements may be permitted to identify individual uses.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90; Am. Ord. 1930, passed 6-9-97) Penalty, see § 155.99


155.38 INDIVIDUAL BUSINESSES.

Within neighborhood and regional shopping centers, each individual business shall be allowed a total sign area as calculated in accordance with §155.37(B).

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90)


155.39 SHOPPING CENTER SIGNS.

In addition to the sign area allowed for individual businesses, shopping centers with more than 100,000 square feet of floor area shall be allowed one double-faced indirectly lighted sign on each street right-of-way such signs shall neither extend beyond the property line nor be placed in the right-of-way and shall be used solely to identify the shopping center, shopping area, or business or activities conducted therein. These signs shall not exceed 300 square feet per face and shall not exceed 30 feet in height from grade to the highest element of the sign.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90)

ENFORCEMENT


155.50 VARIANCES.

The Planning Commission may authorize variances from the requirements of this chapter where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of property, the literal interpretation of this chapter would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding property or neighborhood and to otherwise achieve the purpose of this chapter.

(A)    Granting of variances. No variance shall be granted unless it can be shown that all of the following conditions exist:

(1)    Exceptional or extraordinary conditions apply to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, which conditions are a result of lot size, shape, topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control.

(2)    The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant substantially the same as is possessed by owners of other property in the same zone or vicinity.

(3)    The authorization of the variance shall not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this chapter, be injurious to property in the zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or be otherwise detrimental to the objectives of any development pattern or policy.

(4)    The variance requested is the minimum variance from the provisions and standards of this chapter which will alleviate the hardship.

(B)    Application for a variance. A property owner or his authorized agent may initiate a request for a variance or the modification of an existing variance by filing an application with the city using forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed sign(s). The Planning Commission may require other drawings or information necessary to an understanding of the proposed use and its relationship to surrounding properties. The applicant shall pay a fee as established at the time the application is filed.

(C)    Public hearing on variance. Before the Planning Commission may act on a request for a variance, it shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be held within 40 days after the application is filed. The City Planner shall give notice of the hearing in the following manner:

(1)    Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than five days nor more than 20 days prior to the date of the hearing.

(2)    Not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing, notices shall be mailed to all property owners within the area enclosed by lines parallel to an 300 feet from the exterior boundaries of the property involved. The names and addresses of property owners shall be those shown in the records of the County Assessor. Failure to send notice to a person specified in this section or failure of a person to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings in connection with the application for a variance.

(D)    Notification of action. Within five days after a decision has been rendered, the City Planner shall provide the applicant with written notice of the city’s action on the request for a variance.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90)


155.51 VIOLATIONS.

(A)    Any sign which is not in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter is an unlawful sign and declared to be a public nuisance.

(B)    The city may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter. It shall give 24 hours notice in writing to the owner of the sign, or of the building structure, or premises on which the sign is located, to remove the sign or bring it into compliance.

(C)    The city may remove a sign immediately and without notice if, in its opinion, the condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public, and is hereby authorized to take such steps as may be necessary to remove the sign. Neither the city nor any of its agents shall be liable for any damage to the sign.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90) Penalty, see §155.99


155.99 PENALTY.

(A)    The violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or the erection, use or display or the allowing of, the permitting of, or the suffering of the erection, use or display of any sign not in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and is a Class A violation. The violator shall be required to remove the sign or to take other action as shall be determined by the court to be necessary to bring the sign into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(B)    The remedies provided in this section for violations of or failure to comply with provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law.

(Ord. 1689, passed 1-8-90)


CHAPTER 156 Comprehensive Plan

Section

156.01    Purpose

156.02    Authority

156.03    Plan technical report

156.04    Plan implement measures

156.05    Availability

156.06    Goals and policies

156.07    Annual review

156.08    Amendments

156.09    Transportation System Plan


156.01 PURPOSE.

The several purposes of this chapter are to encourage the most appropriate use of land by the development of a new Comprehensive Plan meeting the requirements of state statutes governing land use planning; to encourage the orderly growth of the city; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities, facilities and other public requirements; to establish with Umatilla County a management agreement for land use within the established urban growth boundaries; and in general to promote public health, safety, convenience and general welfare.

(Ord. 1505, passed 4-9-84)


156.02 AUTHORITY.

(A)    Pursuant to ORS Chapters 92, 197, 215 and 227, the Statewide Planning Goals, and in coordination with Umatilla County and other affected governmental units, the city hereby adopts the August 1983 City of Hermiston Comprehensive Plan as amended.

(B)    The August 1983 City of Hermiston Comprehensive Plan as amended by Ordinance No. 1520, passed July 9, 1984, as amended by Ordinance No. 1563, passed April 22, 1985, is on file at the office of the Finance Director/Recorder for public reference. Ordinances that amend the Comprehensive Plan Map are listed in the ordinance disposition table and also are on file in the Finance Director/Recorder’s office.

(Ord. 1505, passed 4-9-84)


156.03 PLAN TECHNICAL REPORT.

(A)    The technical report provides the background information, facts and considerations upon which the city’s Comprehensive Plan, policies and map are based. The city hereby adopts by reference the following study documents: Regional Water System Feasibility Study for Hermiston-Boardman, Oregon, prepared by Futrell-Redford-Saxton and also Wallulis and Associates dated December 1974; The Greater Hermiston Regional Water Facility Plan prepared by Jones Associates dated April 1975; Regional and Local Water Resources for the City of Hermiston prepared by Wallulis and Associates dated September 1976; The Hermiston Water Study prepared by Wallulis and Associates dated January 1982; Hermiston Sewer Facilities Plan, Parts I and II, prepared by Stevens, Thompson and Runyan dated January and May 1976; Hermiston Airport Master Plan prepared by Stevens, Thompson and Runyan dated November 1975 and the Airport Plan Update prepared by Belltran dated January 1981; the Hermiston Park Master Plan prepared by Kramer, Chin and Mayo dated June 1981.

(B)    The technical report is not adopted as part of the plan but remains the supporting document that is subject to revision as new technical data becomes available. When new data indicates that the city’s plan should be revised, amendments shall be made as provided in 156.07.

(Ord. 1505, passed 4-9-84)


156.04 PLAN IMPLEMENT MEASURES.

All plan implementation measures, including but not limited to the city zoning code, subdivision ordinance, annexation procedures ordinance and Urban Growth Area Joint Management Agreement between the city and Umatilla County, shall be consistent with and subservient to the city’s Comprehensive Plan.

(Ord. 1505, passed 4-9-84)


156.05 AVAILABILITY.

After the city’s Comprehensive Plan receives an acknowledgment of compliance from the Oregon Land Conservation and Development Commission, the Comprehensive Plan and implementation measures shall be available for use and inspection at the Hermiston City Hall, Hermiston Public Library, Umatilla County Planning Department in Pendleton, East Central Oregon Association of Counties office in Pendleton and the Department of Land Conservation and Development in Salem.

(Ord. 1505, passed 4-9-84)


156.06 GOALS AND POLICIES.

The statements of goals and policies provide a general long-range basis for decision-making relative to the future growth and development of the city. The goals are patterned after and are in direct response to applicable statewide planning goals. The policy statements set forth a guide to courses of action which are intended to carry out the goals of the plan and present a clear picture of the city’s position on matters pertaining to physical improvements and development within the city Urban Growth Boundary. Furthermore, policies and statements contained within the city’s Comprehensive Plan which address lands outside the city’s urban growth boundary shall be construed as recommendations to Umatilla County and shall in no way be binding upon the county.

(Ord. 1505, passed 4-9-84)


156.07 ANNUAL REVIEW.

(A)    The Comprehensive Plan and implementation measures shall be reviewed at least annually to determine conformity with changes in:

(1)    The Oregon Revised Statutes;

(2)    Oregon Case Law;

(3)    Oregon Statewide Planning Goals;

(4)    Requirements of the city;

(5)    Needs of residents or landowners within the city and urban growth area; and

(6)    Concerns of Umatilla County and other affected governmental units.

(B)    If the Comprehensive Plan, implementation measures or both fail to conform to any or all of the above mentioned criteria, the nonconforming document(s) shall be amended as soon as practicable.

(Ord. 1505, passed 4-9-84)


156.08 AMENDMENTS.

After the Planning Commission and City Council determine that proposed amendments should be considered, amendment of the Comprehensive Plan shall be based on the following procedure and requirements:

(A)    A public hearing date and notice thereof through a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the hearing;

(B)    Copies of proposed amendments shall be made available for review at least ten days prior to the Planning Commission hearing;

(C)    After the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and recommend to the City Council adoption, revision or denial of the proposed amendments;

(D)    Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall set a public hearing date and give notice thereof through a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the hearing;

(E)    Copies of proposed amendments and the Planning Commission recommendation shall be made available for review at least ten days prior to the City Council hearing;

(F)    After the close of the public hearing, the City Council shall make findings of fact and adopt, adopt with changes or deny the proposed amendments. Adoption is contingent upon:

(1)    City adoption is final in the case of amendment to the plan map for the area within the city limits;

(2)    County adoption in the case of amendment to plan policies or the plan map for the urban growth area; or

(3)    County adoption and LCDC approval in the case of amendment to plan goals or urban growth boundary location.

(G)    Copies of the plan amendments adopted by the city shall be sent to Umatilla County and the LCDC.

(Ord. 1505, passed 4-9-84)


156.09 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PLAN.

(A)    The City Transportation System Plan (TSP) is adopted by reference as the Transportation Element of the City Comprehensive Plan. The TSP will guide transportation planning within the city’s urban growth boundary (UGB). The city will base its transportation policies, actions, and investments on the adopted TSP.

(B)    (1)    Compliance with Planning Rule. The city will comply with the requirements of the Transportation Planning Rule with the adoption of the Transportation System Plan and related amendments to implementing ordinances.

(2)    Notice and coordination. The city will notify and coordinate with all appropriate local, state, and federal agencies and transportation interest groups when a land use application is submitted and potentially impacts a transportation facility. Notification will help identify agency standards and provide an opportunity for agency input to the local land use decision process.

(3)    Protection of transportation facilities. The function of existing and planned roadways will be protected through the application of appropriate access management measures as identified in the adopted TSP. These measures will be coordinated with ODOT access management standards.

(4)    Conformance to adopted TSP. All plan map and zone changes shall conform to the adopted TSP. Proposed amendments shall not substantial impact the functional classification or operation of transportation facilities. To ensure proper review and mitigation, a traffic impact study may be required for proposals that may impact transportation facilities.

(5)    Connected street network. The city will support and develop a connected network of streets, accessways, and other improvements, including bikeways, sidewalks, and safe street crossings, to promote safe and convenient bicycle and pedestrian circulation within the community.

(Ord. 2002, passed 12-13-99)


CHAPTER 157 Zoning

Section

General Provisions

157.001    Purpose

157.002    Definitions

157.003    Compliance with chapter provisions

157.004    State and federal regulations

157.005    Interpretation

Classification of Zones and Zoning Map

157.015    Establishment of zones

157.016    Zoning map

Residential Zones

157.025    Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1)

157.026    Duplex Residential Zone (R-2)

157.027    Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-3)

157.028    Multi-Structure Residential Zone (R-4)

157.029    Recreational Residential Zone (RR)

Commercial Zones

157.040    Central Commercial Zone (C-1)

157.041    Outlying Commercial Zone (C-2)

157.042    Downtown Commercial Overlay Zone (DCO)

157.043    Neighborhood Commercial Overlay Zone (NCO)

Industrial Zones

157.055    Light Industrial Zone (M-1)

157.056    Heavy Industrial Zone (M-2)

157.057    Fairgrounds Overlay

Airport Zone (A)

157.070    Permitted uses

157.071    Conditional permitted uses

157.072    Other requirements and conditions

Open Space Zone (OS)

157.081    Uses permitted outright

157.082    Conditional uses permitted

157.083    Special approval required

157.084    Lot size

157.085    Yard requirements

Development Hazard Overlay Zone (DH)

157.100    Purpose

157.101    Development conditions

Planned Unit Developments

157.110    Purpose

157.111    Ownership

157.112    General requirements

157.113    Permitted uses

157.114    Development procedures

157.115    Preliminary conference

157.116    Preliminary approval

157.117    Final approval

157.118    Appeal to City Council

157.119    Changes, modifications and adherence

157.120    Revocation of permit

Supplemental Provisions

157.135    Zone boundaries

157.136    Accessory use provisions; authorization

157.137    Building projections

157.138    Minimum maintenance requirements

157.139    Exceptions to lot size requirements

157.140    Exceptions to building height and yard requirements

157.141    Access

157.142    Vision clearance

157.143    Utility facilities

157.144    Historic buildings

157.145    Manufactured dwelling standards

157.146    Manufactured dwelling park standards

157.147    Recreational vehicle park standards

157.148    Swimming pools, fish ponds and the like

157.149    Sand and gravel pits

157.150    Transportation improvements, standards, and procedures

157.151    Prohibited activities

157.152    Common wall housing

Development Standards

157.160    Development policy

157.161    Definitions

157.162    Issuance

157.163    Implementing action

157.164    Development requirements

157.165    Final approval

157.166    Limited land use decisions

Off-Street Parking and Loading

157.175    Off-street parking requirements

157.176    Uses and spaces

157.177    Off-street loading

157.178    Additional requirements

157.179    Design requirements

Nonconforming Uses

157.190    Continuation of use

157.191    Vested rights

157.192    Alteration of use or structure

157.193    Restoration of use or structure

157.194    Discontinuance of use

157.195    Criteria to grant or deny

157.196    Compliance with state and local codes

Conditional Uses

157.205    Authority to grant or deny

157.206    Application procedure

157.207    Public hearing; recess

157.208    Approval criteria

157.209    Notification of action

157.210    Standards for conditional uses

Administration and Enforcement

157.215    Infill development designation

157.225    Variances

157.226    Amendments

157.227    Duties of City Manager

157.228    Permit required; time limit

157.229    Public hearings; notice of publication

157.230    Hearings before Planning Commission

157.231    Appeal to City Council

157.232    Petitions, applications and appeals

157.233    Severability

157.999    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


157.001 PURPOSE.

The several purposes of this chapter are to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to aid in the rendering of fire and police protection; to provide for adequate light and air; to lessen congestion; to encourage the orderly growth of the city; to prevent undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities and facilities such as water, sewerage, electrical distribution systems, transportation, schools, parks and other public requirements; and in general, to promote public health, safety, convenience and general welfare.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.002 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. As used in this chapter, the masculine includes the feminine and neuter, and the singular includes the plural.

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or USE. A structure or use incidental and subordinate to the main use of the property and which is on the same lot with the main use. A home occupation is an accessory use.

ALLEY. A narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street.

BED AND BREAKFAST, BOARDING, LODGING or ROOMING HOUSE. A building that is owner occupied with five or less guest rooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation.

BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature greater than 120 square feet or ten feet in height.

CITY. City of Hermiston, Oregon.

CIVIC CENTER. A building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and services, and which may include cultural, recreational, athletic, convention and entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a governmental agency.

CLINIC. Any facility used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, inactive, infirm or injured persons and those who are in need of medical, dental or surgical attention, but who are not provided with board or room or kept overnight on the premises. CLINIC includes dental clinic, health clinic, medical clinic or doctors’ offices and may include laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services.

CLUB. A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and a constitution and by-laws.

COMMON WALL HOUSING. Attached housing units where each dwelling is located on a separate lot and sharing a wall on one or both sides with a neighboring dwelling.

DAY CARE HOME. Any facility, other than a single-family dwelling, in which care and nurturing are provided to the young or elderly.

DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building containing three or more dwelling units. For the purposes of this chapter multiple two0family dwellings on a single lot shall also be considered multi-family dwellings as long as the total number of dwelling units is equal to or greater than three.

DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building containing one dwelling unit and is meant to mean structures conforming to the Oregon State Building Codes, unless otherwise specified.

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.

DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family and not having more than one cooking facility. Includes all conventional and prefabricated housing which meets the State of Oregon’s Uniform Building Code specifications and is constructed on a permanent foundation.

EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.

FAMILY. One or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit. FAMILY shall include two or more handicapped persons as defined in the Fair Housing Act of 1988, living as a single housekeeping unit.

FAMILY DAY CARE PROVIDER. A FAMILY DAY CARE PROVIDER provides day care for not more than 12 children in the provider’s home. The care is considered a residential use.

FENCE, SIGHT-OBSCURING. A fence or planting arranged in a way as to obstruct visibility of land uses on a parcel from adjacent properties.

FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floor(s) of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.

GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of a main building used for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles owned or used by occupants of the main building.

GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage used for the care and repair of motor vehicles where the vehicles are owned or used or stored for compensation, hire or sale.

GRADE (GROUND LEVEL). The average of the finished GROUND LEVEL at the center of all walls of the building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the above ground level should be measured at the sidewalk.

HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within 20 feet of the structure to the highest point of the structure.

HOME OCCUPATION. A lawful activity commonly carried on within a dwelling by members of the family occupying the dwelling with no servant, employee or other person being engaged, provided that:

(1)    The residential character of the dwelling is maintained.

(2)    The activity occupies less than one-quarter of the ground floor area of the dwelling.

(3)    The activity is conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance nor manifest any characteristic of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term nor infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes.

HOSPITAL. An establishment which provides sleeping and eating facilities to persons receiving medical, obstetrical or surgical care and nursing service on a continuous basis.

HOTEL/MOTEL. A building or group of buildings used for transient or residential purposes on a property collectively containing six or more guest rooms.

INDUSTRIAL PARK. A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.

INDUSTRY. Those fields of economic activity related to forestry, fishing, hunting and trapping, mining, construction, manufacturing, transportation, communication, electric, gas, and sanitary services and wholesale trade.

JUNK. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicles, or motor vehicle parts, iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous, or nonferrous material, metal or nonmetal materials.

JUNKYARD. Any establishment or place of business where there is accumulated on the premises eight or more motor vehicles or an equivalent volume of junk that is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling of junk and the term includes automobile graveyards, wrecking yards, and salvage yards.

LOT. A parcel or tract of land.

LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two intersecting streets other than an alley, provided that the streets do not intersect at an angle greater than 135 degrees.

LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.

LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.

LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.

LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot.

LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from the street other than an alley, and in the case of a corner or through lot, the lot line along a street other than an alley over which the primary vehicular access to the property is gained.



LOT LINE, REAR. The longest lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. Where a REAR LOT LINE cannot be determined, it shall be developed by striking a cord ten feet in length within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.

LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.

LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot line.

MANUFACTURED DWELLING. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities; is intended for human occupancy and is being used for residential purposes; meets minimum requirements of Federal Housing and Urban Development standards; is constructed on steel chassis and equipped with axles and towing tongue.

MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK. A five acre minimum tract, lot or parcel of land, the primary purpose of which is to rent space for the purpose of parking four or more manufactured dwellings occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes.

MANUFACTURING. Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products including the assembling of component parts, the MANUFACTURING of products, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors.

MINI-WAREHOUSE. A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis.

MODULAR HOME. A structure constructed off-site at a state approved manufacturing facility; has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities; is intended for human occupancy and used for residential purposes; meets minimum requirements of the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code; is constructed on conventional wood floor systems, set on perimeter concrete foundation; and is not equipped with axles or towing hardware.

NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE or USE. A lawful existing structure or use at the time this chapter or any amendment thereto becomes effective which does not conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located.

OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.

PARK. A tract of land, designated and used by the public for active or passive recreation.

PARKING SPACE. A rectangle not less than 20 feet long and nine feet wide.

PARKING SPACE, HANDICAPPED. A rectangle not less than 20 feet long and 12 feet wide.

PERSON. Every natural PERSON, firm, partnership, association and/or corporation.

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A parcel of land planned as a single unit rather than as an aggregate of individual lots, with design flexibility from traditional zoning regulations.

PLANNING COMMISSION. The city of Hermiston’s Planning Commission.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, self-propelled motor homes and park trailers.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. An area designed by the person establishing, operating, managing or maintaining the same for overnight camping by the general public or any segment of the public. Includes but is not limited to areas open to use free of charge or through payment of a fee or by virtue of rental, lease, license, membership, association or common ownership.

RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed by or under the authority of the Department of Human Resources under ORS 443.400 to 443.460 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for six to 15 individuals who need not be related.

RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME. A home licensed by or under the authority of the Department of Human Resources under ORS 443.400 to 443.825 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for five or fewer individuals who need not be related.

RUBBISH. A general term for solid waste, excluding food waste and ashes, taken from residences, commercial establishments and institutions.

SCRAP. Discarded or rejected materials that result from manufacturing or fabricating operations.

SCREENING. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation.

SETBACK. The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building foundation, excluding uncovered steps.

STORY. That portion of building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the top STORY shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the top floor and the ceiling above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet above grade, the basement or cellar shall be considered a STORY.

STREET. A vehicular way which is:

(1)    An existing state, county, or municipal roadway;

(2)    Shown upon a plat approved pursuant to the law;

(3)    Approved by other official action; or

(4)    Shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer. The street shall include all land between the right-of-way line, whether or not improved or unimproved.

STREET, ARTERIAL. A street with signals at important intersections and stop signs on the side streets, and which collects and distributes traffic to and from collector streets.

STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which collects traffic from local streets and connects with minor and major arterials.

STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround at the end.

STREET, LOCAL. A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property and to discourage through traffic.

STREET VENDOR. Any person upon a public sidewalk or other public way or place carrying, conveying or transporting merchandise which is offered for sale from a mobile type device or as a pedestrian.

STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. A change to the supporting members of a structure including the supporting parts of foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders or the roof.

STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed. An edifice or building or any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground.

SWIMMING POOL. A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing.

TENT. A structure made of materials such as, but not limited to, canvas, an architectural membrane, or other lightweight material and which is supported by a framework of supports or ropes which is intended to function as or resemble a tent or other engineered stressed membrane structure.

UNSTABLE SOIL. Soil types which pose severe limitations upon development or create a groundwater pollution hazard due to poor filtration, high water table and/or cemented hardpan, as defined by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.

USE. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.

VISION CLEARANCE AREA. A triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and an alley, driveway, other point of vehicular access or railroad, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines to a distance specified in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot adjoining the ends of the other two sides. Where the lot lines at intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection. The vision clearance area contains no plantings, walls, structures, or temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding two and one-half feet in height measured from the grade of the street center line.

YARD. An open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

YARD, FRONT. A yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line from the front lot line to the nearest point of the foundation of a building.

YARD, REAR. A yard extending between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point of the foundation of a building.

YARD, SIDE. A yard between the front and rear yards measured horizontally and at right angles to the side lot lines from the side lot line to the nearest point of the foundation of a building.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2109, passed 6-27-05; Am. Ord. 2180, passed 7-25-11; Am. Ord. 2235, passed 12-28-15)


157.003 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER PROVISIONS.

No structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.004 STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.

All development within the city shall adhere to subsections (A) through (E) of this section, but these standards shall not be approval standards for land use decisions, limited land use decisions or expedited land divisions but they shall govern all other city approvals necessary for building permits and to establish a use:

(A)    State and federal air quality standards.

(B)    State and federal clean water regulations.

(C)    State noise regulations.

(D)    State and federal solid and hazardous waste regulations.

(E)    In addition to the requirements of the zoning ordinance, all uses and development must comply with all other applicable city, regional, state, and federal regulations and laws.

(F)    Any use not authorized by this section is prohibited unless permitted outright or as a conditional use or determined to be similar to other uses in a zone by the Planning Commission.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2138, passed 6-25-07; Am. Ord. 2177, passed 7-25-11; Am. Ord. 2207, 10-14-13) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.005 INTERPRETATION.

The provisions of this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements fulfilling its objectives. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)

CLASSIFICATION OF ZONES AND ZONING MAP


157.015 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES.

For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into zones designated as follows:

	Zone	Residential Designations

	Single-Family Residential	R-1

	Duplex Residential	R-2

	Multiple-Family Residential	R-3

	Multi-Structure Residential	R-4

	Central Commercial	C-1

	Outlying Commercial	C-2

	Light Industrial	M-1

	Heavy Industrial	M-2

	Airport	A

	Open Space	OS

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.016 ZONING MAP.

The location of boundaries of the zones designated in § 157.015 are hereby established as shown on the map entitled Zoning Map of the City of Hermiston, dated with the effective date of this chapter and signed by the Mayor and Finance Director/Recorder, and hereafter referred to as the "Zoning Map." The signed copy of the zoning map shall be maintained on file at city hall and is hereby made a part of this chapter.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)

RESIDENTIAL ZONES


157.025 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-1).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In a R-1 zone, only the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    Single-family dwelling;

(2)    Residential care home;

(3)    Home occupations;

(4)    Accessory structures;

(5)    Family day care provider;

(6)    Manufactured dwelling placed on an individual lot outside of a manufactured dwelling park and subject to requirements of § 157.145. This requirement shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded restrictive covenant; and

(7)    Utility facilities as defined in § 157.143.

(B)    Conditional uses permitted. In a R-1 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of §§ 157.205 through 157.210:

(1)    Cemetery;

(2)    Church;

(3)    Community building;

(4)    Day care home;

(5)    Golf course and other open land recreational use, but excluding intensive commercial amusement use such as "pitch and putt" golf course, driving range, automobile race track or amusement park;

(6)    Governmental structure or land use including but not limited to a public park, playground, recreational building, fire station, library, museum, or civic center;

(7)    Hospital or nursing home;

(8)    Mortuary;

(9)    Private utilities including electric power substations, telephone exchanges, television, radio or microwave transmission facilities; and

(10)    Schools: nursery or preschool, primary, elementary, junior or senior high, college.

(C)    Lot size. In a R-1 zone, the lot size shall be as follows:

(1)    The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet;

(2)    The minimum lot depth shall be 80 feet; and

(3)    The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet and 25 feet for cul-de-sac lots.

(D)    Setback requirements. Except as provided in § 157.140, in a R-1 zone the yards shall be as follows:

(1)    The front yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet, measured from the foundation. The garage shall be constructed at 20 feet measured from the foundation. When a covered patio or covered porch is constructed in the front yard, the porch or patio may be constructed with a ten-foot setback.

(2)    Each side yard shall be a minimum of seven feet, measured from the foundation, except that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of ten feet measured from the foundation.

(3)    The rear yard shall be a minimum of ten feet, measured from the foundation. However, for any structure exceeding 15 feet in height, the rear yard shall be increased one foot, up to a maximum of 25 feet, for every foot, or fraction thereof, above 15 feet.

(E)    Heights of buildings. In a R-1 zone, no building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.

(F)    Lot coverage. In a R-1 zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 40% of the lot area. Covered decks, porches, patios, and gazebos may occupy an additional five percent of the total lot area.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2138, passed 6-25-07; Am. Ord. 2180, passed 7-25-11; Am. Ord. 2251, passed 9-25-17) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.026 DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-2).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In a R-2 zone, only the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    A use permitted in the R-1 zone; and

(2)    Two-family dwelling.

(B)    Conditional uses permitted. In a R-2 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of §§ 157.205 through 157.210:

(1)    A use permitted as a conditional use in a R-1 zone;

(2)    Beauty salon and barber shop with less than 2,500 gross square feet;

(3)    Bed and breakfast, boarding, lodging or rooming house;

(4)    Multiple-family dwelling;

(5)    Neighborhood grocery, drug store, convenience store or florist shop which serves the immediate neighborhood and with less than 4,000 gross square feet;

(6)    Planned unit development; and

(7)    Residential care facility.

(C)    Lot size. In a R-2 zone, the minimum lot size shall be as follows:

(1)    The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings shall be 6,500 square feet;

(2)    The minimum lot area for two-family dwellings shall be 8,000 square feet;

(3)    The minimum lot area for multiple-family dwellings shall be 9,000 square feet plus 1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit over two;

(4)    The minimum lot depth shall be 80 feet; and

(5)    The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet and 25 feet for cul-de-sac lots.

(D)    Setback requirements. Except as provided in § 157.140, in a R-2 zone the yards shall be as follows:

(1)    The front yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet, measured from the foundation. The garage shall be constructed at 20 feet measured from the foundation. When a covered patio or covered porch is constructed in the front yard, the porch or patio may be constructed with a ten-foot setback.

(2)    Each side yard shall be a minimum of five feet, measured from the foundation, except that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of ten feet measured from the foundation.

(3)    The rear yard shall be a minimum of ten feet, measured from the foundation. However, for any structure exceeding 15 feet in height the rear yard shall be increased one foot, up to a maximum of 25 feet, for every foot, or fraction thereof, above 15 feet.

(E)    Height of buildings. In a R-2 zone, no building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.

(F)    Lot coverage. In a R-2 zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 45% of the lot area. Covered decks, porches, patios, and gazebos may occupy an additional five percent of the total lot area.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2180, passed 7-25-11; Am. Ord. 2251, passed 9-25-17; Am. Ord. 2263, passed 9-24-18) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.027 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-3).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In a R-3 zone, only the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    A use permitted in the R-2 zone;

(2)    Bed and breakfast, boarding, lodging or rooming house;

(3)    Multiple-family dwelling; and

(4)    Residential care facility.

(B)    Conditional uses permitted. In a R-3 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of §§ 157.205 through 157.210:

(1)    A conditional use permitted in a R-2 zone except bed and breakfast, boarding, lodging or rooming house and residential care facility which are outright uses in this zone;

(2)    Art, music and photographic studio with less than 4,000 gross square feet;

(3)    Doctor prescribed medical products sales with less than 4,000 gross square feet;

(4)    Manufactured dwelling park meeting requirements of § 157.146; and

(5)    Office for an accountant, architect, attorney, chiropractor, optician, engineer, family counselor, psychiatrist, dentist or doctor, and clinic, with less than 4,000 gross square feet.

(C)    Lot size. In a R-3 zone, the lot size shall be as follows:

(1)    The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings shall be 5,000 square feet for an interior lot and 6,000 square feet for a corner lot;

(2)    The minimum lot area for two-family dwellings shall be 6,500 square feet for an interior lot and 7,200 square feet for a corner lot;

(3)    For multiple-family dwellings, the minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet or 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater;

(4)    The minimum lot width at the front building line shall be 60 feet for an interior lot, 70 feet for a corner lot, and 25 feet for cul-de-sac lots; and

(5)    The minimum lot depth shall be 80 feet.

(D)    Setback requirements. Except as provided in § 157.140, in a R-3 zone the yards shall be as follows:

(1)    The front yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet, measured from the foundation. The garage shall be constructed at 20 feet measured from the foundation. When a covered patio or covered porch is constructed in the front yard, the porch or patio may be constructed with a ten-foot setback;

(2)    Each side yard shall be a minimum of five feet, measured from the foundation, except that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of ten feet measured from the foundation; and

(3)    The back yard shall be a minimum of ten feet, measured from the foundation. However, for any structure exceeding 15 feet in height, the rear yard shall be increased one foot, up to a maximum of 25 feet, for every foot, or fraction thereof, above 15 feet.

(E)    Height of buildings. In a R-3 zone, no buildings shall exceed a height of 35 feet.

(F)    Lot coverage. In a R-3 zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 45% of the lot area. Covered decks, porches, patios, and gazebos may occupy an additional five percent of the total lot area.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2180, passed 7-25-11; Am. Ord. 2251, passed 9-25-17) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.028 MULTI-STRUCTURE RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-4).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In a R-4 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    A use permitted in the R-3 zone; and

(2)    Manufactured dwelling park subject to requirements of § 157.146.

(B)    Conditional uses permitted. In a R-4 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of §§ 157.205 through 157.210:

(1)    A conditional use permitted in a R-3 zone except manufactured dwelling park which is an outright permitted use in this zone; and

(2)    Recreational vehicle park subject to requirements of § 157.146.

(C)    Lot size. In a R-4 zone, the lot size shall be as follows:

(1)    The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings shall be 5,000 square feet for an interior lot and 6,000 square feet for a corner lot;

(2)    The minimum lot area for two-family dwellings shall be 6,500 square feet for an interior lot and 7,200 square feet for a corner lot;

(3)    For multiple-family dwellings, the minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet or 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater;

(4)    The minimum lot area for manufactured dwelling parks shall be as five acres;

(5)    The minimum lot width at the front building line shall be 60 feet for an interior lot, 70 feet for a corner lot, and 25 feet for cul-de-sac lots; and

(6)    The minimum lot depth shall be 80 feet.

(D)    Setback requirements. Except as provided in § 157.140, in a R-4 zone the yards shall be as follows:

(1)    The front yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet, measured from the foundation. The garage shall be constructed at 20 feet measured from the foundation. When a covered patio or covered porch is constructed in the front yard, the porch or patio may be constructed with a ten-foot setback;

(2)    Each side yard shall be a minimum of five feet, measured from the foundation, except that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of ten feet measured from the foundation; and

(3)    The back yard shall be a minimum of ten feet, measured from the foundation. However, for any structure exceeding 15 feet in height, the rear yard shall be increased one foot, up to a maximum of 25 feet, for every foot or fraction thereof above 15 feet.

(E)    Height of buildings. In a R-4 zone, no buildings shall exceed a height of 35 feet.

(F)    Lot coverage. In a R-4 zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 45% of the lot area. Covered decks, porches, patios, and gazebos may occupy an additional five percent of the total lot area.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2180, passed 7-25-11; Am. Ord. 2251, passed 9-25-17) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.029 RECREATIONAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RR).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In an RR zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    A use permitted outright in the R-3 zone;

(2)    Attached single-family dwellings;

(3)    Public recreational and accessory uses intermingled with residential development. Uses permitted include a golf course, other recreational uses, and uses accessory to such uses including but not limited to restaurants associated with such recreational use or uses, club house, driving range, putting greens, pro shop, meeting facilities, swimming pools, tennis courts, snack shop, walking paths and jogging/bike trails; and

(4)    Recreational vehicle storage for use by residents of the Recreational Residential zone development within which the storage facility is located.

(B)    Lot size. In an RR zone, the lot size shall be as follows:

(1)    The minimum lot area for single family detached dwellings shall be 5,000 square feet for an interior lot and 6,000 square feet for a corner lot;

(2)    The minimum lot area for two family dwellings shall be 6,500 square feet for an interior lot and 7,200 square feet for a corner lot;

(3)    For multiple family dwellings designed as other than two family dwellings, the minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet or 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater;

(4)    For attached single family dwellings, the minimum lot area shall be 1,800 square feet per dwelling unit;

(5)    For single family detached and for multifamily dwellings, the minimum lot width at the front building line shall be 50 feet for an interior lot, 60 feet for a corner lot, and 25 feet for cul de sac lots;

(6)    For attached single-family dwellings, the minimum lot width at the front building line shall be 20 feet; and

(7)    The minimum lot depth shall be 60 feet.

(C)    Setback requirements. Except as provided in § 157.140, in an RR zone the yards shall be as follows:

(1)    For detached single-family and multifamily development the front yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet, measured from the foundation. The garage shall be constructed at 20 feet measured from the foundation. When a covered patio or covered porch is constructed in the front yard, the porch or patio may be constructed with a ten-foot setback;

(2)    For attached single-family residential development, the front building setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the foundation;

(3)    For detached single-family and multifamily development, each side yard shall be a minimum of five feet, measured from the foundation, except that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of ten feet measured from the foundation;

(4)    For attached single-family, the side yard of the end units shall be a minimum of five feet; and

(5)    The back yard shall be a minimum of ten feet, measured from the foundation.

(D)    Height of buildings. In an RR zone, no residential buildings shall exceed a height of 40 feet.

(E)    Lot coverage. In an RR zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 45% of the lot area. Covered decks, porches, patios, and gazebos may occupy an additional five percent of the total lot area.

(Ord. 2098, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2251, passed 9-25-17)

COMMERCIAL ZONES


157.040 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-1).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In a C-1, only the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    Automobile, boat or trailer sales showroom;

(2)    Bakery;

(3)    Bank, loan company or similar financial institution;

(4)    Barber shop;

(5)    Beauty shop;

(6)    Bicycle shop;

(7)    Blueprinting, photostating or other reproduction;

(8)    Book or stationery store or newsstand;

(9)    Bookbinding;

(10)    Building supply with no outside storage;

(11)    Bus station;

(12)    Business machines, retail and service;

(13)    Catering establishment;

(14)    Church;

(15)    Clinic;

(16)    Clothes, cleaning or laundry agency;

(17)    Clothing store or tailor shop;

(18)    Club, lodge, union or fraternal organization;

(19)    Cocktail lounge or tavern;

(20)    Confectionery store, including soda fountain;

(21)    Curtain or drapery store;

(22)    Dancing school, music studio or instructional classes;

(23)    Delicatessen;

(24)    Drug store, pharmacy;

(25)    Dry cleaning, or pressing, except those using highly volatile or combustible materials or using high pressure steam tanks or boilers;

(26)    Dry goods, millinery or dress shop;

(27)    Electrical supply store;

(28)    Feed and seed store;

(29)    Floor covering sales and service;

(30)    Florist shop;

(31)    Food store;

(32)    Frozen food lockers, retail only;

(33)    Furniture store;

(34)    Garden store;

(35)    Gift, hobby or art shop;

(36)    Grocery store, includes convenience store, mini-market;

(37)    Hardware store;

(38)    Health studio, physical therapist, reducing salon;

(39)    Hotel;

(40)    Jewelry store, including repairing;



(41)    Leather goods sales, including harness and saddle shop;

(42)    Locksmith;

(43)    Magazine or newspaper distribution agency;

(44)    Meat market, retail only;

(45)    Newspaper publishing;

(46)    Notions or variety store;

(47)    Office, business or professional;

(48)    Office supplies;

(49)    Paint store, including related contractor shop;

(50)    Parking lot or garage;

(51)    Pawn shop;

(52)    Pet shop, includes animal grooming but not overnight boarding or kennel;

(53)    Printing plant;

(54)    Radio or television sales and service;

(55)    Restaurant or hotel supply;

(56)    Restaurant or tea room;

(57)    Retail store;

(58)    Scientific or professional instrument sale or repair;

(59)    Secondhand store;

(60)    Self-service laundry;

(61)    Shoe store or shoe repair shop;

(62)    Storage building for household goods in conjunction with retail sales;

(63)    Studio-art, music and photography;

(64)    Telephone or telegraph building;

(65)    Theater, except drive-in theater;

(66)    Upholstery shop, but excluding operations in mattress and upholstery refinishing where cyanide or other highly toxic material is used; and

(67)    Wholesale office or show room with merchandise on the premises limited to small items and samples.

(B)    Conditional uses permitted. In a C-1 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of 157.205 through 157.210 of this chapter:

(1)    Auditorium, exhibition hall or other public assembly room;

(2)    Automobile service station including minor automobile repairs but excluding body and fender work, or painting;

(3)    Community building;

(4)    Day care home or nursery;

(5)    Drive-in establishment offering goods or services to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, except drive-in theater;

(6)    Government structure or land use including but not limited to a public park, playground, recreational building, fire station, library or museum;

(7)    Hospital or nursing home;

(8)    Mortuary;

(9)    Motel;

(10)    Multiple-family dwelling;

(11)    Planned unit development;

(12)    Private utilities including electric power substations, telephone exchanges, television, radio or microwave transmission facilities;

(13)    Public utilities including wells, water storage tanks and sanitary sewer pump stations; and

(14)    Schools: Preschool, primary, elementary, junior or senior high, college.

(C)    Setback requirements. Except as provided in 157.140, in a C-1 zone no yard or vision clearance area shall be required except as follows:

(1)    The front yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone;

(2)    The side yard shall be minimum of 20 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone;

(3)    The rear yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone; and

(4)    All properties facing E. Main street from 3rd street to 7th street shall have a two-foot building setback from their front property line.

(D)    Height of buildings. In a C-1 zone, no building shall exceed 50 feet in height.

(E)    Restrictions on use. In a C-1 zone, the following conditions and restrictions shall apply:

(1)    All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except for off-street parking and loading, drive-in windows, island service for motor vehicles and display of merchandise along the outside wall of the building not extending more than three feet from the wall, unless conducted as part of a special event and authorized by the City Council;

(2)    All items produced or wares and merchandise handled shall be sold at retail on the premises except in the case of 157.040 (A);

(3)    Where there are existing residential dwellings, they and their accessory uses may be maintained, expanded or reconstructed in conformance with the development standards of the R-3 zone; and

(4)    Residential uses shall not be allowed on the ground floor of commercial buildings in the C-1 zone.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2217, passed 3-24-14) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.041 OUTLYING COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-2).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In a C-2 zone, only the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    A use permitted outright in a C-1 zone;

(2)    Amusement enterprise, including pool hall, bowling, dancing hall, skating rink, when enclosed in a building;

(3)    Auditorium, exhibition hall or other public assembly room;

(4)    Automobile, boat or trailer sales, rental, service and repair;

(5)    Automobile service station;

(6)    Automobile laundry;

(7)    Day care home or nursery;

(8)    Mortuary, undertaking or funeral parlor;

(9)    Motel;

(10)    Recreational vehicle park subject to requirements of 157.147;

(11)    Taxidermy shop; and

(12)    Tire shop, including tire recapping.

(B)    Conditional uses permitted. In a C-2 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of §§ 157.205 through 157.210:

(1)    Amusement enterprise not enclosed in a building including, but not limited to, "pitch and putt" golf course, driving range, archery range, automobile race track and drive-in theater;

(2)    Caretaker’s residence subject to the following conditions:

(a)    Residence shall be a manufactured dwelling complying with the 1976 HUD codes and shall be skirted;

(b)    The residence shall be furnished with all utilities including telephone;

(c)    The facility shall be set back from all streets as far as practical and still be in conformance with the setback requirements as established in the Uniform Building Code;

(d)    The caretaker’s residence shall be allowed only in conjunction with a business which requires the outside storage or display of wares and shall be removed within 30 days following the discontinuance of the business enterprise; and

(e)    All uses shall be subject to annual review by the commission and may be removed upon direction of the Commission for violation of these conditions;

(3)    Community building;

(4)    Drive-in establishment offering goods or services to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, except drive-in theater;

(5)    Government structure or land use including but not limited to a public park, playgrounds, recreational building, fire station, library or museum;

(6)    Hospital or nursing home;

(7)    Planned unit development;

(8)    Preschool, primary, elementary, junior or senior high, college;

(9)    Private utilities including electric power substations, telephone exchanges, television, radio or microwave transmission facilities;

(10)    Public utilities including wells, water storage tanks and sanitary sewer pump stations; and

(11)    Other uses similar to the uses permitted outright or the conditional uses normally located in the Outlying Commercial Zone (C-2), providing that the use has approval from the planning commission.

(C)    Restrictions on use. In a C-2 zone, the following conditions and restrictions shall apply:

(1)    Where there are existing residential dwellings, they and their accessory uses may be maintained, expanded or reconstructed in conformance with the development standards as established in the R-3 zone.

(2)    The outside storage of junk shall be contained entirely within a sight-obscuring fence when adjacent to a residential use of property.

(D)    Setback requirements. Except as provided in § 157.140, in a C-2 zone the yards shall be as follows:

(1)    The setback from any street shall be 20 feet. However, if solid ground cover landscaping is provided and maintained, the setback from a street may be reduced to ten feet;

(2)    The side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone; and

(3)    The rear yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone.

(E)    Height of buildings. In a C-2 zone, no building shall exceed a height of 50 feet.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2194, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 2217, passed 3-24-14) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.042 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL OVERLAY ZONE (DCO).

(A)    Purpose. The purpose of the downtown commercial overlay zone is to create a main street atmosphere in the historic downtown area. Specific goals are as follows:

(1)    Be prepared to take advantage of opportunities for infill, redevelopment, and new development in downtown;

(2)    Allow different types of compatible land uses close together to shorten traffic trips and facilitate all modes of transportation such as vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles;

(3)    Continue vehicle and pedestrian circulation systems that are safe, convenient, attractive and comfortable for pedestrians;

(4)    Create, maintain and enhance public spaces such as plazas, parks, public buildings and places of assembly to allow events, informal meetings and social interactions with other people;

(5)    Design and manage parking areas efficiently to provide adequate parking for employees and visitors to downtown and to minimize unnecessary surface parking;

(6)    Design buildings to a scale that provides aesthetic appeal, pedestrian comfort and compatibility with other uses.

(B)    Uses permitted outright.

(1)    In the DCO Zone, all uses and accessory uses permitted outright in the Central Commercial Zone (C-1) zone are allowed.

(2)    Residential uses are permitted on upper stories and on ground floors when not located within storefront space.

(3)    Off-street parking and loading, drive-in windows, and outside dining and the display of merchandise along the outside wall of the building when extending no more than four feet from the wall.

(C)    Conditional uses permitted. In the DCO Zone, the conditional uses and their accessory uses permitted in the Central Commercial Zone (C-1) are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of § 157.205 through § 157.210 except for multiple-family dwellings and planned unit developments. Multiple-family dwellings are permitted outright if the residential units are on upper floors or on the ground floor, when they do not use storefront space.

(D)    Prohibited uses. Planned unit developments are prohibited in the DCO Zone.

(E)    Setback requirements. Except as provided in § 157.140, in a DCO Zone, no yard shall be required except as follows:

(1)    The front yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone;

(2)    The side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone;

(3)    The rear yard shall be a minimum of 25 measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone; and



(F)    Height of buildings. In a DCO Zone no building shall exceed 45 feet in height, except as allowed in § 157.140(B).

(G)    Restrictions on use. In a DCO Zone, the following conditions and restrictions shall apply:

(1)    All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except for off-street parking and loading, drive-in windows, island service for motor vehicles, display of merchandise along the outside wall of the building not extending more than four feet from the wall, and outside dining, unless conducted as part of a special event and authorized by the City Council.

(2)    Where there are existing residential dwellings, they and their accessory uses may be maintained, expanded or reconstructed in conformance with the development standards of the R-3 zone.

(3)    Residential uses shall not be allowed within the storefront space on the ground floor of buildings within the DCO Zone.

(H)    Design standard. In a DCO Zone the following design standards shall apply:

(1)    Primary entrances shall be protected from weather by either the addition of an awning, recessed building entry or other method as approved by the Planning Director.

(2)    Lighting shall be provided for building entrances, parking areas and pathways.

(3)    Off-street parking is not allowed between buildings and the street to which they are oriented. Parking and other vehicle areas shall be allowed between alleys and buildings.

(4)    Ground floor windows shall be provided along 30% of the ground floor street facing elevations.

(5)    Any new drive-up/drive-through facilities established after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be oriented toward an alley, driveway, or interior parking area, and not a public street.

(6)    Drive-up/drive-in queuing areas shall be designed so that vehicles do not obstruct a driveway, fire access lane, walkway, or public right-of-way.

(I)    Access. All lots shall abut a public street, other than an alley, for a minimum width of 25 feet.

(J)    Vision clearance. Vision clearance shall be provided as follows: The minimum distance shall be 15 feet at street intersections including an alley or service drive; except that when the angle of intersection between streets is less than 30 degrees, the distance shall be 25 feet.

(K)    Historic buildings. The standards of § 157.144 shall apply.

(L)    Implementing action. The following development shall fall within the scope of this subchapter and shall be required to comply with the requirements identified:

(1)    New residential or commercial development;

(2)    Expansion of single-family or duplex residential development costing in excess of 30% of the assessed value of the improvements on the property. The provisions of subsection (H)(3) of this section shall not apply;

(3)    Reconstruction of a single-family or duplex residential casualty loss costing in excess of 130% of the previously assessed value of the structure itself. The provisions of subsection (H)(3) of this section shall not apply;

(4)    Expansion of multiple-family or commercial development costing in excess of 50% of the assessed value of the improvements on the property;

(5)    Reconstruction of multiple-family; commercial casualty loss in excess of 110% of the previously assessed value of the structure itself; and

(6)    Conversion of an existing building from residential to commercial use.

(M)    Site plan review.

(1)    The applicant shall complete a building permit application as provided by the city and provide a site plan, landscape plan and building elevations. All plans shall be drawn to scale and show the following:

(a)    All existing and proposed structures and their exterior dimensions;

(b)    All streets, alleys and other public right-of-way;

(c)    Existing and proposed utility lines and/or easements;

(d)    Building setbacks;

(e)    Location of utilities and proposed connection routes;

(f)    Off-street parking;

(g)    Curb cut and sidewalk locations and dimensions and drainage plan;

(h)    Landscape plans;

(i)    Screening;

(j)    Lighting;

(k)    Pedestrian amenities, including location of street furnishings;

(l)    Building elevations; and

(m)    Fire flow and similar requirements.

(2)    At the applicant’s request site plan review can occur prior to submittal of a request for building permit.

(3)    Where the applicant’s development site abuts existing curb and gutter, sidewalks in conformance with city standards are required to be constructed to the extent curb and gutter exist at the time of application.

(4)    The applicant shall be required to participate in a future improvement district to construct and dedicate all public facilities, such as water, wastewater, drainage, curb, gutter, sidewalk and street right-of-way adjacent to the development in conformance with city standards and provide easements or deeds to the city for all public facilities. However, where it is determined that delaying the design and construction of any or all facilities is not appropriate and logical, or causes an adverse impact on surrounding properties, the city may require the developer to construct and dedicate all improvements as a condition of development.

(5)    Where it has been determined that the extension of public facilities is required, all costs related to the extension shall be borne by the developer. In addition, any extension of the facilities shall be continued and extended in a logical fashion to the extent of the development site so as to be readily available for adjacent development.

(6)    Where the improvement installed by a developer shall benefit other properties, a mutually agreeable settlement shall be arrived at between the city and the developer prior to installing the improvements. This agreement shall identify the benefiting properties, actual costs to be charged and method of repayment to the developer. Where prior agreement exists for improvements benefiting the subject property, the applicant shall make arrangements with the city for the payment of the improvements prior to issuance of any city permit.

(7)    The developer shall provide proof of review and approval by all affected and/or county agencies, such as the Department of Transportation or County Planning Department.

(N)    Final approval. In the DCO Zone, the standards of § 157.165 shall apply.

(O)    Off-street parking requirements.

(1)    The requirements of § 157.175 shall apply. Surface parking shall not exceed 110% of the minimum parking required when parking is provided on site. Exemptions to the standard can be approved for developments that provide shared parking, valet parking spaces or similarly managed parking accommodations.

(2)    Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with § 157.176.

(3)    Parking credits. Credits may be granted for on-street parking and public parking lot spaces as follows:

(a)    Credit for on-street parking. The amount of required off-street parking may be reduced by one off-street parking space for every on-street parking space located along the block adjacent to the development. On-street parking shall follow the established configuration of existing on-street parking, subject to city standards, except that angled parking may be allowed, as approved by the city. The configuration of the on-street parking and allowable credit toward off-street parking requirements shall be addressed during site plan review. The city shall maintain a written record of credits granted per each use.

(b)    Credit for public parking lot spaces. For the first 5,000 gsf of building area, and for development located between S.E. 4th Street and Highway 395, credit shall be given for public parking lot spaces. The amount of required off-street parking may be reduced by one off-street parking space for every parking space provided in a city public parking lot located within the Downtown Commercial Overlay district.

(c)    The provisions of Ordinance Nos. 587 and 1080 regarding the municipal parking lots shall remain in effect.

(4)    Shared parking. Parking facilities may be shared by users on adjacent parcels if the following standards are met:

(a)    One of the parcels has excess parking spaces, considering the present use of the property; the other parcel lacks sufficient area for required parking spaces;

(b)    The total number of parking spaces meets the standards for the sum of the number of spaces that would be separately required for each use; and

(c)    Legal documentation shall be submitted verifying permanent use of the excess parking area on one lot by patrons of the uses deficient in required parking area.

(5)    Joint use parking. Joint use of parking spaces may occur where two or more separate developments or multiple uses in a development are able to jointly use some or all of the same required parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times. Joint use of parking spaces may be allowed if the following standards are met:



(a)    There shall be no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which the joint use parking is proposed. Future change of use, and continuation of joint use parking agreement shall be approved by the city.

(b)    The joint use parking spaces shall be located no more than 400 feet from a building or use to be served by the joint use.

(c)    The number and location of parking spaces, hours of use and changes in operating hours of uses subject to joint use shall be approved by the city.

(d)    Legal documentation to the satisfaction of the City Attorney shall be submitted verifying the joint use of parking between the separate developments.

(P)    Signs. The provisions of Chapter 155 shall apply except that sandwich "A" board and portable signs shall be allowed. Sandwich board and portable signs shall not exceed 12 square feet on each side, or a total of 24 square feet.

(1)    Sandwich "A" boards and other portable signs are permitted along the outside wall of the building not extending more than four feet from the wall.

(2)    Sandwich boards do not count against the maximum number of signs allowed.

(Ord. 2175, passed 9-26-11) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.043 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL OVERLAY ZONE (NCO).

(A)    Purpose. The purpose of the neighborhood commercial overlay zone is to create a commercial environment which provides a broad range of commercial services to dense residential users within walking distance. Specific goals are as follows:

(1)    Be prepared to take advantage of opportunities for infill, redevelopment, and new development in outlying commercial areas;

(2)    Allow different types of compatible land uses close together to shorten traffic trips and facilitate all modes of transportation such as vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles.

(B)    Uses permitted outright.

(1)    In the NCO zone, all uses and accessory uses permitted outright in the outlying commercial zone (C-2) are allowed.

(2)    Residential uses are permitted on upper stories and on ground floors when not located within storefront space.

(C)    Conditional uses permitted.

(1)    In the NCO zone, the conditional uses and their accessory uses permitted in the outlying commercial zone (C-2) are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of §§ 157.205 through 157.210;

(2)    Mini-storage; and

(3)    Multiple-family dwelling.

(D)    Restrictions on use. In the NCO zone, the following conditions and restrictions shall apply:

(1)    Where there are existing residential dwellings, they and their accessory uses may be maintained, expanded or reconstructed in conformance with the development standards as established in the R-3 zone.

(2)    The outside storage of junk shall be contained entirely within a sight-obscuring fence when adjacent to a residential use of property.

(E)    Setback requirements. In the NCO zone the yards shall be as follows:

(1)    The setback from any street shall be 20 feet. However, if solid ground cover landscaping is provided and maintained, the setback from a street may be reduced to ten feet;

(2)    The side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone; and

(3)    The rear yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet measured from the foundation where abutting a residential zone.

(F)    Height of buildings. In the NCO zone, no building shall exceed a height of 50 feet.

(Ord. 2245, passed 4-24-17)

INDUSTRIAL ZONES


157.055 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (M-1).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In a M-1 zone, only the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    Cabinet, carpenter or woodworking shop;

(2)    Compounding, packaging or storage of cosmetics, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, soap or toiletries, but not including processes involving refining or rendering of fats and oils;

(3)    Dwelling for caretaker or night watchman on the property;

(4)    Freight depot;

(5)    Ice or cold storage plant;

(6)    Kennel;

(7)    Laboratory for research or testing, but not including the testing of combustion engines;

(8)    Laundry, dry cleaning or dyeing establishment;

(9)    Lumber yard, building supply outlet;

(10)    Machinery or equipment sales, services or storage;

(11)    Manufacture, repair or storage of articles from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felts, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious or semiprecious stone or metal, shell, textiles, wax, wire or yarn;

(12)    Manufacture, repair or storage of ceramic products, musical instruments, novelties, rubber or metal stamps, toys, optical goods, engineering, scientific or precision instrument, medical or dental supplies or equipment, electronic supplies or equipment, industrial or business machines, aircraft parts and equipment, luggage, photographic equipment or small pleasure boats;

(13)    Mini-storage;

(14)    Motor vehicle body shop, tire shop or similar repair service;

(15)    Plumbing, heating, electrical or paint contractor’s sales, repairs or storage;

(16)    Private utilities including electric power substations, telephone exchanges, television, radio or microwave transmission facilities;

(17)    Processing, packaging or storage of food or beverages, but not including processes involving distillation, fermentation, slaughtering or rendering of fats and oils;

(18)    Public utilities including wells, water storage tanks and sanitary sewer pump stations;

(19)    Railroad tracks and related facilities;

(20)    Utility lines, station or substation;

(21)    Veterinary care facility;

(22)    Welding, sheet metal or machine shop;

(23)    Wholesale distribution or outlet, including trucking, warehousing and storage.

(B)    Conditional uses permitted. In a M-1 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of §§ 157.205 through 157.210:

(1)    Temporary dwelling unit;

(2)    Fuel oil distribution; and

(3)    Planned unit development.

(C)    Limitations on use. In a M-1 zone, the following conditions and limitations shall apply:

(1)    A use which creates a nuisance because of the noise, smoke, odor, dust or gas is prohibited.

(2)    Materials shall be stored and grounds shall be maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard.

(3)    Service activities, processing and storage on property abutting or facing a residential zone shall be wholly within an enclosed building or screened from the residential zone view by a permanently maintained sight-obscuring fence at least six feet high.

(4)    Points of access from a public street to properties in a M-1 zone shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and avoid directing traffic into residential streets.

(5)    Building entrances or other openings adjacent to or across the street from a residential zone shall be prohibited if they cause glare, excessive noise or otherwise adversely affect land uses in the residential zone.

(D)    Lot size. In a M-1 zone, no minimum lot size shall be identified other than to meet the requirements of this chapter.

(E)    Setback requirements.

(1)    Except as provided in § 157.140, in a M-1 zone no yard shall be required except as follows:

(2)    When abutting a residential zone, all setbacks shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured from the foundation. If a living, solid screen is provided adjacent to the residential zone, the minimum setback may be reduced to 25 feet.

(F)    Height of buildings. In a M-1 zone, within 150 feet of a residential zone, no building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.056 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE (M-2).

(A)    Uses permitted outright. In a M-2 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1)    A use permitted outright in a M-1 zone; and

(2)    Manufacturing, repairing, compounding, fabricating, processing, packing or storage of a use not listed in § 157.055.

(B)    Conditional uses permitted. In a M-2 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of §§ 157.205 through 157.210:

(1)    Temporary dwelling unit;

(2)    Planned unit development; and

(3)    Sand and gravel pits, including related activities such as exploration excavation, rock crushing, asphalt protection and storage, subject to requirements in § 157.149.

(C)    Limitations on use. In a M-2 zone, the following conditions and limitations shall apply:

(1)    A use is prohibited which creates a nuisance because of noise, smoke, odor, dust or gas or which has been declared a nuisance by statute, by action of the municipal court or by a court of competent jurisdiction.

(2)    Wastes and other materials shall be stored and grounds shall be maintained in a manner that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard.

(3)    Where outside storage is used, the use shall have a solid enclosure at least six feet in height.

(D)    Lot size. Lot size requirements for a M-1 zone shall apply in a M-2 zone.

(E)    Setback requirements. Yard requirements for a M-1 zone shall apply in a M-2 zone.

(F)    Height of buildings. Height of building requirements for a M-1 zone shall apply in a M-2 zone.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.057 FAIRGROUNDS OVERLAY.

(A)    Purpose. The fairgrounds overlay zone is intended to provide an area to accommodate the various uses and accessory uses which are associated with a county fairgrounds and regional event center. Uses on the fairgrounds include commercial, industrial and agricultural uses which overlap many zoning designations and cannot be accommodated under one zoning classification.

(B)    Uses permitted outright. In the fairgrounds overlay zone the following uses are permitted outright:

(1)    Agricultural and animal display buildings;

(2)    Amusement enterprise enclosed in a building;

(3)    Amusement enterprise not enclosed in a building;

(4)    Auditorium or exhibition hall;

(5)    Community building;

(6)    Government structure or land use including but not limited to a public park, playground, recreational building, fire station, library or museum;

(7)    Horse arena and other equine buildings;

(8)    Parking lot;

(9)    Professional office or service office;

(10)    Public and private roads;

(11)    Recreational vehicle park subject to the requirements of § 157.147;

(12)    Rodeo grounds or other open air arena; and

(13)    A use permitted outright in the underlying M-1 and/or OS zone.

(C)    Uses permitted conditionally.

(1)    Caretaker’s dwelling conforming to the standards of § 157.042(B)(2).

(D)    Restrictions on use.

(1)    The perimeter of the fairgrounds overlay shall be fenced with a six-foot chain link fence;

(2)    All buildings shall be constructed at least 25 feet from any adjacent private property line;

(3)    Paved parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of §§ 157.175 through 157.179 and shall be adequate to provide parking sufficient for all public assembly buildings on the property. Additional overflow parking for use during the Umatilla County Fair or other large festival may be grass or gravel; provided, that dust control is provided during the event;

(4)    Building heights and lighting restrictions established in Chapter 151 of the Hermiston Code of Ordinances regarding development within the airport clearance areas shall be maintained.

(Ord. 2185, passed 3-26-12)

AIRPORT ZONE (A)


157.070 PERMITTED USES.

In an A zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are allowed outright:

(A)    A use permitted outright in a C-2 zone; and

(B)    A use permitted outright in a M-1 zone.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2128, passed 1-22-07)


157.071 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.

In an A zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the requirements of 157.205 through 157.210:

(A)    A use permitted conditionally in a C-2 zone; and

(B)    A use permitted conditionally in a M-1 zone.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.072 OTHER REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.

(A)    Other requirements. All requirements for limitation on use, signs, minimum lot size and setbacks and maximum height in an A zone shall conform to those in a M-1 zone, contained in § 157.055(C) through (F).

(B)    Additional conditions. All uses in an A zone shall conform to conditions imposed in Chapter 151 of this code adopted as part of the Hermiston Airport Master Plan, which governs development around the Hermiston Airport, so as to minimize interference with the operations of the airport and reduce hazards to the public health, welfare and safety.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)

Cross Reference:

Airport Hazard Zoning, see Chapter 151

OPEN SPACE ZONE (OS)


157.081 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.

In an OS zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted:

(A)    Agriculture.

(B)    Agricultural extension or experimentation station, including all buildings, sheds, greenhouses and other accessory structures necessary to facilitate operations.

(C)    Public park and public recreation facility.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.082 CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.

In an OS zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted subject to the provisions governing conditional uses:

(A)    Boat landing and launch facility.

(B)    Open land recreation facility requiring the use of any structure with greater than 2,000 square feet of floor area.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.083 SPECIAL APPROVAL REQUIRED.

In addition to the building permit requirements of the City of Hermiston, no building permitted in the OS zone located within the 100-year floodplain shall be erected, constructed, established or moved until approval has been obtained. Said approval shall be granted by the city only after it has been determined that the structure is in compliance with federal standards as established within the city’s floodplain ordinance.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999

Cross-reference:

Flood Hazard Prevention, see Chapter 153


157.084 LOT SIZE.

In an OS zone, no minimum lot size shall be prescribed other than that required by this ordinance.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.085 YARD REQUIREMENTS.

In an OS zone, each lot shall have yards of the following sizes:

(A)    The front yard shall not be less than 20 feet.

(B)    The side yard shall not be less than 20 feet.

(C)    The rear yard shall not be less than 25 feet.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999

DEVELOPMENT HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE (DH)


157.100 PURPOSE.

The purpose of the Development Hazard Overlay designation (DH) is to identify areas within the existing and newly annexed portions of the city characterized by development limitations and/or groundwater pollution hazards due to unstable soils as defined in this chapter. This designation applies to areas of restrictive foundation soils and groundwater pollution hazards identified in Figure 12 of the Comprehensive Plan.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.101 DEVELOPMENT CONDITIONS.

In areas contained within the DH overlay, developers must comply to the following conditions in addition to those imposed by the underlying zoning. These include:

(A)    Prior to the development of lots containing cemented hardpan, the city shall require a registered engineer’s assessment of the design and structural techniques needed to mitigate potential hazards. In the event there are inadequate mitigation measures, the city shall prohibit development.

(B)    In the case of an existing or potential groundwater pollution threat, the city shall prohibit the outdoor storage of hazardous chemicals and underground storage of gasoline and diesel fuels.

(C)    Any additional requirements/prohibitions necessary to mitigate groundwater pollution problems shall be developed in conjunction with the department of Environmental Quality and Water Resources.

(D)    At the discretion of the Planning Commission, an applicant whose property is located in the DH overlay area may obtain an exemption from divisions (A) through (C) above if he can demonstrate the proposed development is not constrained by development limitations and/or will not contribute to potential groundwater pollution. To obtain an exemption, the applicant must present documentation to this effect prepared by a registered engineer.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS


157.110 PURPOSE.

(A)    The purpose of a planned unit development is to permit greater flexibility in land use regulations thereby allowing the developer to use a more creative approach in the development of land. Density requirement setbacks and other land use regulations may be adjusted to allow for a more desirable living environment. Preservation of natural features, harmonious variety of uses, the economy of shared services and facilities, and a development more compatible with the surrounding area are a few of the common benefits attained from a planned unit development.

(B)    The PUD approach is expected to result in development that is superior to what could be obtained through ordinary lot-by-lot development. It is not intended to circumvent conventional land use regulations.

(C)    In return for greater flexibility in site development, the PUD introduces some special requirements and standards for design approval. These conditions will be employed to maximize quality of site design. They will not be used to cause undue delays nor unwarranted increase in costs, when compared to more conventional development. The PUD process will not be used as a device to force a decrease in residential density below that otherwise allowed by the Comprehensive Plan and underlying zoning.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.111 OWNERSHIP.

The tract or tracts of land included in a proposed PUD may be in one ownership or control, or the subject of a joint application by owners of all the property included. The holder of a valid written real estate option contract shall be deemed the owner of the land for the purpose of this section. The Planning Commission may require satisfactory evidence of the contract of purchase.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.112 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.

The following general requirements will apply to planned unit developments:

(A)    A planned unit development shall be allowed in all zones except R-1 as a conditional use according to the procedures set forth for those uses. In all residential zones, or comparable zones in the county, minimum site area shall be two acres to qualify for a PUD. For all other zones, the minimum shall be five acres.

(B)    As a condition of approval of a PUD, the Planning Commission may require the following:

(1)    A performance bond or other securities acceptable to the city to insure that a PUD is completed as submitted;

(2)    An economic impact statement if the PUD is of a sufficient size and economic complexity;

(3)    An environmental impact study if the PUD is large enough to have critical impact upon the land and environment;

(4)    Areas for parks or playgrounds, sized according to prevailing statewide and local government standards, shall be permanently reserved within the PUD or provided for off-site;

(5)    Streets be designed and constructed according to city standards and dedicated to the city;

(6)    Easements for the orderly extension, maintenance, repair or replacement of public utilities; and

(7)    Adequate guarantee must be provided to ensure permanent retention of common open space and recreation areas which may be required as conditions of PUD approval. This guarantee may be satisfied by creation of a nonprofit home owners’ association to ensure maintenance of the area, or by development of the space to city specifications and acceptance of it by the city, in which case it would be available for general public use.

(C)    Whenever a planned unit development is subject to Chapter 154 of this code, the procedures and regulations of that chapter shall apply.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.113 PERMITTED USES.

(A)    Residential zones.

(1)    The principal use of the land shall be residential.

(2)    Related commercial uses designed primarily for the service and convenience of the residents of the planned unit development may be allowed by approval of the Planning Commission.

(3)    Community service uses designed for the residents of the planned unit development or for servicing the adjacent area may be allowed by approval of the Planning Commission.

(4)    Accessory buildings and uses.

(5)    Increased residential density tied to specific performance criteria will be encouraged in those areas that are near developed service centers.

(B)    Commercial and industrial zones.

(1)    Uses permitted outright and conditionally in a commercial or industrial zone, whichever applies.

(2)    Community services uses approved by the Planning Commission.

(3)    Other uses as approved by the Planning Commission which are consistent with the Comprehension Plan of the city and the type of PUD.

(4)    Accessory buildings and uses.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.114 DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES.

(A)    Application. A letter of intent to develop a planned unit development along with a conditional use permit application shall be filed with the City Manager. The applicant shall pay application fee as established by resolution of the City Council.

(B)    Stage review. There shall be a three-stage review process when approving a PUD application:

(1)    Pre-preliminary conference (Stage 1);

(2)    Preliminary approval (Stage 2); and

(3)    Final approval (Stage 3).

(C)    Fees. The following fees as provided or otherwise approved by Council resolution shall accompany each stage of review:

(1)    Pre-preliminary conference (no fee).

(2)    Preliminary approval ($100).

(3)    Final approval ($75).

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.115 PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE.

Stage 1 of development consists of the following:

(A)    Before preparing a preliminary plan map and preliminary plan program, the applicant of a proposed planned unit development shall meet with the city staff at a conference scheduled at a time most convenient for both parties. At the conference, the developer shall provide basic information, such as a schematic drawing, showing the general relationship contemplated among all public and private uses and existing physical features, and written statements regarding the source of water supply, method of sewage disposal, dwelling types, lot layout, public and private access, nonresidential uses, and provisions for maintenance of landscaped areas, parks and open spaces. In return, the city staff shall provide the developer applicable standards and regulations.

(B)    If the staff and applicant reach a satisfactory agreement, the applicant may proceed to Stage 2, preliminary approval.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.116 PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.

Stage 2 of the development consists of the following:

(A)    The applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission four copies of the preliminary plan map for the proposed PUD. The plan map shall show the following information:

(1)    Legally described property lines;

(2)    Section lines;

(3)    Existing streets, buildings, watercourses, tree masses, sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and other existing underground facilities.

(4)    Location and size of the nearest water main and sewer outlet;

(5)    Title of the proposed PUD and the name of the developer;

(6)    Ownership of adjoining parcels within 300 feet of the proposed PUD;

(7)    Contours referred to a City Engineer’s bench mark with intervals sufficient to determine the character and topography of the land to be developed;

(8)    North point, scale and date; and

(9)    Location and size of all proposed streets, buildings, sanitary sewer or other sewage disposal facilities, water mains, storm water facilities, sidewalks, parks, open spaces and signs.

(B)    A preliminary plan program or outline of the following shall accompany the preliminary plan map:

(1)    Proposed ownership and maintenance of streets;

(2)    Drafts of appropriate restrictive covenants and drafts of documents providing for the maintenance of any common space, or required dedications or reservations of public open spaces and any dedications of development rights;

(3)    A list of the types of buildings proposed;

(4)    The amount of land area to be devoted to the various types of buildings and a calculation of the average residential density per net acre;

(5)    The nature of all proposed signs;

(6)    All landscaping plans;

(7)    Plans or written statements regarding grades of proposed streets, width and type of pavement, type of sanitary sewer or other sewage disposal facilities and any grading plans; and

(8)    A stage development schedule if the final development plan is to be developed in stages.

(C)    Upon receiving the preliminary plan map and program, the Planning Commission shall review the proposed planned unit development and shall seek to determine that all of the following conditions are met:

(1)    The planned unit development will be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the city. specifically, this includes:

(a)    Information indicating how the housing provided in the PUD relates to Hermiston area housing need indicators (described in Goal 10 of the Comprehensive Plan and periodically updated after that). All PUD proposals may, consistent with the density allowed by underlying zoning, propose housing concepts including townhouses, condominiums owned multifamily units, mixtures of housing types and lot sizes, multiplex construction, manufactured dwellings or other kinds of dwellings manufactured off-site;

(b)    Description of the municipal service and utilities needed at initial and later phases of PUD occupancy, and whether it is consistent with the city’s then current designation of "sewer eligible" areas;

(c)    Indication that the arterial streets required off-site are provided already, or planned and funded by appropriate city or county agencies. sufficient access will be required to meet vehicular movement and storage generated by the proposed development. Continuity with future streets in adjoining developments and dedication of sufficient arterial street right-of-way for the proposed development and other developments generally anticipated in comprehensive plan maps;

(d)    Assurance that if density of the development in the PUD’S initial stages does not warrant public sewer or water connections, that the layout allows for later increases of density to a level that makes connections financially feasible; and

(e)    Deed restrictions to support future assessments to provide services necessary for urban densities of development

(2)    The planned unit development can be developed in harmony with the surrounding area and between uses within the PUD itself. Specifically:

(a)    Height, bulk and density of buildings not radically different from those anticipated on adjacent or facing properties. Exceptions could be made if the PUD were in a transitional area between higher-intensity district and a lower-intensity residential district;

(b)    Preservation of natural and cultural assets within the area; and

(c)    Density bonuses of 15% are granted as an incentive to go through the PUD process. Maximum 5% additional bonuses may be granted by the Planning Commission for each of the following:

1.    Superior design of structure;

2.    Landscaping;

3.    Public open space;

4.    Provision of low cost housing;

5.    Enhancement of public enjoyment of natural or cultural assets on site; and

6.    Solar energy protection.

(3)    The time table for the completion of the PUD is within reason.

(D)    If, in the opinion of the planning staff, the foregoing provisions are satisfied, the PUD proposal shall be processed for a public hearing according to 157.205 through 157.210 of this chapter.

(E)    After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the proposal still conforms to the permit criteria according to this section.

(F)    The Planning Commission may approve or place conditions upon approving the preliminary plan map and preliminary plan program as suggested in 157.112 (C)(2), or any other conditions it deems necessary.

(G)    The Planning Commission may deny the PUD application or return the PUD to the applicant for revisions.

(H)    If the preliminary plan map and preliminary plan program are approved, the applicant may proceed to final approval (Stage 3).

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.117 FINAL APPROVAL.

(A)    Within one year after the approval of the preliminary plan map and preliminary plan program, the applicant shall submit to the city a final plan map and final plan program, for the entire development or when submission in stages has been authorized pursuant to 157.116 (B)(8) for the first stage of development.

(B)    The final plan map and final plan program shall include all information included in the preliminary plan map and program.

(C)    The final plan program shall include all fully drafted, properly executed legal documents for dedication or reservation of public facilities, and for the creation of a nonprofit home owners’ association.

(D)    The Planning Commission shall review the final plan map and program and shall determine whether they conform to all applicable criteria in 157.116 (C) and all major respects with the approved preliminary plan map and program.

(E)    The Planning Commission may approve, approve with condition, or return final plan map for revisions to meet the original conditions of approval to the applicant. The applicant shall resubmit a revised final plan within 30 days of the Planning Commission decision to return the plan to the applicant.

(F)    The decision of the Planning Commission shall become final ten days after the date of the decision, unless appealed to the City Council.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.118 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.

The applicant or any other interested party may initiate an appeal according to 157.231 of this chapter.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.119 CHANGES, MODIFICATIONS AND ADHERENCE.

(A)    Changes and modifications.

(1)    Major changes in the final plan map and final plan program from the preliminary plan map and program shall be considered the same as a new application and shall follow the procedures specified in 157.114.

(2)    Minor changes in the final plan map and final plan program may be approved by the city staff. Minor changes may include minor shifting of the location of proposed streets, public or private ways, utility easements, parks or other open spaces. Minor changes shall not increase the density, boundary lines, use, location or amount of land devoted to specific land uses.

(B)    Modification and adherence.

(1)    All building permits in a PUD shall be issued only on the basis of the approved final plan map and final plan program.

(2)    All public site dedications for the entire site and regulations regarding a home owners’ association, if proposed, shall be properly recorded prior to the issuance of any building permit.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.120 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.

(A)    In the event of a failure to comply with the approved final plan map and final plan program, the Planning Commission may, after notice and hearing, revoke a PUD application.

(B)    The findings of the Planning Commission shall become final ten days after the date of decision unless appealed to the City Council in accordance with 157.231 of this chapter.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)

SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS


157.135 ZONE BOUNDARIES.

Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are lot lines or the centerline of street, alley, railroad right-of-way or the lines extended. Where a zone boundary divides a land parcel under a single ownership into two zones, then the entire parcel shall be zoned for the less restrictive use by the adjustment of the boundaries, provided the boundary adjustment is a distance of less than 20 feet. If the adjustment involves a distance of more than 20 feet, the procedure for a zone change shall be followed.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.136 ACCESSORY USE PROVISIONS; AUTHORIZATION.

(A)    General provisions regarding accessory uses. Accessory uses shall comply with all requirements for the principal use except where specifically modified by this chapter and shall comply with the following limitations:

(1)    Fences, which may be located within yards, shall not exceed three and one-half feet from the grade of the street centerline in the front yard and on corner lots shall not conflict with requirements of a vision clearance area.

(2)    A greenhouse or hothouse may be maintained accessory to a dwelling only if there are no sales.

(3)    A maximum of one accessory dwelling may be constructed in any residential zone on a single lot which already contains a single-family dwelling, subject to the following provisions:

(a)    For the purposes of this subsection, an accessory dwelling shall be defined as an interior, attached, or detached residential structure that is used in connection with, or that is accessory to, a single-family dwelling.

(b)    The unit may be a detached building, in a portion of a detached accessory structure, or a unit attached or interior to the primary dwelling (e.g., an addition or the conversion of an existing floor).

(c)    A detached accessory dwelling shall provide one or more rooms and contain a kitchen and bathroom within the accessory dwelling.

(d)    An accessory dwelling constructed within a portion of the existing primary dwelling or attached to the existing primary dwelling shall be subject to the following design standards:

1.    A separate entrance shall be provided for the accessory dwelling unit.

2.    An accessory dwelling shall provide one or more rooms and contain a kitchen and bathroom within the accessory dwelling.

(e)    All accessory dwellings constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be subject to an accessory dwelling permit and shall pay an accessory dwelling permit fee as set by the City Council.

(f)    All accessory dwellings constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall register with the city’s utility billing services and pay per unit utility rates as set forth for multifamily dwellings. Registration shall be done as part of the accessory dwelling permit process.

(g)    Parking shall be provided subject to the space requirements and design standards of §§ 157.175 through 157.179.

(h)    Accessory dwelling units are subject to the maximum lot coverage, setbacks, and building height requirements of the underlying zone in which they are located. The sum of the gross square footage of the primary dwelling, garage or carport, outbuildings, and accessory dwelling shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage requirements of the city.

(4)    Swimming pools, fish ponds or other decorative pools shall conform with 157.147.

(B)    Authorization of similar uses. The Planning Commission may rule that a use, not specifically listed in the allowed uses of a zone, shall be included among the allowed uses if the use is of the same general type and is similar to the allowed uses. However, this section does not authorize the inclusion of a use in a zone where it is specifically listed in another zone or which is of the same general type and is similar to a use specifically listed in another zone.

(C)    Tents.

(1)    Tents regulated by this section. Tents are permitted only as temporary accessory uses associated with the allowed uses permitted outright and approved conditional uses in all zones except the Open Space (OS) zone, but in no case shall any tent be allowed more than 30 days in a single calendar year when associated with such permitted or conditional use.

(2)    Tents not regulated by this section.

(a)    Tents 400 square feet or smaller in gross floor area.

(b)    Tents used for temporary activities such as, but not limited to, fairs, circuses, recreational activities and seasonal or other temporary sales.

(3)    Other provisions apply. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section and 157.001 and 157.002, other dimensional regulations and building code provisions continue to apply as applicable to tents.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94 Am. Ord. 2109, passed 6-27-05; Am. Ord. 2260, passed 8-13-18) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.137 BUILDING PROJECTIONS.

Cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features and other similar architectural features may project not more than two feet into a required yard or into required open space as established by coverage standards.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.138 MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.

No lot area, yard or other open space or required off-street parking or loading area existing on or after the effective date of this chapter shall be reduced in area, dimension or size below the minimum required by this chapter, nor shall any lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this chapter for one use be used as the lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area requirements for any other use, except as provided in 157.177.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.139 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.

If, at the time of passage of this chapter, a lot or the aggregate of contiguous lots or land parcels held in a single ownership has an area or dimension which does not meet the lot size requirements of the zone in which the property is located, the lot or aggregate holdings may be occupied by any use permitted outright in the zone subject to the other requirements of the zone and providing, if there is an area deficiency, residential use shall be limited to a single-family residence.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.140 EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.

(A)    In the case of buildings, the following exception to the yard requirements is authorized for a lot in any zone: if there are buildings on both abutting lots with yards of less than the required depth for the zone, the yard of the lot need not exceed the average yard of the abutting buildings. If there is a building on one abutting lot with a yard of less than the required depth for the zone, the yard for the lot need not exceed a depth one-half way between the depth of the abutting yard and the required yard depth.

(B)    The following types of structures or structural parts are not subject to the building height limitations of this chapter except in residentially-zoned areas unless otherwise restricted: chimneys, cupolas, tanks, church spires, belfries, domes, derricks, monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers, water towers, elevator shafts, windmills, conveyors and other similar projections.

(C)    Where new radio, radiotelephone, and television transmission facilities and electrical transmission lines in excess of 35 feet in height are proposed, the city will submit notice of proposed construction to the Oregon Department of Aviation as required by its regulations.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2222, passed 11-24-14)


157.141 ACCESS.

All lots shall abut a street other than an alley for a width of at least 25 feet.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.142 VISION CLEARANCE.

Vision clearance shall be provided with the following distance establishing the size of the vision clearance area:

(A)    In a residential zone, the minimum distance shall be 30 feet at street intersections and ten feet for an alley or driveway.

(B)    In all other zones, except the C-1, the minimum distance shall be 15 feet at street intersections including an alley or service drive; except that when the angle of intersection between streets is less than 30 degrees, the distance shall be 25 feet.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.143 UTILITY FACILITIES.

Public and private utility facilities including but not limited to power transmission lines, major trunk pipelines and similar facilities and public and private wells, water storage tanks and treatment facilities, sanitary sewer pump stations and sanitary sewer treatment facilities, electric power substations, telephone exchanges and television, radio or microwave transmission facilities, but excluding underground sewer, water, gas, communication and power distribution lines and similar facilities serving uses located solely within Umatilla County, which are allowed in any zone.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2138, passed 6-25-07)


157.144 HISTORIC BUILDINGS.

(A)    The following buildings have been designated as historic structures worthy of protection:

(1)    Hermiston Irrigation District Building, 204 E. Hurlburt Avenue;

(2)    Carnegie Building, 213 E. Gladys Avenue;

(3)    Skinner Building, 201 E. Main Street;

(4)    Donovan Bland Building, 201 W. Hermiston Avenue; and

(5)    Bliss Building, 106 E. Main Street.

(B)    Special provisions shall apply as follows:

(1)    The city shall add to the list in division (A) above any other building or site determined to have historical, cultural or archaeological value. The city shall request the assistance of the Hermiston Heritage Association and the Oregon State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) to identify and document buildings or sites.

(2)    Prior to undertaking remodeling, rehabilitation or structural alteration which affects the external appearance of a building or site listed in division (A) above, the owner of the building or site or his authorized agent shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit, subject to provisions in 157.205 through 157.210.

(3)    Before approving an application for a permit, the Planning Commission shall determine that the proposed alterations are harmonious with the appearance of the historical building and do not otherwise adversely affect its architectural integrity or historical value. The applicant shall provide sufficient information about the proposed alterations to permit the Commission to render an informed decision.

(4)    Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit as required in 157.162, the city shall provide the Hermiston Heritage Association with a copy of the application and request the association’s recommendation on the matter.

(5)    Prior to granting a permit to demolish a historical structure listed in division (A) above, the Planning Commission shall review the request, taking into consideration the state of repair, and reasonableness of the cost of rehabilitation or repair and the historic value of the property. If the Commission determines that the building cannot be repaired at a reasonable cost, constitutes an immediate danger to the public health or safety or a delay in demolition will pose an undue economic hardship upon the owner and that these factors outweigh the value to the public of preserving the structure, the Commission shall recommend the city issue the demolition permit.

(6)    If preservation of the structure is feasible, the Commission may delay the issuance of the permit for up to 120 days while the owner is informed of state and federal rehabilitation incentives and/or a buyer who is willing to preserve the building can be found. In rendering its decision, the Commission shall seek the recommendation of the Hermiston Heritage Association on the matter. At the end of the 120day period, the Commission shall review the application for a demolition permit. If no reasonable alternative to demolition is available, the Commission shall recommend that the city issue the permit without further delay. If, in the opinion of the Commission, there is a reasonable alternative, the permit shall be denied.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.145 MANUFACTURED DWELLING STANDARDS.

Within all residential zones, manufactured dwellings placed on individual lots outside of a manufactured dwelling park shall meet the following standards:

(A)    The manufactured dwelling shall be multi-sectional (double wide or wider) and enclose a floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet.

(B)    The manufactured dwelling shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled concrete or masonry block foundation and enclosed at the perimeter so that the manufactured dwelling is located not more than 12 inches above grade. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than 12 inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home. If the manufactured dwelling is placed on a basement, the 12inch limitation shall not apply.

(C)    The manufactured dwelling shall have a pitched roof, except that no standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet in height for each 12 feet in width.

(D)    The manufactured dwelling shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the Building Official.

(E)    The manufactured dwelling shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce heat loss to levels equivalent to the performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the state building code as defined in ORS 455.010. Evidence demonstrating that the manufactured dwelling meets "Super Good Cents" energy efficiency standards is deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope certification requirement. Additional manufacturers certification shall not be required.

(F)    The manufactured dwelling shall have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. The city may require an attached or detached garage in lieu of a carport where such is consistent with the predominant construction of immediately surrounding dwellings.

(G)    A manufactured dwelling, if adjacent to any structure listed in 157.144 as an historic structure, shall be treated as a conditional use.

(H)    In addition to the provisions in divisions (A) through (G) of this section, the city may subject a manufactured dwelling and the lot upon which it is sited to any development standard, architectural requirement and minimum size requirement to which a conventional single-family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subject.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.146 MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK STANDARDS.

A manufactured dwelling park can have significant impacts on the surrounding community, therefore, special standards governing development of these uses have been established.

(A)    The minimum area shall be five acres.

(B)    Manufactured dwelling parks shall abut and have direct access to a street.

(C)    Asphalt access drives, 20 feet in width, shall be provided to each manufactured dwelling space, shall be unobstructed, open to traffic and continuous unless provided with adequate turnaround area or cul-de-sac. If the owner or operator permits parking on the access drives, the owner or operator shall construct the access drives at least 30 feet in width. Each park shall have a principal access drive of not less than 36 feet.

(D)    Walkways, not less than three feet in width, shall be provided from each manufactured dwelling space and service building to access drives and along both sides of all access drives.

(E)    Except as required for vision clearance, the outer perimeter of each park shall be improved with one of the following:

(1)    Sight-obscuring fence or wall not less than six feet in height;

(2)    Maintained evergreen landscaping that is at least five feet in depth, will mature within three years, and reach at least five feet in height at maturity; or

(3)    Combination of divisions (1) and (2) above when required by the Commission to blend the proposed development in with that of surrounding property.

(F)    All manufactured dwellings and accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line, except for the front property line which shall be 20 feet, and ten feet from another manufactured dwelling.

(G)    Each manufactured dwelling space shall be a minimum of 30 feet wide and 40 feet long.

(H)    All areas covered by manufactured dwellings and accessory buildings shall be paved with asphalt or concrete, or covered with permanently contained crushed rock.

(I)    All open areas, except as otherwise specified herein, shall be suitably landscaped according to plans and specifications presented to and approved by the Planning Commission. Areas shall be continuously maintained.

(J)    Each manufactured dwelling space shall be improved with one patio of concrete or other suitable impervious material, having a minimum area of 150 square feet.

(K)    A minimum of 200 square feet of recreation area for each manufactured dwelling space shall be provided in one or more locations within the manufactured dwelling park. The minimum size of each required recreation area shall be 5,000 square feet.

(L)    A centralized storage area for boats, campers, camping trailers, and automobiles shall be provided in each manufactured dwelling park. Storage area shall contain a minimum of 160 square feet for each manufactured dwelling space and be enclosed by a sight-obscuring fence.

(M)    Storage structures and carports shall be located not less than six feet from any manufactured dwelling and shall be subject to all of the applicable permits and building codes of the city.

(N)    Mailboxes shall be provided, whether centrally or individually, for each manufactured dwelling space. Three off-street parking spaces shall be provided for all centralized mailbox areas unless on-street parking is provided.

(O)    All utilities, i.e., sewer, water, natural gas, electricity, telephone, and television cable, shall be underground in locations approved by the City Engineer.

(P)    Prior to location of a manufactured dwelling in a manufactured dwelling park, the owner or occupant shall establish to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector that the manufactured dwelling is in a condition that conforms to one of the following construction standards:

(1)    HUD-manufactured dwellings constructed to the minimum standards in effect in Oregon, at the time of construction or Oregon standards in effect at the time entry into the park is to occur; or

(2)    Non-HUD manufactured dwellings shall be in a condition that is not less than the substantial equivalent of any construction standards in effect in Oregon after June 1, 1979. Manufactured dwellings shall be inspected and certified as being substantially equivalent to construction standards in effect in Oregon after June 1, 1979 by the Oregon Building Codes Agency.

(Q)    Recreational vehicles spaces may be provided; however, spaces shall be separated and distinct from the manufactured dwelling park.

(1)    Manufactured dwelling parks providing recreational vehicle spaces shall provide facilities as required by the ORS and Oregon Administrative Rules.

(2)    There shall be a 14foot separation zone completely surrounding the recreational vehicle area separating it from the manufactured dwelling area.

(R)    All manufactured dwellings shall be skirted.

(S)    A minimum of one public pay telephone shall be provided.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.147 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK STANDARDS.

(A)    This section provides specific uniform standards for recreational vehicle parks which are permitted in R-4 Zones as a conditional use and in addition to any conditions of approval which may be imposed by the Planning Commission under 157.205 et seq. in addition to the normal standards of C-2 Zones where they are allowed as an outright use.

(B)    A recreational vehicle park shall conform to state regulations and the following standards and requirements:

(1)    The minimum area for a recreational vehicle park shall be three acres.

(2)    The required site plan shall reflect the standards of this section and shall include the plot plan requirements of the State Health Division with respect to water supply, sewage disposal, fire hydrants, sanitary facilities, building location, street layout and park design.

(3)    Evidence shall be provided that the park will be eligible for a certificate of sanitation as required by state law.

(4)    A recreational vehicle space shall have an area of not less than 700 square feet exclusive of driveways and common areas.

(5)    Roadways shall have a minimum width of 30 feet or a minimum width of 20 feet where parking is not permitted and an equal amount of off-road parking is provided. Roadways shall be designed and paved in accordance with state statutes.

(6)    Each RV space shall have at least one 10 by 20 foot parking space exclusive of the RV itself. Parking and driveway areas shall be paved.

(7)    Outdoor lighting shall be provided. Lighting shall be oriented to prevent direct illumination onto abutting property.

(8)    The park shall be screened on all sides by a sight-obscuring planting screen, fence or combination thereof. The park owner shall be responsible for its permanent maintenance.

(9)    The park shall provide piped potable water to accommodate not less than 75% of the spaces. One waste disposal dump station shall be provided for each 100 sites, or part thereof. All sewer and water lines shall be first approved by the City Engineer.

(10)    Sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with state standards. Sanitary sewer shall be provided to not less than 75% of the spaces.

(11)    Trash receptacles shall be provided at a rate of 30 gallons of refuse capacity for each two spaces or equivalent.

(12)    All plumbing facilities shall be inspected and approved by the city Building Department.

(13)    Each RV space shall be provided with electrical service.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.148 SWIMMING POOLS, FISH PONDS AND THE LIKE.

(A)    Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool or other outside body of water designed or used for swimming, dipping or immersion purposes having a depth of more than 18 inches shall maintain an enclosure consisting of a fence or wall which shall discourage children from climbing and is acceptable to the Building Inspector.

(B)    All gates or doors opening through the enclosure shall be equipped with self-enclosing and self-latching devices installed at least 40 inches above the ground or base, designed to help and capable of keeping the door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the enclosure required need not be so equipped.

(C)    No swimming pool shall be constructed without first obtaining a building permit. No building permit shall be issued until the plans are filed with the Building Inspector’s office, and no pool shall be used until a final inspection is made by the Building Inspector after its construction is completed.

(D)    Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, on which there is a fish pond or other decorative pool having a depth of 18 inches or more, shall construct and maintain an acceptable enclosure and securely close off or block any and all entrances thereto.

(E)    An acceptable enclosure shall be one of the following:

(1)    A fence completely surrounding the fish pond or decorative pool; or

(2)    A wire across or cover of sufficient strength to hold a weight of at least 75 pounds and installed not more than six inches below the surface of the water at all times.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.149 SAND AND GRAVEL PITS.

(A)    Because a sand and gravel pit can have significant adverse impacts on surrounding properties, particularly those devoted to residential uses, the following special standards governing extraction activities have been established:

(1)    Minimum setbacks: 25 feet from any property line except those abutting a residential zone when the minimum setback shall be 100 feet;

(2)    Extracting and processing operations shall be screened in such a manner that they are not readily visible from a public street or areas zoned or planned for residential development. The required screen shall be at least six feet in height and may consist of one or a combination of the following types:

(a)    Walls. A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, tile, or similar type of solid masonry material a minimum of four inches thick.

(b)    Berms. A berm shall be constructed of earthen materials, and it shall be landscaped.

(c)    Fences, solid. A solid fence shall be constructed of wood and shall form an opaque screen.

(d)    Fences, open. An open-weave or mesh-type fence, when not used in combination with a berm, shall be combined with plant materials to form an opaque screen.

(3)    Access to a sand and gravel pit shall be limited to a major arterial. Under no circumstances shall truck traffic associated with extraction activities be routed through residential neighborhoods.

(B)    To obtain a conditional use permit to operate a sand and gravel pit, the operator or his authorized agent shall submit three copies of the following:

(1)    The name, address, and signature of property owners and applicant;

(2)    A written legal description or record summary of the property; and

(3)    A site plan prepared by a registered mining or civil engineer or registered geologist containing the following:

(a)    North point, scale, and date;

(b)    Extent of the area to be excavated;

(c)    Location, width, and grade of all easements or rights-of-way on or abutting the property;

(d)    Location of all structures on the property;

(e)    Location of all areas on the property subject to inundation or flood hazard, and the location, width, and directions of the flow of all watercourses and flood control channels that may be affected by the excavation;

(f)    Bench marks;

(g)    Existing elevations using contours no greater than 100 feet. This requirement can be modified by the city on applications for quarry excavations, if the size of the site and uniformity of the grade is such that this information is not necessary in the review process of the application;

(h)    Typical cross-sections, showing the extent of overburden, extent of sand and gravel deposits, and the water table;

(i)    Processing and storage areas;

(j)    Proposed fencing, gates, parking and signs;

(k)    Ingress-egress roads, plus on-site roads and proposed surface treatment and means to limit dust;

(l)    A map showing access routes between the property and the nearest arterial road; and

(m)    Areas to be used for ponding.

(4)    An operational statement in which applicant addresses how potentially adverse impacts associated with pits operation will be mitigated, including a description of the following:

(a)    The approximate date of commencement of the excavation and the duration of the operation;

(b)    Proposed hours and days of the operation;

(c)    Estimated type and volume of the excavation;

(d)    Method of extracting and processing, including the disposition and overburden of top soils;

(e)    Equipment proposed to be used in the operation of the excavation;

(f)    Operating practices proposed to be used to minimize noise, dust, air contaminants, and vibration; and

(g)    Methods to prevent pollution of surface or underground water.

(5)    Reclamation plan and support documentation submitted to the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI) in compliance to ORS 517.750 through 517.900, and documentation of DOGAMI’s approval of the plan.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.9990


157.150 TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS, STANDARDS, AND PROCEDURES.

(A)    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards and procedures to implement provisions of the State Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660, Division 12) and local, regional, and state transportation plans.

(B)    Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all development and subdivisions subject to the Development Standards of 157.160 et seq.

(C)    Notice and coordinated review. If a proposed development or subdivision is within 200 feet of a state highway, or an arterial or collector street, notice of the proposal shall be provided to the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) and Umatilla County. Notice will help identify agency standards and provide an opportunity for agency input and coordinated review of transportation impacts.

(D)    Zone changes. In addition to the zone change approval criteria set forth in 157.226(E), all zone changes shall conform to the adopted Transportation System Plan (TSP). Proposed zone changes shall not substantially impact the functional classification or operation of transportation facilities. To ensure proper review and mitigation, a traffic impact study may be required for proposals that may impact transportation facilities.

(E)    Traffic impact study. The applicant for a zone change, or a development or subdivision subject to the Development Standards of 157.160 et seq., shall submit a traffic impact study when the proposal affects a transportation facility if it:

(1)    Changes the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility;

(2)    Changes standards implementing a functional classification system;

(3)    Allows types or levels of land use that would result in levels of traffic or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of a transportation facility; or

(4)    Would reduce the level of service of the facility below the minimum acceptable level identified in the Transportation System Plan.

(F)    Transportation projects. The following transportation projects are permitted outright in all zones in the city:

(1)    Normal operation, maintenance, repair, and preservation activities associated with transportation facilities.

(2)    Installation of culverts, pathways, fencing, guardrails, lighting, and similar types of improvements that take place within the public right-of-way.

(3)    Landscaping as part of a transportation facility.

(4)    Acquisition of right-of-way for public roads, highways, and other transportation projects identified in the TSP.

(5)    Transportation projects specifically identified in the TSP.

(6)    Emergency measures as necessary for the safety and protection of property.

(G)    Access management. The following access management provisions shall apply to all development and subdivisions subject to the Development Standards of § 157.160 et seq.:

(1)    Development shall preserve the flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, functional classification, and level of services. Access management policies set forth in the city TSP and the Oregon Highway Plan will apply to any proposals for new access or change of existing access.

(2)    Residential driveways shall be located to optimize intersection operation and, where possible, to access off the street with the lowest functional classification. For example, if a house is located on the corner of a local street and a minor collector, the driveway shall access from the local street as long as it can be located a sufficient distance from the intersection.

(3)    Properties that front on collector or arterial streets are encouraged to share an access with neighboring properties.

(4)    Access to state highways is regulated by the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) as described in the Oregon Highway Plan. Umatilla County regulates access to county roads.

(5)    A system of joint use driveways, sidewalks, and cross access easements shall be established for commercial and office developments wherever feasible and shall incorporate the following:

(a)    A design speed of ten m.p.h. and a maximum width of 20 feet to accommodate two-way travel aisles for automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles.

(b)    A unified access and circulation plan for coordinated or shared parking areas.

(6)    Pursuant to subsection (5) of this section, property owners shall record the following documents with the Umatilla County Recorder:

(a)    An easement allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways, sidewalks, and cross access or service drive;

(b)    A joint maintenance agreement defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.

(7)    The Planning Director or the Planning Commission may modify or waive the requirements of subsections (5) and (6) of this section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.

(H)    Street standards. Standards for streets, sidewalks, bike lanes, planting strips and right-of-way widths are adopted in the TSP and incorporated into this section by reference:

Table 1: Urban Arterial Cross Sections

Table 2: Urban Collector Cross Sections

Table 3: Urban Local Street Cross Sections

Table 4: Rural Arterial/Collector/Local Road Cross Sections

(I)    Right-of-way dedication and improvement. Right-of-way shall be dedicated as part of the development approval process. Improvements shall take place consistent with adopted street standards concurrent with the development or under a development agreement approved by the City Planning Commission or City Council.

(J)    Bike lanes and bikeways. Bike lanes and bikeways shall be provided in accordance with the adopted TSP. Except as amended or altered by the TSP, bike lanes shall be provided along collector and arterial streets. Bike lanes and bikeways shall be constructed consistent with ODOT bicycle plan standards.

(K)    Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of public streets, consistent with the standards of the TSP. Options are provided for curbside or setback sidewalks.

(L)    Internal connections and bicycle parking.

(1)    Internal pedestrian circulation shall be provided within new commercial, office, institutional and multifamily residential developments through the clustering of buildings, construction of hard surface walkways, landscaping, or similar techniques.

(2)    Internal pedestrian systems shall connect with external existing or planned systems. Walkways shall be as direct as possible and shall limit out-of-direction travel. Walkways shall be paved with a hard surface material and shall be no less than five feet in width. The walkways shall be separated from parking areas and internal driveways using curbing, landscaping, or distinctive paving material.

(3)    Opportunities for at least one pedestrian walkway should be provided between adjacent commercial, office, and institutional development.

(4)    Bicycle parking shall be provided for new commercial, office, institutional, and multifamily developments with more than 15 off-street parking spaces. Bicycle parking spaces must be a minimum of six feet in length, two feet in width, and have an overhead clearance of six feet. Bicycle parking spaces should be located as near as possible to building entrances used by automobile occupants.

(Ord. 2003, passed 12-13-99)


157.151 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.

(A)    Tents. Tents shall not be allowed to accommodate a use permitted outright or an approved conditional use in any zone except the Open Space (OS) zone. Tents smaller than 400 square feet in gross floor area and all tents used for temporary activities, such as but not limited to, fairs, circuses, recreational activities and seasonal or other temporary sales are not regulated by this provision.

(B)    Marijuana related activities. The following activities shall be prohibited activities in the R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, DCO, M-1, and M-2 zones:

(1)    Marijuana processing sites;

(2)    Medical marijuana dispensaries registered under ORS 475.314;

(3)    Marijuana producers licensed under Section 19, Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015;

(4)    Marijuana processors licensed under Section 20, Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015;

(5)    Marijuana wholesalers licensed under Section 21, Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015;

(6)    Marijuana retailers licensed under Section 22, Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015; or

(7)    Any combination of the entities described in this section.

(Ord. 2109, passed 6-27-05; Am. Ord. 2234, passed 11-23-15) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.152 COMMON WALL HOUSING.

(A)    Common wall, attached single-family housing shall be allowed in the R-2, R-3, R-4 and RR zones. Attached single-family housing shall not be allowed in the R-1 zone.

(B)    Where common wall housing is proposed, the minimum lot area shall be calculated using the density standards of the underlying zone for the number of units. At no time may there be more common wall units than would be allowed for traditional single lot multi-family housing.

(C)    There shall be no setback for attached units where abutting a common wall. The sideyard setback on each end of a common housing block shall be the same as that in the underlying zone.

(D)    Front and rear setbacks shall be the same as those in the underlying zone.

(E)    Lot coverage requirements shall be calculated for the aggregate of all common wall attached units and shall be the same as the coverage requirement in the underlying zone.

(F)    Where common wall dwellings abut a lot line, all provisions of the building code for zero lot line housing shall apply.

(G)    Where common wall dwellings are proposed, each dwelling shall be serviced by an individual water meter and sewer connection. Group metering and connections are not allowed.

(H)    All units with a common wall must be constructed concurrently and be under the same ownership at the time of initial construction.

(I)    Common walls must follow the property line and have no openings.

(Ord. 2180, passed 7-25-11)

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


157.160 DEVELOPMENT POLICY.

The expressed purpose of this section is to assure equal and fair treatment to all individuals seeking to develop within the planning area of the city. This subchapter shall govern the development of property or structures within the planning area which are exempt from the subdivision requirements or are developed within subdivided property. The policies of the city are as follows:

(A)    To present adequate information with each development to assure zoning regulatory standards are upheld, coordinate traffic flow and street patterns and assure existing public and private utilities are not damaged or infringed upon by development;

(B)    To assure reasonable development standards are achieved to promote the development of the city, while protecting the tax base and tax burden of all residents in the community;

(C)    To foster and promote the logical extension of public improvements in an economical manner over a long term; and

(D)    To empower the conditioning of the right to build or change uses of property with requirements to construct necessary public improvements.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.161 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

DEVELOPMENT. The conversion or change in character of occupancy or use of a building which would place the structure in a different building group as defined in the Uniform Building Code; the erection of a new structure; the demolishing of existing buildings for the conversion of property to a differing use; the creation of gasoline pumps, drive-up windows, traffic islands or similar alterations which channelize, alter or increase the traffic volume or pattern on adjacent roadways. The term Development for purposes of this chapter shall not mean interior remodeling, repairs or maintenance of improvements to any existing structure which does not increase the volume of the structure, specifically exempted under this chapter are building facades, roof or exterior wall repair or replacement, heating, ventilating or electrical alterations, or activities similar in character.

DEVELOPMENT SITE. An area consisting of a parcel or tract of land specifically identified by a proponent as the land to be altered or developed. All required area to meet parking standards and similar requirements for a particular development shall be included in the term; however, the total property ownership of the proponent will not be considered in the site if it is not necessary to the development.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.162 ISSUANCE.

No building permit may be issued for any development within the city unless it has met the terms of this section.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.163 IMPLEMENTING ACTION.

The following development shall fall within the scope of this subchapter and shall be required to comply with the requirements identified herein:

(A)    New residential, commercial, industrial or utility facility development;

(B)    Expansion of single-family or duplex residential development costing in excess of 30% of the assessed value of the improvements on the property;

(C)    Reconstruction of a single-family or duplex residential casualty loss costing in excess of 130% of the previously assessed value of the structure itself;

(D)    Expansion of multiple-family, commercial or industrial development costing in excess of 10% of the assessed value of the improvements on the property;

(E)    Reconstruction of multiple-family, commercial or industrial casualty loss in excess of 110% of the previously assessed value of the structure itself; and

(F)    Change of occupancies.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2138, passed 6-25-07)


157.164 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.

The following requirements shall pertain to all development falling under the categories identified in 157.163 above:

(A)    The applicant shall complete a building permit application as provided by the city and a site plan. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and show the following:

(1)    All existing and proposed structures and their exterior dimensions;

(2)    All streets, alleys and other public right-of-way;

(3)    Existing and proposed utility lines and/or easements;

(4)    Building setbacks;

(5)    Location of utilities and proposed connection routes;

(6)    Off-street parking;

(7)    Curb cut and sidewalk locations and dimensions and drainage plan.

(B)    When required in a conditional use permit or in a major development, the city may require the applicant to supply landscape plans, screening, lighting, fire flow and similar requirements.

(C)    Where the applicant’s development site abuts existing curb and gutter, sidewalks in conformance with city standards are required to be constructed to the extent curb and gutter exist at the time of application.

(D)    (1)    The applicant shall be required to participate in a future improvement district to construct and dedicate all public facilities, such as water, wastewater, drainage, curb, gutter, sidewalk and street right-of-way adjacent to the development in conformance with city standards and provide easements or deeds to the city for all public facilities.

(2)    However, where it is determined that delaying the design and construction of any or all facilities is not appropriate and logical, or causes an adverse impact on surrounding properties, the city may require the developer to construct and dedicate all improvements as a condition of development.

(E)    Where it has been determined that the extension of public facilities is required, all costs related to the extension shall be borne by the developer. In addition, any extension of the facilities shall be continued and extended in a logical fashion to the extent of the development site so as to be readily available for adjacent development.

(F)    Where the improvement installed by a developer shall benefit other properties, a mutually agreeable settlement shall be arrived at between the city and the developer prior to installing the improvements. This agreement shall identify the benefitting properties, actual costs to be charged and method of repayment to the developer. Where prior agreement exists for improvements benefiting the subject property, the applicant shall make arrangements with the city for the payment of the improvements prior to issuance of any city permit.

(G)    The developer shall provide proof of review and approval by all affected and/or county agencies, such as the Department of Transportation or County Planning Department.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.165 FINAL APPROVAL.

No final approval or certificate of occupancy will be issued by the city until a time as the applicant has complied with all requirements and shall not be issued if there is any major variance from the site plan.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.166 LIMITED LAND USE DECISIONS.

All uses permitted outright by this chapter and subject to 157.160 through 157.165 shall be processed as limited land use decisions as defined in ORC 197.015(13). The approval process shall be as provided in ORS 197.195(1) - (5). The Hermiston Comprehensive Plan shall not be an approval standard for a limited land use decision. Approval shall be by the Planner following notice of the application and an opportunity to comment as required by ORS 197.763. Appeals of the Planner’s decision shall be to the City Council as provided for in ORD 197.195(5), except that such appeals shall be on the record and shall follow the procedures in ORS 197.763.

(Ord. 2138, passed 6-25-07)

OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING


157.175 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

(A)    At the time of erection of a new structure, or at the time of enlargement or change in use of an existing structure within any zone in the city, excepting those properties that have been assessed for public off-street parking facilities, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter unless greater requirements are otherwise established.

(B)    If parking space has been provided in connection with an existing use, the parking space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less than is required by this section. Where square feet are specified, the area measured shall be the gross floor area of the functional use of the building but shall exclude space devoted to off-street parking or loading. Where employees are specified, persons counted shall be those working on the premises, including proprietors, during the largest shift at peak season. Fractional space requirements shall be counted as a whole space.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.176 USES AND SPACES.

	Uses	Standard Number of Spaces

	Residential

	One and two family dwellings	Two spaces per dwelling unit, one of which may be located within any required yard

	Multi-family dwellings	Two spaces per dwelling unit with three or more bedrooms and 1.5 spaces per unit with less than three bedrooms

	Bed and breakfast, boarding, lodging or rooming house	Spaces equal to 80% of the number of guest accommodations plus one additional space for the owner or manager

	Commercial Residential

	Hotel	1.25 spaces per guest room

	Motel	One space per guest room or suite plus one additional space for the owner or manager

	Club, lodge	Spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses being conducted such as hotel, restaurant, auditorium, etc.

	Institutional

	Welfare or correctional institution	One space per five beds for patients or inmates

	Nursing home	One space per two beds for patients or residents

	Hospital	Spaces equal to 1.5 times the number of beds

	Place of Public Assembly

	Church	One space per four seats or eight feet of bench length in the main auditorium

	Library, reading room	One space per 400 square feet of floor area plus one space per two employees

	Day care, preschool	1.5 spaces per teacher

	Kindergarten	Two spaces per teacher

	Elementary or junior high school	1.5 spaces per classroom or one space per four seats or eight feet of bench length in the auditorium or assembly room, whichever is greater

	High school	1.5 spaces per classroom plus one space for each six students or one space per four seats or eight feet of bench length in the main auditorium, whichever is greater

	College, commercial school for adults	One space per five seats in classrooms

	Other auditorium, meeting room	One space per four seats or eight feet of bench length

	Physically handicapped	All public assembly parking lots shall provide one space for each 50 parking spaces or fractions thereof and shall be accessible and approximate to the entrance of the facility

	Commercial Amusement

	Stadium, arena, theater	One space per four seats or eight feet of bench space

	Bowling alley	Five spaces per alley plus one space per two employees

	Dance hall	One space per 100 square feet of skating rink or floor area plus

	Commercial

	Retail store	One space per 200 square feet of floor area

	Service or repair shop, retail store handling exclusively bulky merchandise such as automobiles and furniture	One space per 600 square feet of floor area

	Bank, office (except medical and dental)	One space per 333 square feet of floor area

	Medical and dental	One space per 300 square feet of floor area

	Eating or drinking establishment	One space per 100 square feet of floor area

	Mortuaries	One space per four seats or eight feet of bench length in chapels

	Industrial

	Storage warehouse, manufacturing establishment, rail or trucking freight terminal or wholesale establishment	One space per 1,000 square feet

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.177 OFF-STREET LOADING.

(A)    Passengers. A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children shall be located on the site of any school having a capacity greater than 25 students.

(B)    Merchandise, materials or supplies.

(1)    Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered which receive and distribute material or merchandise shall provide and maintain off-street loading berths in sufficient numbers and size to adequately handle the needs of the particular use. If loading space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use, the loading space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less space than is required to adequately handle the needs of the particular use.

(2)    Off-street parking areas used to fulfill the requirements of this subchapter shall not be used for loading and unloading operations except during periods of the day when not required to take care of parking needs.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.178 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.

(A)    Obligations and violations.

(1)    The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading spaces are continuous obligations of the property owner. No permit shall be issued until plans are presented that show property that is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space. The subsequent use of property for which the permit is issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the amount of parking and loading space required by this subchapter.

(2)    Use of property in violation hereof shall be a violation of this subchapter. Should the owner or occupant of a lot or building change the use to which the lot or building is put, thereby increasing off-street parking or loading requirements, it shall be unlawful and in violation of this subchapter to begin or maintain the altered use until the required increase in off-street parking or loading is provided.

(B)    Additional requirements not listed. Requirements for types of buildings and uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the Planning Commission, based upon the requirements of comparable uses listed.

(C)    Sum of requirements. In the event several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land concurrently, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of all uses computed individually.

(D)    Joint parking and loading spaces. Owners of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land may agree to utilize jointly the same parking and loading spaces when the hours of operation do not overlap, provided that satisfactory legal evidence is presented to the city in the form of deeds, leases or contracts to establish the joint use.

(E)    Location of spaces. Off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with the building. However, non-residential required parking spaces may be located not farther than 500 feet from the building or use they are required to serve, measured in a straight line from the building.

(F)    Storage of vehicles and material prohibited. Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only, and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the business or use.

(G)    Vision clearance problems. Off-street parking of any vehicle, watercraft or parts designed to be affixed thereto, which creates a vision clearance problem or potential safety hazard, shall not be allowed in any required yard.

(H)    Plan submission. Plans shall be submitted as provided in 157.232.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.179 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.

(A)    Hard surfaces required; maintenance. Areas used for standing and maneuvering of vehicles shall have a hard surface and be maintained adequately for all-weather use and so drained as to avoid flow of water across a property line.

(B)    Minimal resident disturbance. Except for parking to serve single or duplex residential uses, parking and loading areas adjacent to or within residential zones or adjacent to residential uses shall be designed to minimize disturbance of residents by the erection between the uses of a sight-obscuring fence of not less than five or more than six feet in height except where vision clearance is required.

(C)    Extension beyond property line prohibited. Parking spaces within a parking lot shall be designed and constructed so that no portion of a parked vehicle, including an opened door, will extend beyond the property line.

(D)    Glare from lighting prohibited. Artificial lighting which may be provided shall not create or reflect substantial glare in a residential zone or on any adjacent dwelling.

(E)    Access aisles. Access aisles shall be of sufficient width for all vehicle turning and maneuvering.

(F)    Driveways required. All parking spaces, except single-family and duplex residential, shall be served by a driveway so that no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street other than an alley will be required.

(G)    Safety for traffic and pedestrians required.

(1)    Off-street parking areas. Service drives to off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic access and egress, and maximum safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site. The number of service drives shall be limited to the minimum that will allow the property to accommodate and service the traffic to be anticipated. Service drives shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined through use of rails, fences, walls or other barriers or markers on frontage not occupied by service drives.

(2)    Minimum vision clearance area. Service drives shall have a minimum vision clearance area formed by the intersection of the driveway center-line, the street right-of-way line and a straight line joining the lines through points of ten feet from their intersection.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999

NONCONFORMING USES


157.190 CONTINUATION OF USE.

(A)    Except as otherwise provided, the use of a building, structure, premises or land lawfully existing at the time of the effective date of this chapter or at the time of a change in the official zoning maps may be continued and maintained in reasonable repair, although the use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter.

(B)    However, any junkyard not in an M-1 or M-2 Industrial Zone as defined shall be enclosed by a sight-obscuring fence of at least six feet in height within one year following adoption of this chapter. The fence shall be a wire fence with slats, wood pickets not exceeding one inch in thickness, or masonry, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. All required sight-obscuring fences shall be maintained throughout the life of the land use.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.191 VESTED RIGHTS.

Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a structure on which construction has physically, lawfully and substantially commenced prior to the adoption of this chapter, provided the structure is completed within two years from the issuance of the permit.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.192 ALTERATION OF USE OR STRUCTURE.

(A)    Definition. As used in this section, ALTERATION of a nonconforming use or structure includes:

(1)    A change in the use of no greater adverse impact to the neighborhood; and/or

(2)    A change in the structure or physical improvements of no greater adverse impact to the neighborhood.

(B)    Minor alteration. A proposal for the alteration of 10% or less of the gross building volume of a nonconforming use or structure may be approved by the city administration as a minor variance to the provisions of this chapter.

(C)    Major alteration. A proposal for the alteration greater than 10% of the gross building volume of a nonconforming use or structure may be approved by the Planning Commission subject to the provisions for conditional use permits.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.193 RESTORATION OF USE OR STRUCTURE.

The city administration may approve, as a minor variance, the restoration, reconstruction, or replacement of a nonconforming use or structure which is damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy to an extent greater than 60% of the replacement value using new materials provided that the restoration is commenced within a period of one year and is diligently prosecuted to completion.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.194 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE.

If a nonconforming use involving a structure or property is discontinued from active use for a period of one year, any subsequent use of the property or structure shall be a conforming use, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission through the conditional use process.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.195 CRITERIA TO GRANT OR DENY.

When reviewing any request to alter or restore a nonconforming use, it shall be determined that all of the following are found to exist:

(A)    The nature and character of the proposed use are substantially the same;

(B)    There is no material difference in the quality, character or degree of use; and

(C)    The proposed use will not prove materially adverse to surrounding properties.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.196 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND LOCAL CODES.

The granting of any approval shall not be deemed as providing any exception to all other state and local codes such as, but not limited to, fire and life safety, building or health codes.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999

CONDITIONAL USES


157.205 AUTHORITY TO GRANT OR DENY.

(A)    Conditional uses are those uses which may be appropriate, desirable, convenient or necessary in the district in which they are allowed, but which by reason of their height or bulk or the creation of traffic hazards or parking problems or other adverse conditions may be injurious to the public safety, welfare, comfort and convenience unless appropriate conditions are imposed. Uses designated in this chapter as conditional uses may be permitted, enlarged or otherwise altered upon authorization by the Planning Commission in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this subchapter and 157.229. In the case of a use existing prior to the effective date of this chapter and which is classified in this chapter as a conditional use, any change in use or in lot area or any alteration of the structure shall conform with the requirements dealing with conditional uses.

(B)    In permitting a conditional use or the modification of an existing conditional use, the city may impose, in addition to those standards and requirements expressly specified by this chapter, any additional conditions which the city considers necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or the city as a whole. These conditions may include:

(1)    Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions;

(2)    Limiting the height of buildings;

(3)    Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;

(4)    Increasing the street width;

(5)    Increasing the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required;

(6)    Limiting the number, size and location of signs;

(7)    Requiring screening and landscaping to protect adjacent property; and

(8)    Recording conditions on the property with the County Clerk.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.206 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.

A property owner or his authorized agent may initiate a request for a conditional use or the modification of an existing conditional use by filing an application with the city using forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development. The Planning Commission may require other drawings or information necessary to understand the proposed use and its relationship to surrounding properties. The applicant shall pay a fee as established by the City Council at the time the application is filed.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.207 PUBLIC HEARING; RECESS.

(A)    Before the Planning Commission may act on a request for a conditional use, it shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in 157.229.

(B)    The Planning Commission may recess a hearing on a request for a conditional use in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice on other property owners or persons who it decides may be interested in the request. Upon recessing for this purpose, the Commission shall announce the time and date when the hearing will be resumed.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.208 APPROVAL CRITERIA.

Based on the testimony provided at the hearing, the Planning Commission shall develop findings of fact to justify either approving or denying a conditional use permit. The Planning Commission may approve the requests when it is determined the request is in conformance with all the following requirements or can be made to conform through the impositions of conditions:

(A)    The proposal is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Code.

(B)    The property is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed use, together with all other zoning requirements and any additional conditions imposed by the Planning Commission.

(C)    Public facilities are of adequate size and quality to serve the proposed use.

(D)    The proposed use will prove reasonably compatible with surrounding properties.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.209 NOTIFICATION OF ACTION.

Within five days after a decision has been rendered, the city shall provide the parties to the hearings with written notice of the city’s action on the request for a conditional use.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.210 STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.

A conditional use shall comply with the standards of the zone in which it is located except as these standards may have been modified in authorizing the conditional use or as otherwise provided as follows:

(A)    Setback. In a residential zone, front, side and rear yards shall be at least two-thirds the height of the principal structure. In any zone, additional yard requirements may be imposed.

(B)    Height exception. A church or governmental building may be built to exceed the height limitations of the zone in which it is located to a maximum height of 50 feet if the total floor area of the building does not exceed one and a half times the area of the site and if the yard dimensions in each case are equal to at least two-thirds of the height of the principal structure.

(C)    Limitation on access to property and openings to buildings. The city may limit or prohibit vehicle access from a conditional use to a residential street, and it may limit building openings within 50 feet of a residential property in an agricultural or residential zone if the openings will cause glare or excessive noise or will otherwise adversely affect adjacent residential property.

(D)    Schools.

(1)    Nursery schools shall provide and maintain at least enough open space for children that meets the requirements for certified child care centers by the Early Learning Division of the Oregon Department of Education (see OAR 414-300-0150). A sight-obscuring fence at least four feet but not more than six feet high shall separate the play area from abutting lots.

(2)    Primary schools shall provide one acre of site area for each 90 pupils or one acre for every three classrooms, whichever is greater.

(3)    Elementary schools shall provide one acre of site area for each 75 pupils or one acre for every 2 1/2 classrooms, whichever is greater.

(E)    Utility substation or pumping substation. In the case of a utility substation or pumping substation, the city may waive the minimum lot size requirement only if it is determined that the waiver will not have a detrimental effect on adjacent property.

(F)    Master plan approval.

(1)    The following uses may be subject to an approved master plan:

(a)    Public, parochial or private schools;

(b)    Public or private nonprofit social service, community or recreational facilities;

(c)    Governmental structures such as city offices, fire station, library, post office and public parks; and

(d)    Hospitals.

(2)    A master plan provides for long range development of an applicant’s property. If a use listed above has received approval for a master plan by the Planning Commission, any expansion shall be processed in accordance with §§ 157.205 through 157.209 of this chapter.

(3)    The procedure for approval of a master plan shall be the same as a quasi-judicial conditional use process in §§ 157.207 through 157.209 of this chapter.

(4)    Once a master plan has been approved, a building permit may be approved administratively by city staff, provided the proposed permit has been addressed in the approved master plan.

(5)    Minor deviation or temporary structures (for example, modular school classrooms) may be approved administratively by city staff, so long as the deviation from the master plan does not increase the overall land use intensity of the site by 10%, unless a different percentage is specified in the master plan.

(6)    A master plan is recommended but not required for uses listed above that existed as of January 1, 1994. However, temporary uses and structures that do not increase the overall land use intensity by 10% may be approved administratively by the city staff.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2264, passed 9-24-18) Penalty, see § 157.999

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


157.215 INFILL DEVELOPMENT DESIGNATION.

(A)    Purpose. The purpose of the infill development designation is to encourage construction of new residential development in existing, underdeveloped neighborhoods when designated by the Planning Commission. Infill development encourages efficient use of land and helps to utilize existing public facility infrastructure, avoiding costly extensions of new facilities. A property owner may apply to have existing property designated as infill property and obtain deviation from property development standards when following the existing clear and objective development standards is not feasible or will result in sub-standard development. 

(B)    Criteria. When the Planning Commission determines that a property is eligible for designation as an infill property, the city may grant deviations from the city’s development standards, including but not limited to: zoning standards, public works standards, access and circulation standards, and other requirements of the city zoning and public works requirements. In order to be considered for designation as an infill property, a property owner or their authorized agent must demonstrate compliance with four of the following eligibility standards:

(1)    A lot with a single-family dwelling constructed prior to February 28, 1994;

(2)    A lot in existence prior to the adoption of the zoning standards adopted in Ordinance 1840 on February 28, 1994;

(3)    A lot within the city limits, except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section;

(4)    A lot located within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or RR zone; and

(5)    The property will be used for residential development.

(C)    Property not eligible. The following items shall not be considered criteria used to determine eligibility for consideration as infill property:

(1)    A landlocked parcel with no street access or dedicated access easement;

(2)    A parcel outside the city limits unless annexation is applied for simultaneously;

(3)    A wetland is not a development constraint eligible for infill waiver as a wetland is considered a water of the state and under the jurisdiction of the Department of State Lands; and

(4)    Existing residential property within the C-1, C-2, DCO, and NCO zones is not eligible for residential infill.

(D)    Constraints. When the Planning Commission determines that a property meets the eligibility standards in subsection (B) of this section, a property owner or their authorized agent must demonstrate that the property is constrained and cannot be developed in the standard manner. Constrained property may include but is not limited to such factors as:

(1)    A lot is not adjacent to existing municipal sewer and/or water lines;

(2)    A lot is serviced by existing municipal sewer and/or water line which is sized below minimum standard pipe size;

(3)    A lot receives access from a street which has no paving, curb, gutter, or sidewalk, and is not adjacent to any existing improvements;

(4)    A lot with a depth of at least 300% of the lot width;

(5)    An existing dwelling situated on the property in such a location that it is impossible to create a second parcel while maintaining the required setbacks for the dwelling and minimum lot width and depth for a new parcel;

(6)    A lot of at least 175% of the minimum lot size in the underlying zone but less than 250% of the minimum lot size;

(7)    A lot of at least 175% of the minimum lot width or depth in the underlying zone but less than 250% of the minimum lot width or depth;

(8)    A property is bounded on at least two sides by development which does not meet current lot size, lot width, lot coverage, or setback requirements;

(9)    A property contains a physical constraint, such as an unusual shape, steep slope, canal, utility easement, alley, or similar feature which makes conventional development impossible;

(10)    A property with an existing dwelling has an assessed land value greater than the assessed value of the improvements; and

(11)    A property contains a dwelling which is no longer functional due to neglect, damage, or other age-related issue.

(E)    Application procedure. A property owner or their authorized agent may initiate a request for an infill designation and deviation by filing an application with the city using forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development. The Planning Commission may require other drawings or information necessary to understand the proposed use and its relationship to surrounding properties. The applicant shall pay a fee as established by the City Council at the time the application is filed.

(F)    Public hearing; recess. Before the Planning Commission may act on a request for an infill designation and deviation, it shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 157.229. At the time of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine if the property meets the eligibility for an infill designation and the appropriate deviations necessary to facilitate development.

The Planning Commission may recess a hearing on a request for an infill designation in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice on other property owners or persons who it decides may be interested in the request. Recess or continuance of the hearing shall be in accordance with the provisions in ORS 197.763(6) and (7) for a quasi-judicial hearing. 

(G)    Approval criteria. Based on the testimony and evidence contained in the record, the Planning Commission shall develop findings of fact to justify either approving or denying an infill designation and deviation as set forth in subsection (H) of this section. The Planning Commission may approve the requests when it is determined the request is in conformance with all the following requirements or can be made to conform through the impositions of conditions:

(1)    The property is constrained by internal or external physical features which preclude development conforming to adopted city standards;

(2)    Public facilities have the capacity to service the development at the proposed density and are either in place or may be extended at the developer’s expense;

(3)    Granting of an infill designation will not have a negative impact on the ability of fire and life services to service the property;

(4)    Approval of infill development will result in a development that is reasonably compatible with the existing neighborhood and adjacent properties; and

(5)    Granting of an infill designation will result in residential development on property that would otherwise remain vacant or developed below the approved density.

(H)    Approval of infill designation. In granting approval of an infill designation, the Planning Commission may grant deviations from the city’s development standards. Standards which qualify for a deviation include: 

(1)    Lot width;

(2)    Lot depth;

(3)    Minimum lot size;

(4)    Lot coverage;

(5)    Front, rear, and side setbacks;

(6)    Minimum street frontage;

(7)    Minimum utility sizing standards;

(8)    Building height;

(9)    Off-street parking standards; and

(10)    Street improvement standards.

When approving an infill designation on a property, the Planning Commission shall adopt conditions it deems necessary to ensure that the property develops in a manner that is reasonably compatible with neighboring properties. These conditions may include but are not limited to:

(1)    Specifying exterior construction materials;

(2)    Requiring landscape improvements;

(3)    Requiring fencing improvements; and

(4)    Requiring certain architectural features to insure neighborhood compatibility.

(I)    Notification. Within five days after a decision has been rendered, the city shall provide the parties to the hearings with written notice of the city’s action on the request for an infill designation. A decision on an infill designation may be appealed to the City Council following the procedures in § 157.231.

(Ord. 2250, passed 9-25-17)


157.225 VARIANCES.

(A)    Authority to grant variances.

(1)    The Planning Commission may authorize variances from the requirements of this chapter where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of property, the literal interpretation of this chapter would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship, except that no variance shall be granted to allow the use of the property for purposes not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use would be located. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and to otherwise achieve the purpose of this chapter. No variance shall be granted unless it can be shown that all of the following conditions exist:

(a)    Exceptional or extraordinary conditions apply to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, which conditions are a result of the lot size, topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control;

(b)    The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant substantially the same as is possessed by owners of other property in the same zone or vicinity;

(c)    The authorization of the variance shall not be materially detrimental to the purpose of this ordinance, be injurious to the property in the zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or be otherwise detrimental to the objectives of any development pattern or policy; or

(d)    It is impractical to maintain the zoning code requirements and, at the same time, build, erect or use the structure as desired.

(2)    Variance procedure. The procedure to be followed in applying for and acting on a variance shall be the same as that provided in 157.229 of this chapter.

(3)    Granting or denying minor variances. The city administration may grant a minor variance to the requirements of the chapter where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances, strict application of the chapter would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. In granting a minor variance, conditions may be imposed which are necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding property or vicinity or otherwise achieve the purpose of this chapter.

(4)    Minor variances. One variance involving the following may be granted by the city administration after a thorough examination and upon presentation of evidence that the variance requested involves one of the issues listed below:

(a)    Deviation from a minimum property development standard by not more than 10%.

(b)    Expansion of a conditional or nonconforming use by not more than 10% of the gross building volume.



(c)    Extension or restoration of a nonconforming structure.

(B)    Procedure.

(1)    Upon receipt of the application form and payment of 25% of the usual application fee for a variance, the city administration shall render a decision within five working days, or the decision may be deferred to the Planning Commission.

(2)    Additional information may be requested to arrive at a decision; and, if so, the decision shall be rendered within five working days following the submission of information.

(C)    Notice.

(1)    Should a minor variance be granted by administrative action, a notice of the variance decision and reasoning shall be mailed to all property owners within 100 feet of the subject property, including any public rights-of-way, soliciting comments or objections. If any written objections to the proposed variance are received within ten days of the mailing, a public hearing shall be required in accordance with 157.229 of this chapter. If no objections to the variance are received within the ten-day period, the variance shall become effective at the end of that period.

(2)    In addition to notice to abutting property owners, the Planning Commission shall be notified of all minor variances granted by administrative variance.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.226 AMENDMENTS.

(A)    Authorization to initiate amendments. An amendment to the text or the zoning map of this chapter may be initiated by the City Council, by the Planning Commission or by application of a property owner or his authorized agent. The Planning Commission shall, within 40 days after a public hearing in accordance with procedures set forth in 157.229, recommend to the City Council approval, disapproval or modification of the proposed amendment.

(B)    Types of amendments. An amendment to this chapter may be either:

(1)    Amendment to the text. Legislative revision.

(2)    Amendment to the map. Legislative revision or quasi-judicial change.

(C)    Legislative revisions. Proposed amendments to this chapter shall be deemed legislative revisions if:

(1)    The proposed amendment involves the text of this chapter; and/or

(2)    The proposed amendment involves the map, when such an amendment would have widespread and significant impact beyond the immediate area of the proposed amendment.

(D)    Quasi-judicial proceedings.

(1)    A proposed amendment to this chapter shall be deemed a quasi-judicial change if the proposed amendment involves the zoning map and does not have widespread and significant impact beyond the immediate area of the proposed amendment.

(2)    Quasi-judicial changes may be initiated by property owners or contract purchases or his or her authorized agent.

(3)    In case of a controversy as to whether an amendment be deemed a legislative or quasi-judicial matter, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final.

(E)    Approval criteria.

(1)    The following criteria must be followed in deciding upon a quasi-judicial proceeding:

(a)    The burden in all land use proceedings is upon the applicant, whether a zone change, conditional use or variance is the subject of the hearing;

(b)    The requested zone change or conditional use must be justified by proof that:

1.    The change is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and also the goals and policies of the plan;

2.    The showing of public need for the rezoning and whether that public need is best served by changing the zoning classification on that property under consideration;

3.    The public need is best served by changing the classification of the subject site in question as compared with other available property.

4.    The potential impact upon the area resulting from the change has been considered.

(c)    The courts will require a "graduated burden of proof" depending upon the more intensive land use that will occur as a result of the proposed rezoning.

(d)    Procedural process for a quasi-judicial hearing.

1.    Parties at a public hearing must have an opportunity to be heard, to present and rebut evidence.

2.    There must be a record which will support the findings made by the City Council or Planning Commission.

(F)    Amendment hearings. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed amendment at the earliest regular meeting, after the application is submitted, in accordance with the public hearing procedures under 157.229 of this chapter. Both text and map amendments shall also be submitted to the Department of Land Conservation and Development 45 days prior to the date set for final action except as provided for under ORS197.610.

(G)    Application and fee. An application for amendment by a property owner or his authorized agent shall be filed with the city. The application shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the average cost of applications as established by the City Council.

(H)    Recess of hearing. The Planning Commission may recess a hearing in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons it decides may be interested in the proposed amendment. Upon recessing for this purpose, the Commission shall announce the time and date when the hearing will be resumed.

(I)    Records of amendments. The city shall maintain a record of amendments to the text and map of this chapter in a form convenient for the use of the public.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.227 DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.

The City Manager or his designee shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter. An appeal from a ruling of the city staff shall be made to the Planning Commission. No decision of the city shall be influenced by factors relating to race, religion, gender, age or physical disability.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.228 PERMIT REQUIRED; TIME LIMIT.

(A)    Permit required. Prior to the erection, movement, reconstruction, extension, enlargement or alteration of a structure, a permit for erection, movement, reconstruction, extension, enlargement or alteration shall be obtained from the city. The applicant shall pay a fee as established by the City Council at the time the application is filed.

(B)    Time limit on a permit. All land use decisions and approvals shall be based upon findings of fact. In order to assure that these decisions remain valid, all land use approvals shall be void after one year if no substantial construction has taken place. However, the Planning Commission may grant two one-year extensions upon a determination that the applicant is pursuing the completion of the project and that no material changes of surrounding land uses or designation has occurred.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94) Penalty, see § 157.999


157.229 PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICE OF PUBLICATION.

Whenever this chapter prescribes that a public hearing shall be held on the applications for conditional use permits, variances or amendments to this chapter, notice thereof shall be given as provided in this section.

(A)    Notices of public hearings shall be consistent with ORS 197.195 for limited land use decisions and consistent with ORS 197.763 for quasi-judicial land use decisions by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(B)    The applicant in all land use actions shall post a sign on the property declaring that a land use application has been filed. The notice shall be posted not less than 20 days prior to the initial public hearing for quasi-judicial land use actions and not less than 14 days prior to the initial public hearing for limited land use decisions. The notice posted on the property shall:

(1)    Be posted on the property in a location clearly visible to the public and no more than 50 feet from a public right-of-way.

(2)    State in letters at least two inches tall the following items:

(a)    "Notice of Proposed Land Use Action."

(b)    The street address of the property proposed for action.

(c)    "For additional information, please contact:" and provide a contact number for the Hermiston Planning Department.

(d)    "Comments must be submitted to the Hermiston Planning Department no later than:" and provide the date for submission of testimony.

(3)    Following posting, the applicant must submit a declaration to the planning department stating that the notice was posted in accordance with this section.

(C)    Notice of public hearing on a conditional use, variance, amendment to a zone boundary, or Comprehensive Plan map amendment shall be mailed to owners of property within 300 feet of the property for which the variance, conditional use, or zone boundary amendment has been requested. The notice of hearing shall be mailed consistent with ORS 197.763 for quasi-judicial land use decisions. The names and addresses of property owners as shown in the records of the County Assessor shall be used. The notice shall:

(1)    Explain the nature of the application and proposed use or uses which could be authorized;

(2)    List the applicable criteria from the chapter and the plan that apply to the application;

(3)    Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property;

(4)    State the date, time and location of the hearing;

(5)    State that the failure to raise an issue by the close of the record at or following the final evidentiary hearing, in person or by letter, precludes appeal to LUBA or the City Council based on that issue, and appeal will be on the record unless directed otherwise by the City Council;

(6)    State that failure to present an issue with sufficient specificity to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to that issue precludes appeal to LUBA or to the City Council based on that issue;

(7)    Include the name of a local government representative to contact and a telephone number where additional information may be obtained;

(8)    State that copies of the following are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at a reasonable cost:

(a)    The application;

(b)    All documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant; and

(c)    Applicable criteria.

(9)    State that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost; and

(10)    Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for the conduct of hearings.

(D)    If a proposed zone boundary amendment is legislative in nature, the mailing of individual notice is not required but additional means of informing the public as may be specified by the Council shall be observed.

(E)    Notice shall be published no later than ten days prior to the hearing date in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for all public hearing items.

(F)    Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this section shall not impair the validity of a hearing, nor the action taken.

(G)    Except as provided for under ORS 227.178, the city shall take final action on all zone change applications, conditional use permits, and variances including resolution of all appeals to the City Council under ORS 227.180, within 120 days from the date a completed application is submitted to the city. Within 30 days of receipt of an application, the city will review the application to determine whether it is complete. The applicant will be notified of any missing materials within the 30-day period. The 120-day time period will commence on the date the application is complete.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2177, passed 7-25-11)


157.230 HEARINGS BEFORE PLANNING COMMISSION.

(A)    Raising issues for appeals. An issue which may be the basis for an appeal shall be raised not later than the close of the record at the final evidentiary hearing on the proposal before the local government. The issues shall be raised with sufficient specificity to afford the Planning Commission and the parties an adequate opportunity to respond to each issue.

(B)    Documents, evidence and reports.

(1)    All documents or evidence relied upon by the applicants shall be submitted to the local government and be made available to the public not less than 21 days prior to the hearing.

(2)    Any staff report used at the hearing shall be available at least seven days prior to the hearing.

(C)    Commencement of hearing. At the commencement of a hearing, a statement shall be made to those in attendance that:

(1)    Lists the substantive criteria which will form the basis of the decision;

(2)    Testimony and evidence must be directed toward the criteria described in subsection (C)(1) of this section or other criteria which the person believes apply to the decision;

(3)    Failure to raise an issue with sufficient specificity to afford the decision maker and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Council based on that issue; and

(4)    The hearing shall result in a final decision.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.231 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.

(A)    An action or ruling of the Planning Commission authorized by this chapter may be appealed to the City Council within 12 days (or within the time limit required by ORS Chapter 227 if it is greater) after notice of the Planning Commission’s decision and of the right of appeal has been mailed to all persons involved in the Planning Commission’s decision. Appeals may be made by submitting a notice of appeal on forms provided by the city and paying the prescribed fee.

(B)    Aggrieved persons are those who have appeared in person or in writing in the evidentiary hearing. They will be given notice of the "notice of decision and right to appeal," and they are the only ones who may appeal and in event of appeal will have the right of notice.

(C)    Fees, costs and records.

(1)    This appeal shall be on the record which means that the hearing is for the presentation of argument against the interpretation or application of the chapter in reaching the decision. The Council shall consider the record of the Planning Commission which should be prepared in synopsis form (not necessarily verbatim) and either stenographic or electronic record of the hearing shall be available to the appellants and to the Council.

(2)    There shall be a filing fee as prescribed by the City Council.

(3)    The actual cost of preparation of any transcription shall not exceed $500 or $10 per tape for copies of the audio tapes of the Planning Commission hearing if desired by appellants. The actual cost of mailing required notices to parties to the appeal shall be in addition, and the applicant shall pay a fee as prescribed by the City Council in advance for out-of-pocket costs and mailing by the city. Costs exceeding the advance will be billed. These costs shall be refunded to the appellants if they prevail.

(4)    The Council may affirm, reverse, modify or remand the decision of the Planning Commission.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 9-24-18)


157.232 PETITIONS, APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS.

All applications and appeals provided for in this chapter shall be made on forms provided for the purpose or as otherwise prescribed by the Planning Commission in order to assure the fullest practical presentation of pertinent facts and to maintain a permanent record. All applications for permits shall be accompanied by plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the building and other structures, existing and proposed; and the existing and intended use of each building, structure or part thereof; the number of families to be accommodated, if any; and other information as is needed to determine their conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Where multiple land use permits or zone changes are required, the hearing and applications may be applied for and conducted at one time.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


157.233 SEVERABILITY.

If any portion of the zoning ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion is to be deemed severed from the subdivision or zoning ordinance, and in no way affects the validity of the remainder of the subdivision or zoning ordinance.

(Ord. 2177, passed 7-25-11)


157.999 PENALTY.

The owner or owners of any buildings or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed, or shall exist, or be maintained, and any architect, builder or contractor who shall assist in the commission of any violation, and all persons or corporations who shall violate or maintain any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to comply therewith, or with any requirements thereof, or who shall build in violation of any detained statement of plan submitted and approved thereunder, shall for each and every violation or noncompliance be deemed guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $250. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate offense.

(Ord. 1840, passed 2-28-94)


TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES

Table

I:    ANNEXATIONS

II:    CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS

III:    FRANCHISES

IV:    LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS

V:    STREET NAME CHANGES

VI:    VACATIONS

VII:    ZONING AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP CHANGES


TABLE I Annexations

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Description

	1890	1-22-96	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1893	2-26-96	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1897	3-18-96	Declaring the annexations of certain lands and outlining new boundaries

	1899	4-22-96	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1900	5-13-96	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1902	6-10-96	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1903	6-24-96	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1908	7-22-96	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1927	4-14-97	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1928	4-14-97	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1933	6-23-97	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1934	7-14-97	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1935	7-14-97	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1936	7-28-97	Declaring the annexation of certain lands and outlining new boundaries

	1940	10-13-97	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1943	11-10-97	Declaring territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts as annexed and outlining new boundaries

	1945	11-24-97	Declaring the annexation of certain lands and outlining new boundaries

	1948	2-23-98	Proposing to withdraw territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts

	1957	4-27-98	Declaring certain territory from the city’s rural fire and library districts annexed

	1959	6-22-98	Proposing to withdraw territory from the county’s library district

	1961	7-27-98	Declaring an annexation of territory from the county’s library district

	1963	8-10-98	Declaring an annexation of territory from the county’s library district

	1964	8-24-98	Proposing to annex territory from the county’s library district

	1966	9-14-98	Proposing to annex territory from the county’s library district

	1968	10-12-98	Amending Ord. 1963 and outlining boundaries

	1970	10-12-98	Declaring certain land to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	1973	10-26-98	Proposing to annex territory from the county’s library district

	1974	10-26-98	Proposing to withdraw territory from the county’s library district

	1975	10-26-98	Proposing to withdraw territory from the county’s library district

	1980	11-23-98	Annexing lands from the Umatilla County’s library district and outlining new boundaries

	1981	11-23-98	Annexing lands from the Umatilla County’s library district and outlining new boundaries

	1982	11-23-98	Declaring certain land to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	1986	3-22-99	Declaring certain land to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	1988	4-12-99	Proposing to annex territory from the county’s library district

	1989	4-12-99	Proposing to annex territory from the county’s library district

	1990	5-10-99	Proposing to annex territory from the county’s library district

	1994	6-28-99	Declaring certain land to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2000	11-22-99	Declaring certain lands to be annexed, outlining new boundaries, and withdrawing said lands from the county’s library district

	2001	11-22-99	Proposing to annex territory from the county’s library district

	2006	1-24-00	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2008	3-13-00	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2011	4-24-00	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2013	4-24-00	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2017	5-23-00	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2022	9-25-00	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2025	11-13-00	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2026	12-11-00	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2032	4-9-01	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2033	5-14-01	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2037	6-11-01	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2038	6-25-01	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2039	7-23-01	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2040	8-13-01	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2043	9-24-01	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2044	9-24-01	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2047	11-26-01	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2052	2-25-02	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2055	5-13-02	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2059	7-22-02	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2071	7-14-03	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2073	8-25-03	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2075	9-22-03	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2076	10-13-03	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2078	11-10-03	Proposing to annex new territory from the county’s library district

	2079	12-22-03	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2088	6-14-04	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2089	7-26-04	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2094	10-25-04	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2100	12-13-04	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2101	1-24-05	Amending Ord. 2100 to correct the legal description of land annexed

	2102	2-14-05	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2105	4-11-05	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2106	4-25-05	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2108	6-13-05	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2113	1-9-06	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2114	2-13-06	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2115	2-13-06	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2116	2-27-06	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2117	3-27-06	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2120	5-22-06	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2121	7-10-06	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2122	7-24-06	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2124	8-14-06	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2125	9-25-06	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2126	10-23-06	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2131	3-26-07	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2132	4-9-07	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2133	5-21-07	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2135	6-11-07	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2137	6-11-07	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2140	7-23-07	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2141	7-23-07	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2143	9-10-07	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2144	10-22-07	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2146	1-14-08	Proposing to annex new territory from the countys library district

	2147	2-25-08	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2148	5-19-08	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2149	6-23-08	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2150	8-11-08	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2153	1-12-09	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2156	7-13-09	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2161	9-14-09	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2168	1-24-11	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2169	2-28-11	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2170	3-14-11	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2172	5-9-11	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2173	5-23-11	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2174	6-27-11	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2183	3-12-12	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2188	4-23-12	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2193	10-8-12	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2195	11-26-12	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2196	3-11-13	Proposing to annex new territory to the city from the county’s library district

	2199	5-13-13	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries, withdrawing lands from Umatilla County library district

	2203	7-22-13	Proposing to annex new territory to the city of Hermiston, withdrawing said territory from the Umatilla County library district

	2205	8-26-13	Declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries

	2208	10-14-13	Proposing to annex new territory to the city of Hermiston, withdrawing said territory from the Umatilla County library district

	2210	11-25-13	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2211	11-25-13	Proposing to annex new territory to the city of Hermiston, withdrawing said territory from special districts, dispensing with an election and calling for a public hearing on the proposed annexation and withdrawal

	2212	12-9-13	Amends Ord. 2199, declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries, withdrawing lands from certain special districts

	2213	12-9-13	Amends Ord. 2205, declaring certain lands to be annexed and outlining new boundaries, withdrawing lands from certain special districts

	2214	1-27-14	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2225	3-23-15	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2226	3-23-15	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2228	4-27-15	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2238	2-22-16	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2247	8-14-17	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2266	10-22-18	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2272	3-11-19	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2275	4-22-19	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts

	2277	5-28-19	Declaring certain lands to be annexed to the city, outlining the new boundaries, describing said property, withdrawing said lands from special districts


TABLE II Contracts and Agreements

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Description

	1481	9-12-83	Adopting the Hermiston Planning Area Joint Management Agreement and directing the Mayor and Finance Director/Recorder to execute and sign documents

	1912	11-25-96	Amending Ordinance No. 1481 to establish an Urban Planning Area Joint Management Agreement with Umatilla County to revise policies concerning county roads within the city’s boundary

	1919	11-13-97	Authorizing a loan from the Public Works Fund to enter into a contract with the Oregon Economic Development Department

	2054	4-22-02	Authorizing the Mayor and City Manager to enter into an agreement with Copper Basin, Inc.

	2084	4-26-04	Repealing Ordinances 1481 and 1912 and implementing the 2004 Planning Area Joint Management Agreement


TABLE III Franchises

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Description

	1514	5-29-84	Granting Umatilla Electric Cooperative a 20-year franchise

	1795	2-22-93	Granting U.S. West (now Qwest) a 20-year franchise

	1851	8-8-94	Granting Sanitary Disposal, Inc., a renewable five-year franchise for solid waste management service

	1958	6-16-98	Granting Cascade Natural Gas Corporation a non-exclusive franchise to construct, maintain and operate the distribution of natural gas to the city for a period of ten years

	2031	3-26-01	Granting Hermiston Transit an exclusive, renewable five-year franchise to operate and maintain a taxicab service in the city

	2041	8-27-01	Granting Falcon Community Cable L.P. d/b/a Charter Communications a non-exclusive franchise to operate a cable system within the city

	2110	6-27-05	Granting Hermiston Transit an exclusive five-year franchise to maintain and operate a taxi service in the city

	2111	8-8-05	Granting Umatilla Electric Cooperative a 20-year franchise

	2157	7-13-09	Granting to Cascade Natural Gas Corporation a non-exclusive franchise and right to use publicly-owned rights-of-way within the city to construct, operate and maintain a system for the sale and distribution of natural and/or artificial gas

	2166	 6-28-10	Granting to Kevin Robinson, dba Hermiston Transit, the exclusive right, privilege and franchise, for a period of five years to maintain and operate a taxi service within the city

	2248	9-11-17	Umatilla Electric Cooperative; amends Ord. 2111


TABLE IV Local Improvements

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Description

	1916	1-13-97	Creating Local Improvement District No. 310 describing improvements, setting boundaries and providing for payment

	1917	1-13-97	Creating Local Improvement District No. 311 describing improvements, setting boundaries and providing for payment

	1918	1-13-97	Creating Local Improvement District No. 312 describing improvements, setting boundaries and providing for payment

	1920	1-27-97	Creating Local Improvement District No. 313 describing improvements, setting boundaries and providing for payment

	1921	1-27-97	Creating Local Improvement District No. 314 describing improvements, setting boundaries and providing for payment

	1922	1-27-97	Creating Local Improvement District No. 315 describing improvements, setting boundaries and providing for payment

	1951	4-13-98	Providing the final assessment for public improvement of curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving installations on W. Dogwood Avenue from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395

	1952	4-13-98	Providing the final assessment for public improvement of curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving installations on N.W. Spruce Street from W. Elm Street to W. Dogwood Avenue

	1953	4-13-98	Providing the final assessment for public improvement of curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving installations on W. Beech Avenue from 170 feet east of N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395

	1954	4-13-98	Providing for the final assessment for public improvement of curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving installations on S.W. 12th Street for 135 feet north of S.W. Poplar Place to W. Orchard Avenue

	1955	4-13-98	Providing for the final assessment for public improvement of paving on the west half of S.W. 8th Street from W. Duane Avenue to W. Division Avenue

	1956	4-13-98	Providing for the final assessment for public improvement of curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving installations on W. Catherine Avenue for N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395

	2014	5-22-00	Creating Local Improvement District No. 317, describing improvements, setting boundary and providing for payment

	2015	5-22-00	Creating Local Improvement District No. 318, describing improvements, setting boundary and providing for payment

	2029	3-12-01	Providing for the final assessment for a public improvement which is the installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving on E. Gladys Avenue from 250 feet east of N.E. 9th Street to N.E. 10th Street

	2030	3-12-01	Providing for the final assessment for a public improvement which is the installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving on N.E. 9th Street from E. Main Street to E. Ridgeway Avenue

	2085	6-14-04	Creating Local Improvement District No. 319, describing improvement, setting boundary and providing for payment

	2086	6-14-04	Creating Local Improvement District No. 320, describing improvement, setting boundary and providing for payment

	2087	6-14-04	Creating Local Improvement District No. 321, describing improvement, setting boundary and providing for payment

	2095	11-8-04	Providing for the final assessment for a public improvement which is the installation of paving on N.E. 9th Street from E. Main Street to E. Newport Avenue

	2096	11-8-04	Providing for the final assessment for a public improvement which is the installation of paving on N.W. 3rd Street from W. Elm Street to W. Marie Avenue

	2097	11-8-04	Providing for the final assessment for a public improvement which is the installation of paving on E. Newport Avenue from S.E. 7th Street to S.E. 9th Street


TABLE V Street Name Changes

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Description

	556	11-24-65 	The names of streets are changed as follows: Emily Street to N.W. Tenth Place; Tlinget Street to N.W. Tenth Street; S.W. Ninth Place to S.W. Ninth Street; Alder street to W. Alder Avenue; Butte Place to N. Butte Drive; Collins Street to N.E. Sixth Street; Standard Drive to W. Standard Avenue; E. and W. Beach Avenue to E. and W. Beech Avenue; Public Road (W. of S.E. 7th Street extended) to S.E. Sixth Street; Ritchie Avenue and Sycamore Avenue to E. Pine Avenue; Pulley Avenue to E. Quince Avenue; Warner Avenue to E. Tamarack Avenue; Newly-opened street between E. Jennie and E. Beebe Avenues and between N. 1st and N.E. 4th Streets to N.E. McNary Street; To-be-dedicated street between Hermiston and Orchard avenues and west of Butte Drive to S.W. Eighth Place; Hermiston Boulevard to Diagonal Boulevard; Reeder Street, south from E. Wilshire Avenue and Sunset Avenue, to E. Sunset Drive; Reeder Street, north from E. Wilshire Avenue and Lake Street to E. Reeder Drive; Proposed street into Christian Church property, south from W. Highland Avenue and west of S.W. 7th Street to S.W. Seventh Place


TABLE VI Vacations

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Description

	1891	2-12-96	Closing and vacating real property dedicated to the city for utility easement purposes

	1901	5-20-96	Closing and vacating real property dedicated to the city for utility easement purposes

	1937	8-25-97	Closing and vacating real property dedicated to the city for alley purposes

	1962	8-10-98	Closing and vacating real property dedicated to the city for street purposes

	1985	1-25-99	Closing and vacating a portion of Hermiston Avenue dedicated to the public for street purposes

	1991	6-14-99	Closing and vacating real property dedicated to the city for utility purposes

	1997	10-11-99	Closing and vacating real property dedicated to the city for street purposes

	2005	1-10-00	Vacating real property heretofore dedicated to the public for street purposes

	2035	5-21-01	Vacating real property heretofore dedicated to the public for street purposes

	2142	8-27-07	Vacating real property heretofore dedicated to the public for street purposes

	2218	5-12-14	Vacating real property heretofore dedicated to the public for street purposes

	2223	1-26-15	Vacating real property heretofore dedicated to the public for street purposes


TABLE VII Zoning and Comprehensive Plan Map Changes

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Description

	1889	12-18-95	Amending the Zoning Map to change an area from an M-1 District to OS District and amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from a Mixed Commercial Industrial District to an Open Space District

	1892	2-26-96	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map by the conversion of certain lands from urbanizable status to urban status and establishing land use plan designation

	1895	3-18-96	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map by the conversion of certain lands from urbanizable status to urban status and establishing land use plan designation

	1909	8-26-96	Amending the Zoning Map to change an area from a Light Industrial District to an Outlying Commercial District and amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from an Industrial District to a Commercial District

	1910	9-23-96	Amending the Zoning Map to change an area from a Light Industrial District to an Outlying Commercial District and amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from an Industrial District to a Commercial District

	1929	6-9-97	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map by the conversion of certain lands from urbanizable status to urban status and establishing land use plan designation

	1931	6-23-97	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map by changing an area from a Commercial District to a Medium Density Residential District

	1939	9-22-97	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map by the conversion of certain lands from urbanizable status to urban status and establishing land use plan designation

	1947	12-8-97	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map by the conversion of certain lands from urbanizable status to urban status and establishing land use plan designation

	1950	4-13-98	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change the districts of certain areas

	1969	10-12-98	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map by the conversion of certain lands from urbanizable status to urban status and establishing land use plan designation

	1977	11-9-98	Amending the Zoning Map to change an area from a Light Industrial District to an Outlying Commercial District and amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from an Industrial District to a Commercial District

	1983	1-25-99	Amending the Zoning Map to change an area from an Outlying Commercial District to a Mixed Commercial/Light Industrial District and amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from a Commercial to a Mixed Commercial/Industrial District

	1984	1-25-99	Amending the Zoning Map to change an area from a Single Family Residential District (R-1) to Duplex Residential District (R-2)

	1993	6-28-99	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from an Industrial District to a Low Density Residential District

	1996	8-23-99	Amending the Zoning Map to change an area from a Light Industrial (M-1) District to an Open Space (OS) District and amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from an Industrial District to an Open Space District

	2000	11-22-99	Extending the Zoning Map to include newly annexed territory as Single-Family Residential (R-1)

	2018	7-24-00	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map by the conversion of certain lands from Urbanizable status to Urban status

	2021	9-25-00	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Commercial to Medium Density Residential and amending the Zoning Map to change an area from Outlying Commercial (C-2) to Multi-Family Residential (R-3)

	2051	1-28-02	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Low Density Residential to Commercial and amending the Zoning Map from Duplex Residential (R-2) to Outlying Commercial (C-2)

	2058	7-22-02	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Medium Density/Mobile Home Residential to Low Density Residential and amending the Zoning Map from Multi-Structure Residential (R-4) to Duplex Residential (R-2)

	2091	8-9-04	Amending the Comprehensive Plan; amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to add Recreational Residential (RR) as a plan map designation

	2092	8-9-04	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to include the former C&B Feedlot property in the urban growth boundary

	2093	8-23-04	Repealing Ord. 2092 and amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to include the former C&B Feedlot property in the urban growth boundary

	2099	12-13-04	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from North and South County Agricultural to Recreational Residential and amending the Zoning Map from Exclusive Farm Use to Recreational Residential

	2107	6-13-05	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Medium Density Residential to Commercial and amending the Zoning Map from Multi-Family Residential (R-3) to Outlying Commercial (C-2)

	2112	9-26-05	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Medium Density Residential to Commercial and amending the Zoning Map from Multi-Family Residential (R-3) to Outlying Commercial (C-2)

	2118	3-27-06	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Future Residential to Medium Density Residential

	2123	7-24-06	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Medium Density/Mobile Home Residential to Commercial and amending the Zoning Map from Multi-Family Residential (R-4) to Outlying Commercial (C-2)

	2127	1-8-07	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area to Open Space (OS)

	2145	10-22-07	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Medium Density Residential to Commercial and amending the Zoning Map from Multi-Family Residential (R-3) to Central Commercial (C-1)

	2155	2-23-09	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to convert certain lands from Urbanizable Status to Urban Status located within the urban growth boundary of the city, and shall be designated Medium Density Residential (M)

	2164	5-24-10	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to convert certain lands from Urbanizable Status to Urban Status located within the urban growth boundary of the city, and shall be designated as Commercial (C) and Medium Density Residential (M)

	2165	5-24-10	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Low Density Residential (L) to Commercial (C) and on the Zoning Map from Duplex Residential (R-2) to Outlying Commercial (C-2)

	2186	3-26-12	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Industrial (I) to Commercial (C) and on the Zoning Map from Light Industrial (M-1) to Outlying Commercial (C-2)

	2187	3-26-12	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Industrial (I) to Commercial (C) and on the Zoning Map from Light Industrial (M-1) to Outlying Commercial (C-2)

	2189	4-23-12	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Industrial (I) and Open Space (OS) to Fairgrounds (F) and on the Zoning Map from Light Industrial (M-1) and Open Space (OS) to Fairgrounds Overlay (FO)

	2190	5-14-12	Amending Ordinance No. 2189 to remove reference to amending Comprehensive Plan Map

	2191	6-25-12	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Low Density Residential (L) to Commercial (C) and on the Zoning Map from Duplex Residential (R-2) to Central Commercial (C-1)

	2221	7-14-14	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Future Mixed Commercial/Industrial to Commercial (C)

	2246	8-14-17	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to convert certain lands from urbanizable status to urban status located within the urban growth boundary of the city of Hermiston

	2255	5-29-18	Amending the City of Hermiston Comprehensive Plan Map to change an area from Industrial (I) to Commercial (C) and Medium Density Residential (M) and on the Zoning Map from Light Industrial (M-1) to Outlying Commercial (C-2) and Multi-Family Residential (R-3)

	2271	3-11-19	Amending the Comprehensive Plan Map to convert certain lands from urbanizable status to urban status located within the urban growth boundary of the city of Hermiston

	2273	3-11-19	Designating land as Commercial (C) on Comprehensive Plan Map and as Outlying Commercial (C-2) on Zoning Map

	2274	3-25-19	Designating land as Commercial (C) on Comprehensive Plan Map and as Outlying Commercial (C-2) on Zoning Map

	2278	6-24-19	Designating land as Medium Density/Mobile Home Residential (MH) on Comprehensive Plan Map and as Multi-Structure Residential (R-4) on Zoning Map


Parallel References

References to Oregon Revised Statutes

References to Ordinances

References to Resolutions


References to Oregon Revised Statutes

	ORS Section	Code Section

	10.010 - 10.105	33.36

	10.061	33.40

	10.115	33.36

	30.765	131.05

	34.010 - 34.100	116.12, 135.102, 136.22, 136.35

	Ch. 36	50.35

	54.010 - 54.050	33.36

	54.100 - 54.130	33.36

	54.160	33.36

	Ch. 87	112.11

	90.100(28)	134.06

	90.450	136.24

	Ch. 92	156.02

	92.050 - 92.080	154.60

	98.302 - 98.436	52.07

	153.005(f)	152.01

	161.405	134.01

	161.450	134.01

	163.160 -163.190	134.01

	163.415 - 163.445	134.01

	163.465	134.01

	164.015 - 164.140	134.01

	164.115	10.99

	164.243 - 164.265	134.01

	164.315 - 164.335	134.01

	164.345 - 164.365	134.01

	164.805	134.01

	166.025	134.01

	166.065(1)(a)	134.01

	166.155 - 166.165	134.01

	167.007 - 167.017	134.01

	167.117	130.12, 134.01

	167.122 - 167.127	134.01

	167.203	134.01

	181.555	33.51

	190.240	115.005

	192.610 - 192.690	32.02

	Ch. 197	156.02

	197.015(13)	157.166

	197.195(1) - (5)	157.166

	197.610	157.226

	197.763	157.166

	Ch. 215	156.02

	215.213(2)(q) - (s)	154.03

	221-190	Charter § 30

	221.340	72.10

	221.515(3)	115.036

	Ch. 222	150.06

	223.205 - 223.295	34.36

	223.220	34.27

	223.230	34.36

	223.315	34.36

	223.389	34.32

	223.391	34.36

	223.405 - 223.485	34.31

	223.505 - 223.650	34.32

	223.505 - 223.775	34.37

	223.715	34.38

	223.715 - 223.750	34.38

	223.750 - 223.765	34.38

	223.755	34.38

	223.770	34.38

	223.805 - 223.845	34.35

	223.880	34.38

	Ch. 227	156.02

	227.020	32.16

	227.178	157.229

	227.180	157.229

	243.105(1).	35.04

	243.125(4).	35.04

	243.221	35.04

	243.275	35.04

	243.291	35.04

	243.303	35.04

	243.565	35.04

	279.835 - 279.850	35.10

	Ch. 279A	35.03, 35.08

	279A.025	35.04

	279A.065	35.05, 35.06

	279A.070	35.05

	Ch. 279B	35.03, 35.08

	279B.130	35.08

	Ch. 279C	35.03, 35.08

	279C.440	35.08

	279C.600	35.13

	279C.800 - 279C.870	35.04

	283.140	115.005

	292.210 - 292.288	32.02

	414.115	35.10

	414.125	35.10

	414.135	35.10

	414.145	35.10

	418.205	130.11

	419C.680	134.01

	443.400 - 443.460	157.002

	443.400 - 443.825	157.002

	455.010	157.145

	457.010	37.01

	457.045	37.02

	Ch. 459	50.17

	459.005	50.03

	459A.700 - 459A.740	50.03

	Ch. 466	50.15

	466.005	50.03

	471.105 - 471.482	134.01

	Ch. 475	130.04

	475.005 - 475.285	134.01

	475.035	132.01

	475.752 - 475.980	132.01

	475.940 - 475.995	134.01

	517.750 - 517.900	157.149

	Ch. 701	50.15

	Ch. 757	115.039

	Ch. 759	115.005

	759.005(1)(a)	115.005

	759.010	115.005

	Chs. 801 - 823	70.02, 70.05, 72.03

	801.400	10.05, 90.01, 94.05

	806.010	70.07

	807.010	70.07

	809.720	70.07

	809.716	70.07

	809.725	70.07

	811.175	70.07

	811.182	70.07

	811.615	72.03

	813.010	70.07

	Ch. 819	33.06

	819.180	70.07


References to Ordinances

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Disposition

	1	- -	Repealed by 95

	2	- -	Repealed by 336

	3	- -	Repealed by 28

	4	8-7-07	90.02, 90.99

	5	- -	Repealed by 36

	6	- -	Repealed by 282

	7	- -	Not codified

	8	- -	Repealed by 370

	9	- -	Repealed by 36

	10	- -	Repealed by 370

	11	- -	Repealed by 282

	12	- -	Repealed by 49

	13	- -	Repealed by 35

	14	- -	Repealed by 187

	15	- -	Repealed by 347

	16	- -	Repealed by 366

	17	- -	Repealed by 871

	18	- -	Not codified

	19	- -	Repealed by 187

	20	- -	Repealed by 1802

	21	- -	Repealed by 95

	22	- -	Repealed by 367

	23	- -	Repealed by 347

	24	- -	Repealed by 282

	25	- -	Repealed by 36

	26	- -	Repealed by 27

	27	- -	Repealed by 343

	28	- -	Not codified

	29	- -	Repealed by 74

	30	- -	Repealed by 74

	31	- -	Repealed by 346

	32	- -	Repealed by 367

	33	- -	Repealed by 193

	34	- -	Not codified

	35	- -	Repealed by 193

	36	- -	Repealed by 346

	37	- -	Repealed by 187

	38	1-19-10	Not codified

	39	- -	Not codified

	40	- -	Not codified

	41	- -	Not codified

	42	- -	Repealed by 76

	43	- -	Repealed by 367

	44	- -	Repealed by 1750

	45	- -	Repealed by 1615

	46	- -	Repealed by 82

	47	- -	Not codified

	48	- -	Not codified

	49	- -	Repealed by 337

	50	- -	Not codified

	51	- -	Repealed by 193

	52	- -	Not codified

	53	- -	Not codified

	54	- -	Not codified

	55	- -	Not codified

	56	5-31-11	94.02, 94.99

	57	- -	Not codified

	58	- -	Repealed by 271

	59	- -	Not codified

	60	- -	Not codified

	61	- -	Repealed by 1615

	62	- -	Not codified

	63	- -	Not codified

	64	- -	Not codified

	65	- -	Not codified

	66	- -	Not codified

	67	- -	Repealed by 107

	68	- -	Repealed by 80

	69	- -	Repealed by 240

	70	- -	Not codified

	71	- -	Repealed by 104

	72	- -	Not codified

	73	- -	Repealed by 342

	74	- -	Repealed by 366

	75	- -	Repealed by 369

	76	- -	Repealed by 871

	77	10-15-13	Not codified

	78	- -	Not codified

	79	- -	Repealed by 335

	80	- -	Repealed by 343

	81	- -	Not codified

	82	- -	Not codified

	83	- -	Repealed by 372

	84	- -	Not codified

	85	- -	Repealed by 343

	86	- -	Not codified

	87	- -	Repealed by 341

	88	2-23-15	32.01

	89	- -	Not codified

	90	- -	Repealed by 340

	91	- -	Not codified

	92	7-5-17	94.04, 94.99

	93	- -	Repealed by 95

	94	- -	Not codified

	95	- -	Repealed by 335

	96	- -	Repealed by 368

	97	- -	Not codified

	98	4-2-19	Not codified

	99	- -	Repealed by 107

	100	- -	Not codified

	101	- -	Not codified

	102	- -	Not codified

	103	- -	Repealed by 107

	104	- -	Repealed by 342

	105	- -	Not codified

	106	- -	Not codified

	107	- -	Repealed by 375

	108	- -	Not codified

	109	- -	Not codified

	110	- -	Repealed by 342

	111	- -	Not codified

	112	- -	Not codified

	113	- -	Not codified

	114	- -	Not codified

	115	- -	Not codified

	116	- -	Not codified

	117	- -	Not codified

	118	- -	Not codified

	119	- -	Not codified

	120	- -	Not codified

	121	- -	Not codified

	122	- -	Repealed by 368

	123	- -	Not codified

	124	- -	Repealed by 368

	125	- -	Repealed by 871

	126	- -	Repealed by 368

	127	- -	Not codified

	128	- -	Repealed by 342

	129	- -	Not codified

	130	- -	Repealed by 342

	131	- -	Not codified

	132	- -	Not codified

	133	- -	Not codified

	134	- -	Not codified

	135	- -	Repealed by 141

	136	- -	Repealed by 345

	137	- -	Not codified

	138	- -	Not codified

	139	- -	Not codified

	140	- -	Not codified

	141	- -	Repealed by 1750

	142	- -	Not codified

	143	- -	Not codified

	144	- -	Not codified

	145	- -	Repealed by 335

	146	- -	Not codified

	147	- -	Not codified

	148	- -	Not codified

	149	- -	Repealed by 1260

	150	- -	Not codified

	151	- -	Not codified

	152	- -	Not codified

	153	- -	Not codified

	154	- -	Repealed by 344

	155	- -	Not codified

	156	- -	Not codified

	157	- -	Not codified

	158	- -	Not codified

	159	- -	Not codified

	160	- -	Not codified

	161	- -	Not codified

	162	- -	Repealed by 335

	163	- -	Not codified

	164	- -	Not codified

	165	- -	Not codified

	166	- -	Not codified

	167	- -	Repealed by 342

	168	- -	Not codified

	169	- -	Repealed by 335

	170	- -	Not codified

	171	- -	Not codified

	172	- -	Not codified

	173	- -	Repealed by 198

	174	- -	Repealed by 193

	175	- -	Not codified

	176	- -	Not codified

	177	- -	Not codified

	178	- -	Not codified

	179	- -	Not codified

	180	- -	Not codified

	181	- -	Not codified

	182	- -	Not codified

	183	- -	Not codified

	184	- -	Not codified

	185	- -	Not codified

	186	- -	Repealed by 346

	187	- -	Repealed by 363

	188	- -	Repealed by 372

	189	- -	Not codified

	190	- -	Not codified

	191	- -	Repealed by 368

	192	- -	Repealed by 346

	193	- -	Repealed by 213

	194	- -	Repealed by 335

	195	- -	Not codified

	196	- -	Not codified

	197	- -	Repealed by 342

	198	- -	Repealed by 213

	199	- -	Repealed by 201

	200	- -	Repealed by 341

	201	- -	Repealed by 340

	202	- -	Repealed by 341

	203	- -	Not codified

	204	- -	Not codified

	205	- -	Repealed by 335

	206	- -	Repealed by 1750

	207	- -	Repealed by 368

	208	- -	Not codified

	209	- -	Not codified

	210	- -	Not codified

	211	- -	Repealed by 368

	212	- -	Not codified

	213	- -	Repealed by 1776

	214	- -	Repealed by 378

	215	7-9-43	Not codified

	216	- -	Not codified

	217	- -	Repealed by 335

	218	- -	Not codified

	219	- -	Not codified

	220	- -	Not codified

	221	- -	Repealed by 368

	222	2-21-45	Not codified

	223	- -	Not codified

	224	- -	Not codified

	225	- -	Not codified

	226	- -	Not codified

	227	- -	Not codified

	228	- -	Repealed by 363

	229	- -	Repealed by 363

	230	- -	Not codified

	231	- -	Not codified

	232	- -	Not codified

	233	- -	Not codified

	234	- -	Not codified

	235	- -	Repealed by 335

	236	- ,	Repealed by 345

	237	- -	Repealed by 342

	238	- -	Not codified

	239	- -	Not codified

	240	- -	Not codified

	241	- -	Not codified

	242	- -	Repealed by 245

	243	- -	Repealed by 246

	244	- -	Repealed by 342

	245	- -	Not codified

	246	- -	Not codified

	247	- -	Not codified

	248	- -	Not codified

	249	- -	Not codified

	250	- -	Repealed by 346

	251	- -	Repealed by 338

	252	- -	Not codified

	253	- -	Not codified

	254	- -	Not codified

	255	- -	Not codified

	256	- -	Not codified

	257	- -	Not codified

	258	- -	Not codified

	259	- -	Not codified

	260	- -	Not codified

	261	- -	Not codified

	262	- -	Repealed by 372

	263	- -	Not codified

	264	- -	Repealed by 335

	265	- -	Not codified

	266	- -	Not codified

	267	- -	Not codified

	268	- -	Not codified

	269	- -	Not codified

	270	- -	Not codified

	271	- -	Not codified

	272	- -	Not codified

	273	- -	Not codified

	274	- -	Not codified

	275	- -	Not codified

	276	- -	Not codified

	277	- -	Not codified

	278	- -	Not codified

	279	- -	Repealed by 1260

	280	- -	Not codified

	281	- -	Not codified

	282	- -	Repealed by 1260

	283	- -	Not codified

	284	- -	Not codified

	285	- -	Not codified

	286	12-19-51	Not codified

	287	- -	Repealed by 560

	288	- -	Not codified

	289	- -	Not codified

	290	- -	Not codified

	291	- -	Repealed by 363

	292	- -	Not codified

	293	- -	Repealed by 871

	294	- -	Not codified

	295	- -	Not codified

	296	- -	Not codified

	297	- -	Not codified

	298	- -	Repealed by 346

	299	1-20-54	114.01 - 114.11, 114.99

	300	- -	Not codified

	301	- -	Not codified

	302	- -	Not codified

	303	- -	Repealed by 363

	304	- -	Repealed by 355

	305	- -	Not codified

	306	5-19-54	Not codified

	307	- -	Not codified

	308	- -	Not codified

	309	- -	Repealed by 1750

	310	- -	Not codified

	311	- -	Not codified

	312	- -	Repealed by 431

	313	- -	Not codified

	314	- -	Not codified

	315	- -	Not codified

	316	- -	Not codified

	317	- -	Not codified

	318	- -	Not codified

	319	3-7-56	133.01 - 133.03, 133.99

	320	- -	Repealed by 363

	321	- -	Not codified

	322	- -	Not codified

	323	- -	Not codified

	324	- -	Not codified

	325	- -	Not codified

	326	- -	Not codified

	327	- -	Not codified

	328	- -	Not codified

	329	- -	Not codified

	330	- -	Not codified

	331	- -	Not codified

	332	- -	Not codified

	333	- -	Repealed by 560

	334	- -	Not codified

	335	- -	Not codified

	336	4-11-57	Not codified

	337	- -	Repealed by 373

	338	4-10-57	32.03

	339	4-10-57	Not codified

	340	- -	Not codified

	341	- -	Not codified

	342	- -	Not codified

	343	- -	Not codified

	344	- -	Not codified

	345	- -	Not codified

	346	- -	Not codified

	347	- -	Not codified

	348	- -	Repealed by 375

	349	- -	Repealed by 374

	350	- -	Not codified

	351	- -	Not codified

	352	- -	Not codified

	353	- -	Not codified

	354	- -	Not codified

	355	6-12-57	113.01, 113.02, 113.99

	356	6-12-57	Not codified

	357	- -	Repealed by 1260

	358	- -	Not codified

	359	- -	Not codified

	360	- -	Repealed by 1776

	361	- -	Not codified

	362	- -	Repealed by 1750

	363	- -	Repealed by 612 and 614

	364	- -	Repealed by 1448

	365	- -	Repealed by 378

	366	9-11-57	90.02

	367	- -	Repealed by 811

	368	- -	Repealed by 871

	369	- -	Not codified

	370	- -	Superseded by 1310

	371	- -	Not codified

	372	- -	Repealed by 1448

	373	- -	Not codified

	374	- -	Not codified

	375	- -	Repealed by 429

	376	- -	Repealed by 1776

	377	- -	Not codified

	378	- -	Repealed by 1274

	379	- -	Not codified

	380	- -	Repealed by 1776

	381	- -	Not codified

	382	- -	Not passed

	383	- -	Not codified

	384	- -	Not codified

	385	- -	Not passed

	386	- -	Not codified

	387	- -	Not codified

	388	- -	Not codified

	389	- -	Repealed by 1405

	390	- -	Not codified

	391	- -	Not codified

	392	- -	Not codified

	393	- -	Repealed by 397

	394	- -	Repealed by 396

	395	- -	Repealed by 1407

	396	- -	Repealed by 612 and 614

	397	- -	Repealed by 1405

	398	- -	Repealed by 560

	399	- -	Not codified

	400	12-9-59	Repealed by 1915

	401	- -	Repealed by 1407

	402	- -	Not codified

	403	- -	Not codified

	404	- -	Not codified

	405	- -	Repealed by 811

	406	- -	Not used

	407	- -	Not codified

	408	- -	Not codified

	409	- -	Not codified

	410	- -	Repealed by 811

	411	- -	Not codified

	412	- -	Repealed by 612 and 614

	413	- -	Repealed by 560

	414	- -	Repealed by 612 and 614

	415	- -	Repealed by 431

	416	12-28-60	Not codified

	417	- -	Not codified

	418	- -	Not codified

	419	- -	Not codified

	420	- -	Not codified

	421	- -	Not codified

	422	3-8-61	Not codified

	423	- -	Not codified

	424	- -	Repealed by 560

	425	- -	Not codified

	426	- -	Not codified

	427	- -	Not codified

	428	7-12-61	Not codified

	429	6-14-61	52.01 - 52.15, 52.99

	430	- -	Repealed by 1737

	431	8-23-61	34.25 - 34.32, 34.34 - 34.39

	432	- -	Not codified

	433	- -	Repealed by 560

	434	- -	Not codified

	435	- -	Not codified

	436	- -	Not codified

	437	- -	Not codified

	438	- -	Not codified

	439	- -	Not codified

	440	- -	Not codified

	441	- -	Not codified

	442	- -	Not codified

	443	- -	Repealed by 1802

	444	- -	Not codified

	445	- -	Not codified

	446	- -	Not codified

	447	- -	Not codified

	448	- -	Not codified

	449	- -	Not codified

	450	- -	Not codified

	451	- -	Not codified

	452	- -	Not codified

	453	- -	Not codified

	454	- -	Not codified

	455	- -	Not codified

	456	- -	Not codified

	457	- -	Not codified

	458	- -	Not codified

	459	- -	Not codified

	460	- -	Not codified

	461	- -	Not codified

	462	- -	Not codified

	463	- -	Not codified

	464	- -	Not codified

	465	- -	Not codified

	466	- -	Not codified

	467	- -	Not codified

	468	- -	Not codified

	469	- -	Not codified

	470	- -	Not codified

	471	- -	Not codified

	472	- -	Not codified

	473	- -	Not codified

	474	- -	Not codified

	475	- -	Not codified

	476	- -	Not codified

	477	- -	Not codified

	478	- -	Not codified

	479	- -	Not codified

	480	- -	Not codified

	481	- -	Not codified

	482	- -	Not codified

	483	- -	Not used

	484	- -	Not codified

	485	- -	Not codified

	486	- -	Repealed by 828

	487	- -	Not codified

	488	- -	Not codified

	489	- -	Repealed by 1802

	489A.	- -	Not codified

	490	8-23-63	94.65 - 94.73, 94.99

	491	- -	Not codified

	492	- -	Not codified

	493	- -	Not codified

	494	- -	Not codified

	495	- -	Not codified

	496	- -	Not codified

	497	- -	Not codified

	498	- -	Not codified

	499	- -	Not codified

	500	- -	Not codified

	501	- -	Not codified

	502	- -	Not codified

	503	- -	Not codified

	504	- -	Not codified

	505	- -	Not codified

	506	- -	Not codified

	507	- -	Not codified

	508	- -	Not codified

	509	- -	Not codified

	510	- -	Not codified

	511	- -	Not codified

	512	- -	Not codified

	513	- -	Not codified

	514	- -	Not codified

	515	- -	Not codified

	516	- -	Not codified

	517	- -	Not codified

	518	- -	Repealed by 551

	519	- -	Not codified

	520	- -	Not codified

	521	- -	Not codified

	522	- -	Not codified

	523	- -	Not codified

	524	- -	Not codified

	525	- -	Not codified

	526	- -	Not codified

	527	- -	Not codified

	528	- -	Not codified

	529	- -	Not codified

	530	- -	Not codified

	531	- -	Not codified

	532	- -	Not codified

	533	- -	Not codified

	534	- -	Not codified

	535	- -	Not codified

	536	- -	Not codified

	537	- -	Not codified

	538	- -	Not codified

	539	- -	Not codified

	540	- -	Not codified

	541	- -	Not codified

	542	- -	Not codified

	543	- -	Not codified

	544	- -	Not codified

	545	- -	Not codified

	546	- -	Not codified

	547	- -	Not codified

	548	- -	Not codified

	549	- -	Not codified

	550	- -	Not codified

	551	- -	Repealed by 1260

	552	- -	Not codified

	553	- -	Not codified

	554	- -	Not codified

	555	- -	Not codified

	556	11-24-65	94.20 - 94.26, 94.99, T.S.O. V

	557	- -	Repealed by 858

	558	12-22-65	73.01 - 73.15, 73.25 - 73.26, 73.99

	559	- -	Not codified

	560	- -	Repealed by 868

	561	- -	Not codified

	562	- -	Not codified

	563	- -	Not codified

	564	- -	Not codified

	565	- -	Not codified

	566	- -	Not codified

	567	- -	Not codified

	568	- -	Not codified

	569	- -	Not codified

	570	- -	Not codified

	571	- -	Not codified

	572	- -	Not codified

	573	- -	Not codified

	574	- -	Not codified

	575	- -	Not codified

	576	- -	Not codified

	577	- -	Not codified

	578	- -	Not codified

	579	- -	Not codified

	580	- -	Not codified

	581	- -	Not codified

	582	- -	Not codified

	583	- -	Not codified

	584	- -	Not codified

	585	- -	Not codified

	586	- -	Not codified

	587	- -	Not codified

	588	- -	Repealed by 868

	589	- -	Not codified

	590	- -	Not passed

	591	- -	Not codified

	592	- -	Not codified

	593	- -	Not codified

	594	- -	Not codified

	595	- -	Not codified

	596	- -	Repealed by 688

	597	- -	Not codified

	598	- -	Not codified

	599	- -	Not codified

	600	- -	Not codified

	601	- -	Not passed

	602	- -	Not codified

	603	- -	Not codified

	604	- -	Not codified

	605	- -	Not codified

	606	- -	Not codified

	607	- -	Repealed by 1448

	608	- -	Not codified

	609	- -	Not codified

	610	- -	Not codified

	611	- -	Not codified

	612	- -	Repealed by 688

	613	2-28-68	Not codified

	614	- -	Repealed by 1136

	615	2-28-68	152.25 - 152.31, 152.99

	616	- -	Not codified

	617	- -	Not codified

	618	- -	Not codified

	619	- -	Not codified

	620	- -	Not codified

	621	- -	Not codified

	622	- -	Not codified

	623	- -	Not codified

	624	- -	Not codified

	625	- -	Repealed by 1407

	626	- -	Not codified

	627	- -	Not codified

	628	- -	Not codified

	629	- -	Not codified

	630	- -	Not codified

	631	- -	Not codified

	632	- -	Not codified

	633	- -	Not codified

	634	- -	Not codified

	635	- -	Not codified

	636	- -	Not codified

	637	- -	Not codified

	638	- -	Number not used

	639	- -	Not codified

	640	- -	Not codified

	641	- -	Not passed

	642	- -	Not codified

	643	- -	Not codified

	644	- -	Not codified

	645	- -	Not codified

	646	- -	Not codified

	647	- -	Repealed by 868

	648	- -	Not codified

	649	- -	Not codified

	650	- -	Repealed by 868

	651	- -	Number not used

	652	- -	Repealed by 868

	653	- -	Not codified

	654	- -	Not codified

	655	- -	Not codified

	656	- -	Not codified

	657	- -	Not codified

	658	5-25-70	34.37, 34.38

	659	- -	Not codified

	660	- -	Repealed by 868

	661	- -	Not codified

	662	- -	Not codified

	663	- -	Not codified

	664	- -	Not codified

	665	- -	Not codified

	666	- -	Not codified

	667	- -	Not codified

	668	- -	Not codified

	669	- -	Not codified

	670	- -	Not codified

	671	- -	Not codified

	672	- -	Not codified

	673	- -	Not codified

	674	- -	Repealed by 868

	675	- -	Not codified

	676	- -	Not codified

	677	- -	Not codified

	678	- -	Not codified

	679	- -	Not codified

	680	- -	Not codified

	681	- -	Not codified

	682	- -	Not codified

	683	- -	Not codified

	684	- -	Not codified

	685	- -	Not codified

	686	- -	Not codified

	687	- -	Not codified

	688	- -	Repealed by 1392

	689	- -	Repealed by 868

	690	- -	Repealed by 868

	691	- -	Repealed by 868

	692	- -	Repealed by 1260

	693	- -	Repealed by 1136

	694	- -	Not codified

	695	- -	Not codified

	696	4-26-71	94.03, 94.99

	697	- -	Not codified

	698	- -	Not codified

	699	- -	Not codified

	700	- -	Repealed by 710

	701	- -	Not codified

	702	- -	Not codified

	703	- -	Not codified

	704	- -	Not codified

	705	- -	Not codified

	706	- -	Not codified

	707	- -	Not codified

	708	- -	Not codified

	709	- -	Not codified

	710	- -	Not codified

	711	- -	Not codified

	712	- -	Not codified

	713	- -	Not codified

	714	- -	Not codified

	715	- -	Repealed by 868

	716	- -	Repealed by 1448

	717	- -	Not codified

	718	- -	Not codified

	719	- -	Not codified

	720	- -	Repealed by 868

	721	- -	Not codified

	722	- -	Not codified

	723	- -	Not codified

	724	- -	Repealed by 868

	725	- -	Repealed by 1136

	726	- -	Not codified

	727	- -	Not codified

	728	- -	Not codified

	729	- -	Not codified

	730	- -	Not codified

	731	- -	Not codified

	732	- -	Not codified

	733	- -	Repealed by 828

	734	- -	Not codified

	735	- -	Repealed by 868

	736	- -	Not codified

	737	- -	Not codified

	738	- -	Not codified

	739	- -	Not codified

	740	- -	Not codified

	741	- -	Not codified

	742	- -	Not codified

	743	- -	Repealed by 868

	744	- -	Not codified

	745	- -	Not codified

	746	- -	Not codified

	747	- -	Not codified

	748	- -	Repealed by 868

	749	- -	Not codified

	750	- -	Not codified

	751	- -	Not codified

	752	- -	Not codified

	753	- -	Not codified

	754	- -	Not codified

	755	- -	Not codified

	756	- -	Not codified

	757	- -	Not codified

	758	- -	Not codified

	759	- -	Not codified

	760	- -	Not codified

	761	- -	Not codified

	762	- -	Repealed by 868

	763	- -	Not codified

	764	- -	Not codified

	765	- -	Not codified

	766	- -	Not codified

	767	- -	Not codified

	768	- -	Not codified

	769	- -	Not codified

	770	- -	Not codified

	771	- -	Not codified

	772	- -	Not codified

	773	- -	Not codified

	774	- -	Repealed by 868

	775	- -	Not codified

	776	- -	Not codified

	777	- -	Not codified

	778	- -	Repealed by 868

	779	- -	Void

	780	- -	Not codified

	781	- -	Not codified

	782	- -	Not codified

	783	- -	Not codified

	784	- -	Not codified

	785	- -	Not codified

	786	- -	Not codified

	787	12-10-73	Not codified

	788	- -	Not codified

	789	- -	Not codified

	790	- -	Not codified

	791	- -	Not codified

	792	- -	Not codified

	793	- -	Not codified

	794	- -	Not codified

	795	- -	Not codified

	796	- -	Not codified

	797	- -	Not codified

	798	- -	Not codified

	799	- -	Not codified

	800	- -	Not codified

	801	- -	Not codified

	802	- -	Not codified

	803	- -	Not codified

	804	- -	Not codified

	805	- -	Not codified

	806	- -	Not codified

	807	- -	Not codified

	808	- -	Not codified

	809	- -	Not codified

	810	- -	Not codified

	811	- -	Repealed by 906

	812	- -	Not codified

	813	- -	Not codified

	814	- -	Not codified

	815	- -	Not codified

	816	- -	Not codified

	817	5-20-74	Repealed by 2009

	818	- -	Not codified

	819	- -	Repealed by 1274

	820	- -	Not codified

	821	- -	Not codified

	822	- -	Not codified

	823	- -	Not codified

	824	- -	Repealed by 1737

	825	- -	Not codified

	826	- -	Not codified

	827	- -	Not codified

	828	- -	Repealed by 1540

	829	- -	Not codified

	830	- -	Not codified

	831	- -	Not passed

	832	- -	Not codified

	833	- -	Not codified

	834	- -	Not codified

	835	- -	Not codified

	836	- -	Not codified

	837	11-25-74	32.02

	838	- -	Not codified

	839	- -	Not codified

	840	- -	Not codified

	841	- -	Not codified

	842	- -	Not codified

	843	- -	Not codified

	844	- -	Not codified

	845	- -	Not codified

	846	- -	Not codified

	847	- -	Not codified

	848	- -	Not codified

	849	- -	Not codified

	850	- -	Not codified

	851	- -	Not codified

	852	- -	Not codified

	853	- -	Not codified

	854	- -	Not codified

	855	- -	Not codified

	856	- -	Repealed by 868

	857	- -	Repealed by 865

	858	4-14-75	154.01 - 154.04, 154.15 - 154.21, 154.35, 154.45, 154.46, 154.60 - 154.64, 154.75, 154.76, 154.99

	859	- -	Void

	860	- -	Not codified

	861	- -	Not codified

	862	- -	Not codified

	863	- -	Not codified

	864	- -	Not codified

	865	- -	Not codified

	866	- -	Not codified

	867	5-12-75	36.01, 36.43

	868	- -	Repealed by 1476

	869	- -	Not codified

	870	- -	Not codified

	871	- -	Not codified

	872	- -	Not codified

	873	- -	Not codified

	874	- -	Not codified

	875	- -	Not codified

	876	- -	Not codified

	877	- -	Not codified

	878	- -	Not codified

	879	- -	Not codified

	880	- -	Not codified

	881	- -	Not codified

	882	- -	Not codified

	883	- -	Not codified

	884	- -	Not codified

	885	- -	Not codified

	886	- -	Not codified

	887	- -	Not codified

	888	- -	Not codified

	889	- -	Not codified

	890	- -	Not codified

	891	- -	Not codified

	892	- -	Not codified

	893	- -	Not codified

	894	- -	Not codified

	895	- -	Not codified

	896	- -	Not codified

	897	- -	Not codified

	898	- -	Not codified

	899	- -	Not codified

	900	- -	Not codified

	901	- -	Not codified

	902	- -	Not codified

	903	- -	Not codified

	904	- -	Not codified

	905	- -	Not codified

	906	- -	Not codified

	907	- -	Not codified

	908	- -	Not codified

	909	- -	Not codified

	910	- -	Not codified

	911	- -	Not codified

	912	- -	Superseded by 915

	913	- -	Not codified

	914	- -	Not codified

	915	- -	Not codified

	916	- -	Not codified

	917	- -	Not codified

	918	- -	Not codified

	919	- -	Not codified

	920	- -	Not codified

	921	- -	Repealed by 1878

	922	- -	Not codified

	923	- -	Not codified

	924	- -	Not codified

	925	- -	Repealed by 1540

	926	- -	Not codified

	927	- -	Not codified

	928	- -	Not codified

	929	- -	Not codified

	930	- -	Not codified

	931	- -	Not codified

	932	- -	Void

	933	- -	Void

	934	- -	Not codified

	935	- -	Not codified

	936	- -	Not codified

	937	- -	Not codified

	938	- -	Not codified

	939	- -	Not codified

	940	- -	Not codified

	941	- -	Not codified

	942	- -	Not codified

	943	- -	Not codified

	944	- -	Not codified

	945	- -	Not codified

	946	- -	Not codified

	947	- -	Not codified

	948	- -	Not codified

	949	- -	Not codified

	950	- -	Not codified

	951	- -	Not codified

	952	- -	Not codified

	953	- -	Not codified

	954	- -	Not codified

	955	- -	Not codified

	956	- -	Not codified

	957	- -	Not codified

	958	- -	Not codified

	959	- -	Not codified

	960	- -	Not codified

	961	- -	Not codified

	962	- -	Not codified

	963	- -	Not codified

	964	- -	Not codified

	965	- -	Not codified

	966	- -	Not codified

	967	- -	Not codified

	968	- -	Not codified

	969	- -	Not codified

	970	- -	Not codified

	971	- -	Not codified

	972	- -	Not codified

	973	- -	Not codified

	974	- -	Not codified

	975	- -	Not codified

	976	- -	Not codified

	977	- -	Not codified

	978	- -	Not codified

	979	- -	Not codified

	980	- -	Not codified

	981	- -	Not codified

	982	- -	Not codified

	983	- -	Not codified

	984	- -	Not codified

	985	- -	Not codified

	986	- -	Not codified

	987	- -	Not codified

	988	- -	Not codified

	989	- -	Not codified

	990	- -	Not codified

	991	- -	Not codified

	992	- -	Not codified

	993	- -	Not codified

	994	- -	Not codified

	995	- -	Not codified

	996	- -	Not codified

	997	- -	Not codified

	998	- -	Not codified

	999	- -	Not codified

	1000
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1001
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1002
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1003
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1004
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1005
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1006
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1007
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1008
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1009
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1010
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1011
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1012
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1013
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1014
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1015
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1016
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1017
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1018
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1019
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1020
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1021
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1022
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1023
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1024
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1025
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1026
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1027
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1028
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1029
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1030
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1031
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1032
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1033
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1034
[IMAGE]
	2-14-77	110.01 - 110.13, 110.20 - 110.34, 110.99

	1035
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1036
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1037
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1038
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1039
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1040
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1041
[IMAGE]
	3-14-77	154.61

	1042
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1043
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1044
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1045
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1046

	1046
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1047
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1048
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1049
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1050
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1051
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1052
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1053
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1054
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1055
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1056
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1057
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1058
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1059
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1060
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1061
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1062
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1063
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1064
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1065
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1066
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1067
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1068
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1069
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1070
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1071
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1072
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1073
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1074
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1503

	1075
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1076
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1077
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1078
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1079
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1080
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1081
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1082
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1083
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1084
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1085
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1086
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1087
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1088
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1089
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1090
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1091
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1092
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1093
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1094
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1095
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1096
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1097
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1098
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1099	- -	Void

	1100
[IMAGE]
	11-7-77	94.02

	1101
[IMAGE]
	11-7-77	32.01

	1102
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1103
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1104
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1105
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1106
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1107
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1108
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1109
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1110
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1111
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1112
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1113
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1114
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1115
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1116
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1117
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1118
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1119
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1120
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1121
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1122
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1123
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1124
[IMAGE]
	3-13-78	34.26

	1125
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1126
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1127
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1128
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1129
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1130
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1131
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1132
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1133
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1134
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1135
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1136
[IMAGE]
	6-12-78	Repealed by 2062

	1137
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1138
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1139
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1140
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1141
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1142
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1143
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1144
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1145
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1146
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1147
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1148
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1149
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1150
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1151
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1152
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1153
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1154
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1155
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1156
[IMAGE]
	8-14-78	31.01

	1157
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1158
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1159
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1160
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1161
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1162
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1163
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1164
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1165
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1166
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1167
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1168
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1169
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1170
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1171
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1172
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1173
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1174
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1175
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1478

	1176
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1177
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1178
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1179
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1180
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1181
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1182
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1183
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1184
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1185
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1186
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1187
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1188
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1189
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1190	- -	Not passed

	1191	- -	Not passed

	1192
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1193
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1476

	1194
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1195
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1196
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1197
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1198
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1199
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1200
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1201
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1202
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1203
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1204
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1205
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1206
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1207
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1208
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1209
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1210
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1211
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1212
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1213
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1214
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1481

	1215
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1216
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1217
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1218
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1219
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1220
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1221
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1222
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1223
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1224
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1225
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1226
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1227
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1228
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1229
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1230
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1231
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1232
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1233
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1234
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1235
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1236
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1237
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1238
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1239
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1240
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1241
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1242
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1243
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1244
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1245
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1246
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1247
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1248
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1249
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1448

	1250
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1737

	1251
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1252
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1253
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1254
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1255
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1256
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1257
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1258
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1259
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1260
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1753

	1261
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1262
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1263
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1264
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1265
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1266
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1267
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1268
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1269
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1270
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1271
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1272
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1273
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1274
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1737

	1275
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1276
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1277
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1278
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1279
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1280
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1281
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1282
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1283
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1284
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1285
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1286
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1287
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1288
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1289
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1290
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1291
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1292
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1293
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1294
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1295
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1296
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1297
[IMAGE]
	5-12-80	34.37

	1298
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1299
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1300
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1301
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1302
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1303
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1304
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1305
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1306
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1307
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1308
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1309
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1476

	1310
[IMAGE]
	7-14-80	Repealed by 2057

	1311
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1312
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1313
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1314
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1315
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1316
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1317
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1318
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1319
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1320
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1321
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1322
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1323
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1324
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1325
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1326
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1327
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1328
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1329
[IMAGE]
	10-13-80	95.01 - 95.08, 95.99

	1330
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1331
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1332
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1333
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1334
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1335
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1336
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1337
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1338
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1339
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1340
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1341
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1342
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1343
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1344
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1345
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1346
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1347
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1348
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1349
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1350
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1351
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1352
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1353
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1354
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1355
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1503

	1356
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1357
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1358
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1359
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1360
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1361
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1362
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1363
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1364
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1365
[IMAGE]
	6-8-81	34.37, 34.38

	1366
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1367
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1368
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1369
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1370
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1371
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1372
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1373
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1374
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1375
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1376
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1377
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1378
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1379
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1380
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1381
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1382
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1383
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1384
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1385
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1386
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1387
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1388
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1389
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1390
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1391
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1392
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1393
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1394
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1753

	1395
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1396
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1397
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1398
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1399
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1400
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1401
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1402
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1403
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1404
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1405
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1406
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1407
[IMAGE]
	4-12-82	33.35 - 33.39

	1408
[IMAGE]
	4-12-82	132.01 - 132.03, 132.99

	1409
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1410
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1411
[IMAGE]
	4-27-82	151.01 - 151.03, 151.15 - 151.20, 151.35 - 151.37, 151.50 - 151.57, 151.99

	1412
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1413
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1414
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1415
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1416
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1417
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1418
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1419
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1420
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1421
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1422
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1423
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1424
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1425
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1426
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1427
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1428
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1429
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1430
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1431
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1432
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1433
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1434
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1435	- -	Number not used

	1436	- -	Number not used

	1437	- -	Number not used

	1438
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1439
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1440
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1441
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1442
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1443
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1444
[IMAGE]
	11-22-82	Repealed by 2057

	1445
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1446
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1447
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1448
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1759

	1449
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1464

	1450
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1451
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1759

	1452
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1568

	1453
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1454
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1455
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1456
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1457
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1458
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1459
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1460
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1461
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1462
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1568

	1463
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1464
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1465
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1466
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1467
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1468
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1469
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1470
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1471
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1472
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1473
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1474
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1475
[IMAGE]
	7-25-83	94.20

	1476
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1480

	1477
[IMAGE]
	8-15-83	150.01 - 150.06

	1478
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1482

	1479
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1480
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1504

	1481
[IMAGE]
	9-12-83	Repealed by 2084

	1482
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1505

	1483
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1484
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1485
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1486
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1487
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1488
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1489
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1490
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1491
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1492
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1493
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1494
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1495
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1496
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1497
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1498
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1499
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1500
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1501
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1502
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1503
[IMAGE]
	3-26-84	90.15 - 90.21, 90.99

	1504
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1691

	1505
[IMAGE]
	4-9-84	156.01 - 156.08

	1506
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1507
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1508
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1509
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1510
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1511
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1512
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1513
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1514
[IMAGE]
	5-29-84	T.S.O. III

	1515
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1516
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1517
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1518
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1519
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1691

	1520
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1521
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1522
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1523
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1524
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1525
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1526
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1527
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1528
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1529
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1530
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1531
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1532
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1533
[IMAGE]
	9-10-84	111.01 - 111.06, 111.99

	1534
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1535
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1536
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1537
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1538
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1539
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1540
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1851

	1541
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1542
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1543
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1561

	1544
[IMAGE]
	10-8-84	33.20 - 33.23

	1545
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1546
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1547
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1548	- -	Number not used

	1549
[IMAGE]
	12-10-84	110.99

	1550
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1551
[IMAGE]
	1-14-85	Repealed by 1979

	1552
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1553
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1554
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1555
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1556
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1557
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1558
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1559
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1560
[IMAGE]
	2-25-85	52.05, 52.07 - 52.09

	1561
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1562
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1563
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1564
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1565
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1566
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1567
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1568
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1623

	1569
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1802

	1570
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1571
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1572
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1573
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1574
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1575
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1576
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1577
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1578
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1579
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1580
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1581
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1582
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1583
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1584
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1585
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1586
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1587
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1588
[IMAGE]
	4-28-86	93.02 - 93.04, 93.99

	1589
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1590
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1621

	1591
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1592
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1593
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1594
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1595
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1596
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1597
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1598
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1599
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1600
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1601
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1690

	1602
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1603
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1604
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1605
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1606
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1607	- -	Not codified

	1608
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1609
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1610
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1611
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1612
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1613
[IMAGE]
	10-27-86	90.16, 90.21

	1614
[IMAGE]
	10-27-86	Repealed by 1689

	1615
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1691

	1616
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1617
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1618
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1619
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1620
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1621
[IMAGE]
	2-23-87	Repealed by 2167

	1622
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1623
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1634

	1624
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1625
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1626
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1627
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1628
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1629
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1630
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1631
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1632
[IMAGE]
	6-22-87	52.99, 73.99, 90.99, 94.99, 95.99, 110.99, 113.99, 114.99, 133.99, 152.99, 154.99

	1633
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1647

	1634
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1635
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1636
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1637
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1691

	1638
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1639
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1640
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1641
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1753

	1642
[IMAGE]
	10-26-87	Not codified

	1643
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1644
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1691 and 1770

	1645
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1646
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1647
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1798

	1648
[IMAGE]
	1-25-88	Repealed by 1694

	1649
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1650
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1651
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1652
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1653
[IMAGE]
	3-14-88	52.03, 52.15

	1654
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1655
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1656
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1657
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1658
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1659
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1660
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1661
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1662
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1663
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1664
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1665	- -	Not enacted

	1666
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1667
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1668
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1669
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1670
[IMAGE]
	9-12-88	93.04

	1671
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1744

	1672	- -	Not enacted

	1673
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1674
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1675
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1676
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1677
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1678
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1679
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1680
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1681
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1682
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1683
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1684
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1744

	1685
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1686
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1688
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1689
[IMAGE]
	1-8-90	155.01, 155.02, 155.15 - 155.25, 155.35 - 155.39, 155.50, 155.51, 155.99

	1690
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1727

	1691
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1770

	1692
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1693
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1694
[IMAGE]
	3-12-90	Repealed by 1718

	1695
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1696
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1697
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1795

	1698
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1699
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1700
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1701
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1702
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1703
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1704
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1705
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1706
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1707
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1708
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1709
[IMAGE]
	6-25-90	92.25 - 92.30, 92.99

	1710
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1711
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1712
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1713
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1714
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1715
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1716
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1717
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1718
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1805

	1719
[IMAGE]
	3-11-91	112.01 - 112.13, 112.25 - 112.28, 112.99

	1720
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1721
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1722
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1723
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1724	- -	Not codified

	1725
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1726
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1727
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1794

	1728
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1729
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1730
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1731
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1732
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1733
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1734
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1735
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1736
[IMAGE]
	6-24-91	52.03

	1737
[IMAGE]
	6-24-91	51.001 - 51.006, 51.020 - 51.028, 51.040 - 51.048, 51.060 - 51.063, 51.076, 51.110 - 51.113, 51.999

	1738
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1739
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1740
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1741
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1742
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1743
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1744
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1745
[IMAGE]
	8-26-91	92.27

	1746
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1747
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1748
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1749
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1750
[IMAGE]
	10-28-91	92.01 - 92.09, 92.13, 92.99

	1751
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1752
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1753
[IMAGE]
	12-9-91	Not codified

	1754
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1755
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1756
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1757
[IMAGE]
	3-9-92	32.02

	1758
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1759
[IMAGE]
	3-23-92	70.01 - 70.06, 70.99, 71.01 - 71.08, 72.01 - 72.09

	1760
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1761
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1762
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1763
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1764
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1765
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1766
[IMAGE]
	5-11-92	112.25, 112.27

	1767
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1768
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1769
[IMAGE]
	9-28-92	154.03, 154.60

	1770
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1840

	1771
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1772
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1773
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1774
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1775
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1776
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1777
[IMAGE]
	11-9-92	114.03, 114.08

	1778
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1779
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1780
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1781
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1782
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1783
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1784
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1785
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1786
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1787
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1788
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1789
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1790
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1791
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1792
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1793
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1794
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1844

	1795
[IMAGE]
	2-22-93	T.S.O. III

	1796
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1797
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1798
[IMAGE]
	2-22-93	Repealed by 2062

	1799
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1800
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1801
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1802
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1803
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1804
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1805
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1806
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1807
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1808
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1809
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1810
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1811
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1812
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1813
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1814
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1815
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1816
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1817
[IMAGE]
	5- -93	33.01 - 33.09

	1818
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1819
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1820
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1821
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1822
[IMAGE]
	6-28-93	52.25 - 52.32, 52.99

	1823
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1824
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1825
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1826
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1827
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1828
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1829
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1830
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1831
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1840

	1832
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1833
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1834
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1835
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1883

	1836
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1837
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1838
[IMAGE]
	- -	Repealed by 1883

	1839
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1840
[IMAGE]
	2-28-94	157.001 - 157.005, 157.015, 157.016, 157.025 - 157.028, 157.040, 157.041, 157.055, 157.056, 157.070, 157.160 - 157.165, 157.999

	1841
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1842
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1843
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1844
[IMAGE]
	5-23-94	Repealed by 1914

	1845
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1846
[IMAGE]
	6-27-94	Repealed by 2062

	1847
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1848
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1849
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1850
[IMAGE]
	8-8-94	112.04, 112.25, 112.27

	1851
[IMAGE]
	8-8-94	T.S.O. III, 50.01 - 50.03, 50.15 - 50.18, 50.30 - 50.36, 50.50, 50.51, 50.99

	1852
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1853
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1854
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1855
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1856
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1857
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1858
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1859
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1860
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1861
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1862
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1863
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1864
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1865
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1866
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1867
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1868
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1869
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1870
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1871
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1872
[IMAGE]
	1-23-95	Repealed by 2009

	1873
[IMAGE]
	1-23-95	131.01 - 131.06, 131.99

	1874
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1875
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1876
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1877
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1878
[IMAGE]
	5-22-95	Repealed by 1998

	1879
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1880
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1881	- -	Not codified

	1882
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1883
[IMAGE]
	6-12-95	70.07

	1884
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1885
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1886
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1887
[IMAGE]
	6-26-95	92.14

	1888
[IMAGE]
	- -	Not codified

	1889
[IMAGE]
	12-18-95	T.S.O. VII

	1890
[IMAGE]
	1-22-96	T.S.O. I

	1891
[IMAGE]
	2-12-96	T.S.O. VI

	1892
[IMAGE]
	2-26-96	T.S.O. VII

	1893
[IMAGE]
	2-26-96	T.S.O. I

	1894
[IMAGE]
	2-26-96	Repealed by 2031

	1895
[IMAGE]
	3-18-96	T.S.O. VII

	1897
[IMAGE]
	3-18-96	T.S.O. I

	1898
[IMAGE]
	4-8-96	Repealed by 1976

	1899
[IMAGE]
	4-22-96	T.S.O. I

	1900
[IMAGE]
	5-13-96	T.S.O. I

	1901
[IMAGE]
	5-20-96	T.S.O. VI

	1902
[IMAGE]
	6-10-96	T.S.O. I

	1903
[IMAGE]
	6-24-96	T.S.O. I

	1904
[IMAGE]
	7-8-96	Repealed by 1916

	1905
[IMAGE]
	7-8-96	Repealed by 1917

	1906
[IMAGE]
	7-8-96	Repealed by 1918

	1907
[IMAGE]
	7-8-96	92.14

	1908
[IMAGE]
	7-22-96	T.S.O. I

	1909
[IMAGE]
	8-26-96	T.S.O. VII

	1910
[IMAGE]
	9-23-96	T.S.O. VII

	1911
[IMAGE]
	10-28-96	Not codified

	1912
[IMAGE]
	11-25-96	Repealed by 2084

	1913
[IMAGE]
	11-25-96	52.03

	1914
[IMAGE]
	12-23-96	Repealed by 2036

	1915
[IMAGE]
	11-25-96	Not codified

	1916
[IMAGE]
	1-13-97	T.S.O. IV

	1917
[IMAGE]
	1-13-97	T.S.O. IV

	1918
[IMAGE]
	1-13-97	T.S.O. IV

	1919
[IMAGE]
	11-13-97	T.S.O. II

	1920
[IMAGE]
	1-27-97	T.S.O. IV

	1921
[IMAGE]
	1-27-97	T.S.O. IV

	1922
[IMAGE]
	1-27-97	T.S.O. IV

	1923
[IMAGE]
	2-10-97	94.01

	1924
[IMAGE]
	2-10-97	50.51

	1925
[IMAGE]
	3-24-97	Not codified

	1926
[IMAGE]
	4-14-97	51.072, 52.09

	1927
[IMAGE]
	4-14-97	T.S.O. I

	1928
[IMAGE]
	4-14-97	T.S.O. I

	1929
[IMAGE]
	6-9-97	T.S.O. VII

	1930
[IMAGE]
	6-9-97	155.02, 155.37

	1931
[IMAGE]
	6-23-97	T.S.O. VII

	1932
[IMAGE]
	7-14-97	Repealed by 1978

	1933
[IMAGE]
	6-23-97	T.S.O. I

	1934
[IMAGE]
	7-14-97	T.S.O. I

	1935
[IMAGE]
	7-14-97	T.S.O. I

	1936
[IMAGE]
	7-28-97	T.S.O. I

	1937
[IMAGE]
	8-25-97	T.S.O. VI

	1938
[IMAGE]
	9-8-97	34.01 - 34.12

	1939
[IMAGE]
	9-22-97	T.S.O. VII

	1940
[IMAGE]
	10-13-97	T.S.O. I

	1941
[IMAGE]
	11-24-97	51.090 - 51.097, 51.999

	1942
[IMAGE]
	11-10-97	94.35 - 94.52, 94.99

	1943
[IMAGE]
	11-10-97	T.S.O. I

	1944
[IMAGE]
	11-24-97	92.01, 92.10

	1945
[IMAGE]
	11-24-97	T.S.O. I

	1946
[IMAGE]
	11-24-97	Repealed by 1987

	1947
[IMAGE]
	12-8-97	T.S.O. VII

	1948
[IMAGE]
	2-23-98	T.S.O. I

	1949
[IMAGE]
	3-9-98	71.09

	1950
[IMAGE]
	4-13-98	T.S.O. VII

	1951
[IMAGE]
	4-13-98	T.S.O. IV

	1952
[IMAGE]
	4-13-98	T.S.O. IV

	1953
[IMAGE]
	4-13-98	T.S.O. IV

	1954
[IMAGE]
	4-13-98	T.S.O. IV

	1955
[IMAGE]
	4-13-98	T.S.O. IV

	1956
[IMAGE]
	4-13-98	T.S.O. IV

	1957
[IMAGE]
	4-27-98	T.S.O. I

	1958
[IMAGE]
	6-16-98	T.S.O. III

	1959
[IMAGE]
	6-22-98	T.S.O. I

	1961
[IMAGE]
	7-27-98	T.S.O. I

	1962
[IMAGE]
	8-10-98	T.S.O. VI

	1963
[IMAGE]
	8-10-98	T.S.O. I

	1964
[IMAGE]
	8-24-98	T.S.O. I

	1965
[IMAGE]
	9-14-98	33.50, 33.51

	1966
[IMAGE]
	9-14-98	T.S.O. I

	1967
[IMAGE]
	9-14-98	52.14

	1968
[IMAGE]
	10-12-98	T.S.O. I

	1969
[IMAGE]
	10-12-98	T.S.O. VII

	1970
[IMAGE]
	10-12-98	T.S.O. I

	1971
[IMAGE]
	10-12-98	112.02

	1972
[IMAGE]
	10-12-98	52.04

	1973
[IMAGE]
	10-26-98	T.S.O. I

	1974
[IMAGE]
	10-26-98	T.S.O. I

	1975
[IMAGE]
	10-26-98	T.S.O. I

	1976
[IMAGE]
	10-26-98	50.99, 51.999, 52.99, 70.99, 73.99, 90.01, 90.03 - 90.05, 90.99, 92.11, 92.99, 94.05 - 94.10, 94.99, 131.99, 133.99

	1977
[IMAGE]
	11-9-98	T.S.O. VII

	1978
[IMAGE]
	11-9-98	Not codified

	1979
[IMAGE]
	11-9-98	93.01

	1980
[IMAGE]
	11-23-98	T.S.O. I

	1981
[IMAGE]
	11-23-98	T.S.O. I

	1982
[IMAGE]
	11-23-98	T.S.O. I

	1983
[IMAGE]
	1-25-99	T.S.O. VII

	1984
[IMAGE]
	1-25-99	T.S.O. VII

	1985
[IMAGE]
	1-25-99	T.S.O. VI

	1986
[IMAGE]
	3-22-99	T.S.O. I

	1987
[IMAGE]
	3-22-99	150.01 - 150.05

	1988
[IMAGE]
	4-12-99	T.S.O. I

	1989
[IMAGE]
	4-12-99	T.S.O. I

	1990
[IMAGE]
	5-10-99	T.S.O. I

	1991
[IMAGE]
	6-14-99	T.S.O. VI

	1992
[IMAGE]
	6-14-99	92.12, 92.99

	1993
[IMAGE]
	6-28-99	T.S.O. VII

	1994
[IMAGE]
	6-28-99	T.S.O. I

	1995
[IMAGE]
	7-12-99	Not codified

	1996
[IMAGE]
	8-23-99	T.S.O. VII

	1997
[IMAGE]
	10-11-99	T.S.O. VI

	1998
[IMAGE]
	10-25-99	Repealed by 2104

	1999
[IMAGE]
	10-25-99	Repealed by 2007

	2000
[IMAGE]
	11-22-99	T.S.O. I and VII

	2001
[IMAGE]
	11-22-99	T.S.O. I

	2002
[IMAGE]
	12-13-99	156.09

	2003
[IMAGE]
	12-13-99	157.150

	2004
[IMAGE]
	12-13-99	154.15, 154.16, 154.18, 154.22, 154.65, 154.66

	2005
[IMAGE]
	1-10-00	T.S.O. VI

	2006
[IMAGE]
	1-24-00	T.S.O. I

	2007
[IMAGE]
	2-14-00	T.S.O. VI

	2008
[IMAGE]
	3-13-00	T.S.O. I

	2009
[IMAGE]
	8-28-00	10.05, 130.01 - 130.12, 130.30, 130.31

	2010
[IMAGE]
	3-27-00	Adopting Ordinance

	2011
[IMAGE]
	4-24-00	T.S.O. I

	2013
[IMAGE]
	4-24-00	T.S.O. I

	2014
[IMAGE]
	5-22-00	T.S.O. IV

	2015
[IMAGE]
	5-22-00	T.S.O. IV

	2016
[IMAGE]
	5-22-00	Repealed by 2249

	2017
[IMAGE]
	5-23-00	T.S.O. I

	2018
[IMAGE]
	7-24-00	T.S.O. VII

	2019
[IMAGE]
	7-24-00	Not codified

	2020
[IMAGE]
	9-11-00	33.36, 33.39

	2021
[IMAGE]
	9-25-00	T.S.O. VII

	2022
[IMAGE]
	9-25-00	T.S.O. I

	2023
[IMAGE]
	9-25-00	32.01

	2024
[IMAGE]
	10-9-00	92.12

	2025
[IMAGE]
	11-13-00	T.S.O. I

	2026
[IMAGE]
	12-11-00	T.S.O. I

	2027
[IMAGE]
	12-18-00	93.04

	2028
[IMAGE]
	12-18-00	51.006, 52.15

	2029
[IMAGE]
	3-12-01	T.S.O. IV

	2030
[IMAGE]
	3-12-01	T.S.O. IV

	2031
[IMAGE]
	3-26-01	T.S.O. III

	2032
[IMAGE]
	4-9-01	T.S.O. I

	2033
[IMAGE]
	5-14-01	T.S.O. I

	2034
[IMAGE]
	5-14-01	Repealed by 2104

	2035
[IMAGE]
	5-21-01	T.S.O. VI

	2036
[IMAGE]
	5-21-01	152.01 - 152.03

	2037
[IMAGE]
	6-11-01	T.S.O. I

	2038
[IMAGE]
	6-25-01	T.S.O. I

	2039
[IMAGE]
	7-23-01	T.S.O. I

	2040
[IMAGE]
	8-13-01	T.S.O. I

	2041
[IMAGE]
	8-27-01	T.S.O. III

	2042
[IMAGE]
	9-24-01	152.04

	2043
[IMAGE]
	9-24-01	T.S.O. I

	2044
[IMAGE]
	9-24-01	T.S.O. I

	2045
[IMAGE]
	9-24-01	Not codified

	2046
[IMAGE]
	10-22-01	72.09, 72.10

	2047
[IMAGE]
	11-26-01	T.S.O. I

	2048
[IMAGE]
	11-26-01	72.09

	2049
[IMAGE]
	12-10-01	72.09

	2050
[IMAGE]
	12-10-01	70.01

	2051
[IMAGE]
	1-28-02	T.S.O. VII

	2052
[IMAGE]
	2-25-02	T.S.O. I

	2053
[IMAGE]
	2-25-02	72.09

	2054
[IMAGE]
	4-22-02	T.S.O. II

	2055
[IMAGE]
	5-13-02	T.S.O. I

	2056
[IMAGE]
	6-10-02	112.25, 112.27

	2057
[IMAGE]
	7-8-02	Repeals Ch. 30

	2058
[IMAGE]
	7-22-02	T.S.O. VII

	2059
[IMAGE]
	7-22-02	T.S.O. I

	2060
[IMAGE]
	8-12-02	152.04

	2061
[IMAGE]
	11-4-02	152.01, 152.03, 152.04, 152.99

	2062
[IMAGE]
	11-25-02	Repeals Ch. 91

	2063
[IMAGE]
	12-23-02	Repealed by 2104

	2064
[IMAGE]
	12-23-02	Repealed by 2104

	2065
[IMAGE]
	12-23-02	53.01

	2066	- -	Failed to pass

	2067
[IMAGE]
	1-27-03	112.04, 112.25

	2068
[IMAGE]
	4-28-03	Repealed by 2104

	2069
[IMAGE]
	5-12-03	Repealed by 2249

	2070
[IMAGE]
	6-9-03	156.09

	2071
[IMAGE]
	7-14-03	T.S.O. I

	2072
[IMAGE]
	7-28-03	70.03, 71.03

	2073
[IMAGE]
	8-25-03	T.S.O. I

	2074
[IMAGE]
	9-8-03	Repealed by 2104

	2075
[IMAGE]
	9-22-03	T.S.O. I

	2076
[IMAGE]
	10-13-03	T.S.O. I

	2077
[IMAGE]
	10-27-03	134.01 - 134.07

	2078
[IMAGE]
	11-10-03	T.S.O. I

	2079
[IMAGE]
	12-22-03	T.S.O. I

	2080
[IMAGE]
	3-8-04	155.24

	2081
[IMAGE]
	4-12-04	135.001 - 135.005, 135.020 - 135.022, 135.030 - 135.040, 135.050 -135.053, 135.060 - 135.064, 135.070 - 135.079, 135.090 - 135.093, 135.100 - 135.102

	2082
[IMAGE]
	4-12-04	70.07

	2083
[IMAGE]
	4-26-04	136.01 - 136.04, 136.10 - 136.24, 136.30 - 136.35

	2084
[IMAGE]
	4-26-04	T.S.O. II

	2085
[IMAGE]
	6-14-04	T.S.O. IV

	2086
[IMAGE]
	6-14-04	T.S.O. IV

	2087
[IMAGE]
	6-14-04	T.S.O. IV

	2088
[IMAGE]
	6-14-04	T.S.O. I

	2089
[IMAGE]
	7-26-04	T.S.O. I

	2090
[IMAGE]
	8-9-04	Not codified

	2091
[IMAGE]
	8-9-04	T.S.O. VII

	2092
[IMAGE]
	8-9-04	T.S.O. VII

	2093
[IMAGE]
	8-23-04	T.S.O. VII

	2094
[IMAGE]
	10-25-04	T.S.O. I

	2095
[IMAGE]
	11-8-04	T.S.O. IV

	2096
[IMAGE]
	11-8-04	T.S.O. IV

	2097
[IMAGE]
	11-8-04	T.S.O. IV

	2098
[IMAGE]
	12-13-04	157.029

	2099
[IMAGE]
	12-13-04	T.S.O. VII

	2100
[IMAGE]
	12-13-04	T.S.O. I

	2101
[IMAGE]
	1-24-05	T.S.O. I

	2102
[IMAGE]
	2-14-05	T.S.O. I

	2103
[IMAGE]
	2-28-05	Not codified

	2104
[IMAGE]
	3-28-05	35.01 - 35.15

	2105
[IMAGE]
	4-11-05	T.S.O. I

	2106
[IMAGE]
	4-25-05	T.S.O. I

	2107
[IMAGE]
	6-13-05	T.S.O. VII

	2108
[IMAGE]
	6-13-05	T.S.O. I

	2109
[IMAGE]
	6-27-05	157.002, 157.136, 157.151

	2110
[IMAGE]
	6-27-05	T.S.O. III

	2111
[IMAGE]
	8-8-05	T.S.O. III

	2112
[IMAGE]
	9-26-05	T.S.O. VII

	2113
[IMAGE]
	1-9-06	T.S.O. I

	2114
[IMAGE]
	2-13-06	T.S.O. I

	2115
[IMAGE]
	2-13-06	T.S.O. I

	2116
[IMAGE]
	2-27-06	T.S.O. I

	2117
[IMAGE]
	3-27-06	T.S.O. I

	2118
[IMAGE]
	3-27-06	T.S.O. VII

	2119
[IMAGE]
	3-27-06	93.04

	2120
[IMAGE]
	5-22-06	T.S.O. I

	2121
[IMAGE]
	7-10-06	T.S.O. I

	2122
[IMAGE]
	7-24-06	T.S.O. I

	2123
[IMAGE]
	7-24-06	T.S.O. VII

	2124
[IMAGE]
	8-14-06	T.S.O. I

	2125
[IMAGE]
	9-25-06	T.S.O. I

	2126
[IMAGE]
	10-23-06	T.S.O. I

	2127
[IMAGE]
	1-8-07	T.S.O. VII

	2128
[IMAGE]
	1-22-07	157.070

	2129
[IMAGE]
	1-22-07	35.10

	2130
[IMAGE]
	2-12-07	33.50

	2131
[IMAGE]
	3-26-07	T.S.O. I

	2132
[IMAGE]
	4-9-07	T.S.O. I

	2133
[IMAGE]
	5-21-07	T.S.O. I

	2134
[IMAGE]
	5-21-07	93.04, 130.07

	2135
[IMAGE]
	6-11-07	T.S.O. I

	2136
[IMAGE]
	7-11-07	93.04, 130.07

	2137
[IMAGE]
	6-11-07	T.S.O. I

	2138
[IMAGE]
	6-25-07	157.004, 157.025, 157.143, 157.163, 157.166

	2139
[IMAGE]
	7-9-07	94.11, 94.99

	2140
[IMAGE]
	7-23-07	T.S.O. I

	2141
[IMAGE]
	7-23-07	T.S.O. I

	2142
[IMAGE]
	8-27-07	T.S.O. VI

	2143
[IMAGE]
	9-10-07	T.S.O. I

	2144
[IMAGE]
	10-22-07	T.S.O. I

	2145
[IMAGE]
	10-22-07	T.S.O. VII

	2146
[IMAGE]
	1-14-08	T.S.O. I

	2147
[IMAGE]
	2-25-09	T.S.O. I

	2148
[IMAGE]
	5-19-08	T.S.O. I

	2149
[IMAGE]
	6-23-08	T.S.O. I

	2150
[IMAGE]
	8-11-08	T.S.O. I

	2151
[IMAGE]
	8-25-08	33.60, 33.61

	2152
[IMAGE]
	8-25-08	93.01, 93.04

	2153
[IMAGE]
	1-12-09	T.S.O. I

	2154
[IMAGE]
	3-9-09	33.36, 33.37, 33.40

	2155
[IMAGE]
	2-23-09	T.S.O. VII

	2156
[IMAGE]
	7-13-09	T.S.O. I

	2157
[IMAGE]
	7-13-09	T.S.O. III

	2158
[IMAGE]
	7-13-09	70.07

	2159
[IMAGE]
	7-13-09	92.04

	2160
[IMAGE]
	8-10-09	52.03, 52.07, Repeals 51.064

	2161
[IMAGE]
	9-14-09	T.S.O. I

	2162
[IMAGE]
	10-26-09	112.11

	2163
[IMAGE]
	3-22-10	130.11

	2164
[IMAGE]
	5-24-10	T.S.O. VII

	2165
[IMAGE]
	5-24-10	T.S.O. VII

	2166
[IMAGE]
	6-28-10	T.S.O. III

	2167
[IMAGE]
	8-23-10	153.01 – 153.07, 153.20 – 153.22, 153.35, 153.36, 153.99

	2168
[IMAGE]
	1-24-11	T.S.O. I

	2169
[IMAGE]
	2-28-11	T.S.O. I

	2170
[IMAGE]
	3-14-11	T.S.O. I

	2171
[IMAGE]
	3-28-11	93.04(K)

	2172
[IMAGE]
	5-9-11	T.S.O. I

	2173
[IMAGE]
	5-23-11	T.S.O. I

	2174
[IMAGE]
	6-27-11	T.S.O. I

	2175
[IMAGE]
	9-26-11	157.042

	2176		Number not used

	2177
[IMAGE]
	7-25-11	157.004(E) and (F), 157.229, 157.233

	2178
[IMAGE]
	7-25-11	Not codified

	2179
[IMAGE]
	7-25-11	Not codified

	2180
[IMAGE]
	7-25-11	154.03, 154.19(C) and (F), 157.002, 157.025(D)(1), 157.026(D)(1), 157.027(D)(1), 157.028(D)(1), 157.152

	2181
[IMAGE]
	7-25-11	Not codified

	2182
[IMAGE]
	10-24-11	10.99(F)

	2183
[IMAGE]
	3-12-12	T.S.O. I

	2184
[IMAGE]
	3-15-12	Repealed by 2254

	2185
[IMAGE]
	3-26-12	157.057

	2186
[IMAGE]
	3-26-12	T.S.O. VII

	2187
[IMAGE]
	3-26-12	T.S.O. VII

	2188
[IMAGE]
	4-23-12	T.S.O. I

	2189
[IMAGE]
	4-23-12	T.S.O. VII

	2190
[IMAGE]
	5-14-12	T.S.O. VII

	2191
[IMAGE]
	6-25-12	T.S.O. VII

	2192
[IMAGE]
	7-23-12	112.02, 112.03(A) and (E), 112.04, 112.05(A), 112.07(B), 112.25(A) – (C), 112.27(B) and (D)

	2193
[IMAGE]
	10-8-12	T.S.O. I

	2194
[IMAGE]
	11-26-12	157.041(B)(11)

	2195
[IMAGE]
	11-26-12	T.S.O. I

	2196
[IMAGE]
	3-11-13	T.S.O. I

	2197
[IMAGE]
	3-25-13	92.14, 92.15

	2198
[IMAGE]
	3-25-13	131.02, 131.05

	2199
[IMAGE]
	5-13-13	T.S.O. I

	2200
[IMAGE]
	5-20-13	37.01 – 37.03

	2201		Failed

	2202
[IMAGE]
	7-8-13	132.01, 132.03

	2203
[IMAGE]
	7-22-13	T.S.O. I

	2204
[IMAGE]
	8-26-13	Not codified

	2205
[IMAGE]
	8-26-13	T.S.O. I

	2206
[IMAGE]
	9-9-13	116.01 – 116.12

	2207
[IMAGE]
	10-14-13	157.004

	2208
[IMAGE]
	10-14-13	T.S.O. I

	2209
[IMAGE]
	10-28-13	93.01

	2210
[IMAGE]
	11-25-13	T.S.O. I

	2211
[IMAGE]
	11-25-13	T.S.O. I

	2212
[IMAGE]
	12-9-13	T.S.O. I

	2213
[IMAGE]
	12-9-13	T.S.O. I

	2214
[IMAGE]
	1-27-14	T.S.O. I

	2215
[IMAGE]
	1-27-14	Not codified

	2216
[IMAGE]
	3-3-14	130.02(D) and (E)

	2217
[IMAGE]
	3-24-13	157.040(E), 157.041(E)

	2218
[IMAGE]
	5-12-14	T.S.O. VI

	2219
[IMAGE]
	6-9-14	Not codified

	2220
[IMAGE]
	6-9-14	Not codified

	2221
[IMAGE]
	7-14-14	T.S.O. VII

	2222
[IMAGE]
	11-24-14	151.03, 157.140

	2223
[IMAGE]
	1-26-15	T.S.O. VI

	2224
[IMAGE]
	1-12-15	Not codified

	2225
[IMAGE]
	3-23-15	T.S.O. I

	2226
[IMAGE]
	3-23-15	T.S.O. I

	2227
[IMAGE]
	3-23-15	93.04(O), 93.99

	2228
[IMAGE]
	4-27-15	T.S.O. I

	2229
[IMAGE]
	4-27-15	90.16, 90.18 – 90.22

	2230
[IMAGE]
	5-11-15	117.01 – 117.14

	2231
[IMAGE]
	8-10-15	117.09

	2232
[IMAGE]
	7-27-15	112.02 – 112.12, 112.25, 112.26, 112.28

	2233		Failed

	2234
[IMAGE]
	11-23-15	157.151(B)

	2235
[IMAGE]
	12-28-15	157.002

	2236
[IMAGE]
	12-14-15	112.04, 112.25(A)

	2237
[IMAGE]
	12-14-15	35.06, 35.09(A) and (C) – (E), 35.10, 35.13(E) – (G)

	2238
[IMAGE]
	2-22-16	T.S.O. I

	2239
[IMAGE]
	3-14-16	Not codified

	2240
[IMAGE]
	4-25-16	112.25

	2241
[IMAGE]
	5-9-16	50.51

	2242
[IMAGE]
	12-12-16	32.01 – 32.38

	2243
[IMAGE]
	3-20-17	73.26, 73.27

	2244
[IMAGE]
	3-20-17	112.13

	2245
[IMAGE]
	4-24-17	157.043

	2246
[IMAGE]
	8-14-17	T.S.O. VII

	2247
[IMAGE]
	8-14-17	T.S.O. I

	2248
[IMAGE]
	9-11-17	T.S.O. III

	2249
[IMAGE]
	9-11-17	115.001 – 115.999

	2250
[IMAGE]
	9-25-17	157.215

	2251
[IMAGE]
	9-25-17	157.025 – 157.029

	2252
[IMAGE]
	11-13-17	112.25

	2253
[IMAGE]
	3-26-18	32.39 – 32.42

	2254
[IMAGE]
	3-26-18	Not codified; Repeals 2184

	2255
[IMAGE]
	5-29-18	T.S.O VII

	2256
[IMAGE]
	5-29-18	32.03

	2257
[IMAGE]
	5-29-18	111.03

	2258
[IMAGE]
	6-11-18	115.077

	2259
[IMAGE]
	8-13-18	92.23 – 92.30

	2260
[IMAGE]
	8-13-18	157.136(A)(3)

	2261
[IMAGE]
	8-27-18	116.01, 116.02(E), 116.03(C), 116.07(C) and (I), 116.10 – 116.12, 116.99

	2262
[IMAGE]
	9-24-18	92.99(C), 134.01(18)

	2263
[IMAGE]
	9-24-18	157.026(B)(5)

	2264
[IMAGE]
	9-24-18	157.210(D)(1)

	2265
[IMAGE]
	9-24-18	157.231(A)

	2266
[IMAGE]
	10-22-18	T.S.O. I

	2267
[IMAGE]
	10-22-18	Not codified

	2268
[IMAGE]
	10-22-18	94.70

	2269
[IMAGE]
	11-13-18	152.01 – 152.28, 152.31, 152.99

	2270
[IMAGE]
	12-10-18	33.01, 33.02, 33.05, 33.09

	

	2271
[IMAGE]
	3-11-19	T.S.O. VII

	2272
[IMAGE]
	3-11-19	T.S.O. I

	2273
[IMAGE]
	3-11-19	T.S.O. VII

	2274
[IMAGE]
	3-25-19	T.S.O. VII

	2275
[IMAGE]
	4-22-19	T.S.O. I

	2276
[IMAGE]
	5-13-19	34.25 – 34.44

	2277
[IMAGE]
	5-28-19	T.S.O. I

	2278
[IMAGE]
	6-24-19	T.S.O. VII


References to Resolutions

	Res. No.	Date Passed	Description

	1955	 	 

	01	07/11/55	Designate U.S. National Bank as depository for all funds

	1956

	01	03/28/56	Authorize $150 balance in General emergency fund for civil defense supplies

	02	06/06/56	Transfer $20,903.75 water/sewer bond and interest surplus to general sinking fund

	03	06/06/56	Apply $1,000 drainage sinking funds to storm sewer pipe on 7th (between Orchard and Highland)

	04	06/06/56	Transfer $13,000 from construction fund to street fund (Orchard Avenue Project)

	05	07/18/56	Apply $1,000 water emergency fund to meters and boxes, office equipment, etc.

	06	07/18/56	Transfer $1,200 police department funds to sinking funds for remodeling police department

	07	07/18/56	Transfer $2,000 CRC surplus and $1,700 emergency general fund surplus to overexpended items

	08	07/18/56	Transfer $1,500 from street emergency fund to equipment maintenance

	09	07/18/56	Apply $943 new car balance to auto and radio repair items

	10	07/18/56	Transfer $945 from sewer labor to lift Station No. 3

	11	07/18/56	Transfer funds from sinking fund to equipment and supplies items

	12	07/18/56	Transfer state street funds to labor, paving and oil, material and supplies items

	13	07/18/56	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign quit claim deed to O.M. and Jessie Marlow for Lot 16, Block 4, Newport Addition, less N. 42'

	14	08/01/56	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign bargain and sale deed to O.M. and Jessie Marlow for N. 42' of Lot 16, Block 4, Newport Addition

	15	08/15/56	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign correction deed from Horace M. and Millie B. Smith to City

	16	08/15/56	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign correction deed from Horace M. and Millie B. Smith to City

	1957

	01	01/10/57	Designate U.S. National Bank as depository for all funds

	02	02/14/57	Heart Association proclamation

	03	02/27/57	Place outstanding water accounts in inactive file

	04	05/22/57	City civil defense accept State Industrial Accident coverage

	05	06/12/57	Transfer $13,000 construction fund to Orchard Avenue project preparation

	06	06/00/57	Water rates

	07	06/26/57	Transfer $275 from insurance and bonds to airport legal fund

	08	06/26/57	Transfer 1956-57 sinking fund items to sinking fund as of 06/30/57

	09	06/26/57	Allow funds for general government emergency, sewer engineering water emergency

	10	06/26/57	Transfer $2,000 to sinking fund for new water/sewer billing machine

	11	06/28/57	$300 to Library Board from library budget for books

	12	07/23/57	Place outstanding ambulance accounts in inactive file

	13	08/15/57	Transfer $808.50 from billing machine sinking fund to engineer costs for new official map

	14	11/14/57	Designate areas for parking meters

	1958

	01	01/22/58	Establish commercial, residential sewer rates (Provided in Ordinance No. 374)

	02	01/22/58	Rescinded by Res. No. 335

	03	03/26/58	Establish residential, commercial, commercial special sewer rates (Ordinance No. 374)

	04	05/28/58	Transfer $14,000 from construction fund to street fund (Re: Orchard Avenue project)

	05	06/25/58	Transfer funds to sinking fund authorized by special election

	06	07/09/58	Pay $435 balance library fund to Library Board for books

	07	07/15/58	Budgeted $4,000 to sinking fund for Butte Drive lift station project

	08	08/13/58	Re-appropriate emergency fund - Main Street crossing and labor

	09	08/13/58	Re-allocate $1,500 of emergency fund to parking meter fund and $500 to building, maintenance fund

	10	09/10/58	Replace $14,000 in construction fund (see Res. No. 4 passed 05/28/58)

	11	09/10/58	Designate stop streets - east Newport at 2nd, east-west Highland at W. 7th

	12	10/30/58	Grant year extension to Eastern Oregon Natural Gas (see Ordinance 377)

	1959

	01	1959	Adopt accident prevention program

	02	06/10/59	Transfer funds to sinking fund

	03	06/24/59	Transfer $400 balance library fund to Library Board for books

	04	06/59	Not signed - void

	05	07/01/59	Designate U.S. National Bank as depository for irrigation, cash working and revolving funds

	06	07/08/59	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign agreement with State Highway Department to install flashing beacon at N. First and Main Streets

	07	08/05/59	Invest surplus bond sinking and general sinking funds in treasury bonds and notes

	08	08/26/59	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign applications to construct crossing at UPRR tracks

	09	11/28/59	Re-invest money received from Treasury Bill #1341519

	10	11/18/59	Designate Inland Empire Bank as depository for water, sewer, revolving, cash working funds

	11	11/25/59	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign refuse collection and disposal contract

	12	12/01/59	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign lease agreement with Empire Implement for rental of landfill equipment

	13	12/01/59	Designate Inland Empire Bank as depository sanitary landfill funds

	1960

	01	1960	(suggested resolution) apply for planning assistance from State Board of Higher Education [701]

	02	02/02/60	Re-invest money received from Treasury Bill #1341520

	03	04/13/60	Retire Police Badge #3 in memory of Patrolman Ronald Glenn Kilby

	04	04/27/60	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute consent to assignment by Eastern Oregon Natural Gas to Cascade Natural Gas

	05	05/11/60	Proceed with extension of Elm over UPRR crossing (City and County project)

	06	06/08/60	Authorize agreement with State to improve First Street west from Maple to Highland

	07	07/13/60	Re-invest money received from Treasury Bill #1341523

	08	09/14/60	Advise County Court not to grant license to Max Schultz for junk and 2nd hand business at S.E. 7th and Newport

	09	09/28/60	Provide for manager-council form of government (adopted by election 11/08/60)

	10	10/26/60	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute contract with O-WRR and UPRR and county for crossing at Elm

	11	10/28/60	Invest $10,000 from General Sinking Fund surplus in Treasury Bonds or notes

	12	10/28/60	Re-invest monies received on $5,000 U.S. Certificate of Indebtedness #501

	Resolutions Numbered Consecutively from 1961 on

	01	02/08/61	Invest approximately $3,500 surplus in bonds and interest to 1950 issue sewer bonds

	02	05/10/61	Designate Inland Empire Bank as depository for water/sewer, cash working, landfill, water/sewer extensions and revolving funds

	03	05/10/61	Designate U.S. National Bank as depository for general, general sinking, irrigation, payroll construction and bond and interest sinking funds

	04	05/24/61	S. First and Highland sewer system - call for feasibility report

	05	06/01/61	Allow $987.65 from sinking fund to repair motor at well #3

	06	06/01/61	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign option with State Highway Commission for park area as building site

	07	06/14/61	Authorize $275 from sinking fund for Cadillac ambulance (from State)

	08	06/14/61	Apply for special street funds for Hermiston Avenue (3rd west to Butter Creek Highway)

	09	06/28/61	Re-allocate funds for city manager's salary and bills incidental to position

	10	06/28/61	Transfer $9,200 to sinking fund for ambulance equipment, street drainage and equipment, fire truck, cemetery mower and pickup, water system equipment, sewer paint and repairs, sewer plant equipment

	11	06/30/61	Transfer $1,000 from street funds to part payment on Michigan Loader

	12	07/12/61	Initiate proceedings - vacate alley in Block 1, Lobaugh and Storer Addition

	13	08/18/61	Allow $9,042 for Michigan tractor-shovel; transfer $2,000 from Street Equipment Sinking Fund to sinking fund

	14	09/13/61	FAILED

	15	09/13/61	FAILED

	16	09/13/61	Allow $419 from Water Equipment Sinking Fund to repair motor

	17	10/11/61	FAILED

	18	10/11/61	FAILED

	19	10/11/61	FAILED

	20	10/11/61	FAILED

	21	10/11/61	FAILED

	22	10/11/61	FAILED

	23	10/11/61	FAILED

	24	10/11/61	FAILED

	25	10/11/61	N.W. 11th (Ridgeway north) water main - call for feasibility report (LID 6)

	26	10/11/61	N.W. 11th water main - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 6)

	27	10/11/61	E. Main sewer lateral #2 - call for feasibility report (LID 7)

	28	10/11/61	E. Main sewer lateral #2 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 7)

	29	10/11/61	S.W. #1 sewer lateral #1 - call for feasibility report (LID 8)

	30	10/11/61	S.W. #1 sewer lateral #1 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 8)

	31	11/08/61	E. Catherine Avenue paving - LID 9 FAILED

	32	11/08/61	E. Catherine Avenue paving - LID 9 FAILED

	33	11/08/61	North Street paving - LID 10 FAILED

	34	11/08/61	North Street paving - LID 10 FAILED

	35	11/08/61	E. Jennie Avenue (First to E. of 4th) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 11)

	36	11/08/61	E. Jennie Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 11)

	37	11/08/61	Allow $1,966.02 from water equipment sinking fund to repair burned out control equipment

	38	11/08/61	Issue temporary use permit for construction of home for aged (Valle Vista)

	39	11/08/61	Authorize "then" mayor (Belt) to sign reciprocal fire protection agreement with U.A.D. dated 8/60

	40	11/22/61	Brewer's sewer lateral #4 - call for feasibility report (LID 12)

	41	11/22/61	Brewer's sewer lateral #4 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 12)

	42	11/22/61	S.W. #2 sewer lateral #5 - call for feasibility report (LID 13)

	43	11/22/61	S.W. #2 sewer lateral #5 - accept feasibility report call for hearing (LID 13)

	44	02/14/62	W. Pine Avenue (7th to 9th Streets) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 14)

	45	02/14/62	W. Pine Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 14)

	46	02/14/62	Surplus pipe, etc. given as payment in kind as part of City's portion for said pipe to other participating parties

	47	02/28/62	FAILED

	48	03/28/62	FAILED

	49	03/14/62	Transfer $1,000 from sewage treatment plant painting repair sinking fund to E. Ridgeway lift station

	50	03/14/62	Transfer $7,100 from lift station sinking fund to E. Ridgeway lift station

	51	03/28/62	Superceded by Res. No. 268

	52	03/28/62	Superceded by Res. No. 269

	53	03/28/62	Provide for investigating O.L.C.C. applications and charging $10 fee for such investigations

	54	03/28/62	E. Catherine Avenue (First to 4th) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 9)

	55	03/28/62	E. Catherine Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 9)

	M-F

	#208	04/09/62	Resolution from Milton-Freewater re: All-American City

	56	05/02/62	FAILED

	57	05/23/62	Approve Housing Authority application to Public Housing Administration for preliminary loan for low-rent public housing

	58	NOT USED

	59	06/27/62	Designate U.S. National Bank as depository for Bancroft Bond and Interest Fund

	60	07/11/62	Designate Inland Empire Bank as depository for Special Assessment Account

	61	07/11/62	Transfer $2,602.49 General Funds to Special Assessment Fund for street improvement projects

	62	07/11/62	Deposit $4,298.50 to Special Assessment Fund for W/S improvement projects

	63	07/11/62	Transfer $1,100 from W/S Contingent Fund to plumbing supplies and fixed machinery and equipment repair account

	64	07/11/62	Transfer $1,500 construction funds to Sewer Lateral #4 and water line west of S.W. 7th (Brewer's)

	65	07/11/62	Transfer $4,000 from General Contingent Fund for Rockwell Parking meter contract and $2,225 to Wayne Street Sweeper

	66	07/11/62	Pay Library Board $645 budgeted balance for books

	67	07/25/62	Purchase playground equipment for Newport Park with Co-op Laundry and Cannery assets ($375.53)

	68	08/22/62	Request Urban Planning assistance from Bureau of Municipal Research

	69	10/10/62	W. Madrona sewer lateral - call for feasibility report (LID 3)

	70	11/07/62	W. Madrona sewer lateral - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 3)

	71	10/10/62	S.W. 10th (Highland to Duane) water main - call for feasibility report (LID 1)

	72	10/10/62	S.W. 10th water main - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 1)

	73	10/10/62	W. Madrona Avenue water main - call for feasibility report (LID 2)

	74	10/10/62	W. Madrona Avenue water main - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 2)

	75	12/12/62	W. Hartley Avenue sewer lateral #7 - call for feasibility report (LID 4)

	76	12/12/62	W. Hartley Avenue sewer lateral #7 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 4)

	77	11/28/62	Initiate proceeding - vacate Block 16, Original Town alley and portion of W. Locust Avenue

	78	11/28/62	North Street (Catherine to Jennie) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 10)

	79	11/28/62	North Street paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 10)

	80	12/12/62	W. Ridgeway (6th to 135' west of Butte Drive) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 18)

	81	12/12/62	W. Ridgeway paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 18)

	82	12/12/62	S.W. 9th Street (Orchard to Pine) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 19)

	83	12/12/62	S.W. 9th Street paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 19)

	84	02/13/63	Superceded by Res. No. 131

	85	02/13/63	W. Jennie (First to First Place) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 20)

	86	02/13/63	W. Jennie paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 20)

	87	NOT USED

	88	NOT USED

	89	03/14/63	Apply for 1964 special street moneys (S.E. 4th)

	90	04/10/63	W. Hemlock Avenue paving - call for feasibility report (LID 21)

	91	04/10/63	W. Quince Avenue (7th to 9th) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 22)

	92	04/10/63	W. Juniper (9th Street west) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 23)

	93	04/10/63	W. Hemlock Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 21)

	94	04/10/63	W. Quince Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 22)

	95	04/10/63	W. Juniper Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 23)

	96	NOT USED

	97	04/24/63	S.W. 10th Place water main - call for feasibility report (LID 25)

	98	04/24/63	S.W. 10th Place water main - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 25)

	99	04/24/63	S.W. 9th Street (Orchard to Hermiston) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 24)

	100	04/24/63	S.W. 9th Street - accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving (LID 24)

	101	05/22/63	FAILED

	102	05/22/63	FAILED

	103	05/22/63	FAILED

	104	05/22/63	FAILED

	105	08/14/63	FAILED

	106	08/14/63	FAILED

	107	06/12/63	W. Highland paving - call for feasibility report (LID 30)

	108	06/12/63	W Highland paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 31)

	109	06/12/63	W. Tamarack (7th to 9th) overlay - call for feasibility report (LID 31)

	110	06/12/63	W. Tamarack (7th to 9th) overlay - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 31)

	111	06/12/63	S.W. Butte Drive overlay - call for feasibility report (LID 32)

	112	06/12/63	S.W. Butte Drive overlay - accept feasibility report call for hearing (LID 32)

	113	06/26/63	Enter Public Employees Retirement System(effective 07/01

	114	07/10/63	Miscellaneous rates apply to police, firemen (state retirement program)

	115	07/10/63	W. Tamarack (7th to 9th) overlay - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 31)

	116	07/24/63	E. Hurlburt paving (6th to 7th) - call for feasibility report (LID 33)

	117	08/14/63	E. Hurlburt paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 33)

	118	08/14/63	FAILED

	119	08/14/63	FAILED

	120	08/14/63	FAILED

	121	08/14/63	FAILED

	122	08/14/63	FAILED

	123	08/14/63	FAILED

	124	08/14/63	Fire agreement - U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

	125-126	NOT USED

	127	12/11/63	J.C. Nye 4th sewer lateral #13, call for feasibility report (LID 41)

	128	12/11/63	J.C. Nye 4th sewer lateral #13 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 41)

	129	11/27/63	Establish cemetery rates - cemetery lots, grave preparation

	130	NOT USED

	131	01/08/64	E. Highland sewer lateral #11 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 42)

	132	01/15/64	Execute documents - bring Hermiston-Hinkle section of Highway 333 (Hermiston Avenue) to state standards

	133	02/12/64	Osburn Tract sewer lateral #14 - call for feasibility report (LID 43)

	134	02/12/64	Osburn Tract sewer lateral #14 -  accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 43)

	135	02/12/64	Interpose defense governmental immunity (Horning vs Graham)

	136	04/29/64	McKenzie water main - call for feasibility report (LID 44)

	137	04/29/64	McKenzie water main - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 44)

	138	04/22/64	Apply for right to Butte - Bureau of Land Management

	139	04/22/64	Newport paving (4th to 5th) - call for feasibility report (LID 45)

	140	04/22/64	Newport paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 45)

	141 -142	NOT USED

	143	05/13/64	W. Highland paving (Laird Addition) - call for feasibility report (LID 47)

	144	05/13/64	W. Highland paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 47)

	145-146	NOT USED

	147-148	06/10/64	FAILED

	149	NOT USED

	150	NOT USED

	151	NOT USED

	152	NOT USED

	153	06/24/64	W. Highland (700 Block) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 40)

	154	06/24/64	W. Highland paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 40)

	155	06/10/64	Grant license to Commtronix for location of building and radio tower

	156	06/24/64	Transfer funds for council chairs and street sprayer to General Sinking Fund

	157	07/08/64	Allow permissive zoning use (Stewart's)

	158	07/22/64	Issue permit for non-conforming use (Roller Rink)

	159	08/12/64	Urge Highway Commission to adopt Umatilla Bridge route for U.S. 82-N

	160	NOT USED

	161	11/25/64	Initiate proceedings - vacate alley between Newport and Warner, 4th Street west

	162	11/25/64	Continuance of City Planning and "701" Program

	163	01/13/65	Council procedure

	164	12/09/64	Transfer funds from w/s extensions revolving fund to w/s construction sinking fund

	165	02/11/65	Apply for 1966 special street moneys - S.E. 4th Street

	166A	02/10/65	E. Beebe water main (1st to McNary) - call for feasibility report (LID 48)

	166B	02/10/65	E. Beebe water main - accept feasibility  report, call for hearing (LID 48)

	167	03/24/65	E. Beech sewer lateral #15 (1st to 4th) - call for feasibility report (LID 49)

	168	02/24/65	FAILED

	169	02/24/65	McKenzie (1st to 4th), S.W. 4th (McKenzie north ) paving - call for feasibility report (LID 51)

	170	03/24/65	E. Beech sewer lateral # 15 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 49)

	171	02/24/65	McKenzie, S.W. 4th paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 51)

	172	02/24/65	FAILED

	173	03/10/65	S.W. 9th Street paving (Pine to Highland) - call for feasibility report (LID 52)

	174	03/10/65	S.W. 9th Street paving - accept feasibility  report, call for hearing (LID 52)

	175	03/24/65	S.W. 4th Street (easement north of McKenzie to easement south thereof) sewer lateral # 16 - call for feasibility report (LID 53)

	176	03/24/65	S.W. 4th Street sewer lateral #16 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 53)

	177	03/24/65	S.W. 6th Street (Hermiston to Locust) paving - call for feasibility report (LID  46)

	178	03/24/65	S.W. 6th Street paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 46)

	179	03/24/65	S.W. 6th Street (Locust to Orchard) curb/gutter/paving - call for feasibility report (LID 54)

	180	03/24/65	S.W. 6th Street curb/gutter/paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 54)

	181	04/05/65	Columbia TV, Inc. Franchise - 60 days extension

	182	05/11/65	Hermiston Development Corporation (develop area north of city)

	183	05/26/65	Authorize installation of traffic signals - First and Gladys, First and Main

	184	06/23/65	Initiate proceedings - vacate utility easement, S.W. 9th and Pine

	185	06/23/65	Transfer funds to Sinking Fund

	186	07/14/65	UPRR - W. Elm water main, mayor and recorder sign agreement

	187	09/08/65	Execute agreement with State Highway Commission for Hermiston Avenue improvement (LID 55)

	188	09/22/65	Establish new sewer rates (Rescinded by Res. No. 332)

	189	09/22/65	Hermiston Avenue paving - call for feasibility report (LID 55)

	190	09/22/65	Hermiston Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 55)

	191	09/22/65	Hook on 12" loop water main, northwest segment

	192	10/13/65	Workable Program for Community Improvement

	193	11/17/65	N.E. 8th Place paving - call for feasibility report

	194	11/24/65	N.E. 8th Place paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 56)

	195	11/24/65	Install stop signs

	196	12/08/65	Authorize state to audit

	197	12/22/65	FAILED

	198	NOT USED

	199	NOT USED

	200	01/12/66	FAILED

	201	12/22/65	701 Program

	202	01/12/66	S.W. 7th Place paving - call for feasibility report

	203	01/12/66	S.W. 7th Place paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 59)

	204	01/12/66	W. Highland Avenue - call for feasibility report (paving)

	205	01/12/66	W. Highland Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 60)

	206	01/26/66	Special street money - S.E. 4th Street

	207	01/26/66	Refuse franchise transfer -  Econo to Sullivan

	208	02/23/66	Lakeview Tract curb/gutter - call for feasibility report

	209	02/23/66	Lakeview Tract curb/gutter - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 61)

	210	02/23/66	Lakeview Tract sewer lateral 18 - call for feasibility report

	211	02/23/66	Lakeview Tract sewer lateral 18 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 62)

	212	02/09/66	Off-street parking lots acquisition - call for feasibility report

	213	02/09/66	Off-street parking lots acquisition - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 63)

	214	04/13/66	Vacate alley - initiate proceedings (Lanham)

	215	04/20/66	Transfer funds - drainage expenses, Hermiston Avenue (LID 55)

	216	04/27/66	Approve application for low-rent public housing

	217	05/11/66	N.W. Butte paving - call for feasibility report

	218	05/11/66	N.W. Butte paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 64)

	219	05/11/66	Vacate portion W. Jennie - initiate proceedings

	220	06/08/66	Rescinded by Res. No. 262

	220A	05/25/66	Install restricted parking sign N. 1st and E. Beebe

	221	05/25/66	Install street lights, N.E. 4th at E. Beech, Highway 32

	222	06/08/66	Authorize signatures, maintenance agreement on Hermiston Avenue (RR and State)

	223	06/22/66	Transfer funds, 701 Program to sinking fund

	224	06/22/66	Transfer funds, general contingent to irrigation

	225	06/22/66	Transfer funds, office equipment to sinking fund

	226	09/28/66	Taxi franchise transfer - Goodwin to Wells

	227	10/26/66	Authorize filing application with HUD for water construction projects

	228	11/09/66	Adopt comprehensive 701 Plan and 20 Year Needs Study of domestic water as parts of overall comprehensive plan for development

	229	11/09/66	Accept designation as planning agency responsible for preparation of comprehensive plan of development

	230	11/09/66	Submit application to HUD for annual renewal of certification of Workable Program and authorize city manager to complete and sign all documents in connection with such application

	231	11/09/66	Adopt policy on acquisition of real property for new water well, reservoir and distribution system

	232	11/09/66	Authorize Attorney Corey to interpose defense for City (Charles Bruce)

	233	11/17/66	Continue long-range planning of land use, transportation, etc. aspects of physical, economic and social development of significance to urban area

	234	11/23/66	Stop signs on S.W. 9th Street

	235	12/28/66	Establish bus loading zones on S.E. 2nd Street

	236	01/25/67	Special Street Moneys - S.E. 4th - 1968

	237	02/08/67	Support NE Ore. Rds Association action

	238	02/08/67	Authorize entering into and appearing in proceedings before Circuit Court of Marion County and PUC Commissioner re: limiting utilities franchises

	239	02/22/67	Destruction of bonds

	240	03/08/67	Authorize execution of water grant agreement between federal government and City

	241	03/14/67	Approve, endorse county road levy

	242	03/22/67	Laird Addition sewer lateral 19 (LID 66) - call for feasibility report

	243	03/22/67	Laird Addition sewer lateral 19 (LID 66) - accept feasibility report, call for hearing

	244	04/26/67	Street markings at Schwab's and Car Wash, Enforce Ordinances and Statutes, Discontinue U-turns between intersections and reversing direction on public and private property

	245	05/10/67	Restrict parking on S.E. 3rd Street from Main Street to Hurlburt Avenue

	246	06/09/67	Mayor and Recorder sign agreement with Ore./Wash. RR and Navigation and U.P.R.R. granting City right of construct 12" water line

	247	06/28/67	Signs at Car Wash at 4th and E. Main Streets

	248	07/12/67	Direct and authorize city manager to execute agreements with HUD for drilling well, erecting water tank, laying 12" main, etc.

	249	07/12/67	Initiate proceedings to vacate alley (PGG)

	250	07/26/67	Transfer funds, General Contingent to Police, Attorney, Airport, Museum and Insurance Departments

	251	08/09/67	Alley paving - call for feasibility report

	252	08/09/67	Alley paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 09/27 at 8:15 p.m. (LID 67)

	253	09/13/67	S.W. 10th St., Pl. paving - call for feasibility report

	254	09/13/67	S.W. 10th St., Pl. paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 09/27 at 8:30 p.m. (LID 68)

	255	09/13/67	W. Ridgeway paving (3rd to 6th) - call for feasibility report

	 256	09/13/67	W. Ridgeway paving (3rd to 6th) - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 09/27 at 8:45 p.m. (LID 69)

	257	09/13/67	FAILED

	258	09/13/67	FAILED

	259	09/13/67	Accede to application of West End Development Co. to purchase land in Butte area to locate microwave antenna tower and building

	260	10/11/67	Authorize loan from federal government for sewer study

	261	10/11/67	Approve agreement establishing planning coordinating council for local governments of county

	262	05/10/67	Rescinded by Res. No. 421

	263	11/08/67	Authorize street light installation

	264	11/22/67	Authorize street light installation (UECA)

	265	12/13/67	Establish sinking fund for airport funds

	266	02/28/68	Request County assistance in enforcing junk regulations and Highway Department for regulations to enforce removal of unsightly conditions and prohibit further expansion

	267	02/28/68	Establish 10 minute parking time limit at post office

	268	04/24/68	Superceded by Res. No. 459

	269	04/24/68	Superceded by Res. No. 317

	270	04/10/68	Workable Program - renew certification

	271	04/24/68	Establish 2 hour parking zone - W. Hermiston Avenue between 1st Place and 2nd Street

	272	05/08/68	FAILED

	273	05/08/68	FAILED

	274	06/05/68	Mayor and Recorder sign agreement with Ore./Wash./ RR and Navigation and U.P.R.R. granting City right to construct, maintain and operate 12" water line

	275	06/12/68	Extend R.J. Strasser Drilling Co. contract on Well #4

	276	06/26/68	N.W. 9th Street (Hermiston to Madrona) paving - call for feasibility report

	277	06/26/68	N.W. 9th Street (Hermiston to Madrona) paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 07/24 at 8:00 p.m. (LID 72)

	278	06/26/68	N.E. 4th Street (Ridgeway to Jennie) paving - call for feasibility report

	279	06/26/68	N.E. 4th Street (Ridgeway to Jennie) paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 07/24 at 8:15 (LID 73)

	280	06/26/68	E. Hurlburt (5th to 6th) paving - call for feasibility report

	281	06/26/68	E. Hurlburt (5th to 6th) paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 07/24 at 8:30 p.m. (LID 74)

	282	07/24/68	W. Ridgeway (10th to 11th) paving - call for feasibility report (Re-done, see Res. No. 308)

	283	07/24/68	W. Ridgeway (10th to 11th) paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 75) (Re-done, see Res. No. 309)

	284	07/24/68	Establish no parking area on west side of S. First Street between Main and Hurlburt

	285	08/14/68	Re-appropriate budget items in 67-68 budget

	286	08/07/68	Oppose changing route of Interstate Highway 82

	287	08/28/68	Pave SW 5th from Orchard to Hermiston and Locust from 4th to 5th. (LID 76) Call for feasibility report

	288	08/28/68	Approve feasibility report and call for hearing 08/25/68 at 8:00 p.m.

	289	10/09/68	Initiate proceedings to vacate alley and public right-of-way in Block 15, Original Town West (Myrick)

	290	09/22/68	Establish one way traffic in east-west downtown alleys

	291	11/27/68	FAILED

	292	11/27/68	FAILED

	293	11/27/68	FAILED

	294	11/27/68	FAILED

	295	12/11/68	W. Madrona (10th to 11th) paving - call for feasibility report

	296	12/11/68	W. Madrona (10th to 11th) paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 01/08/69 at 8:30 p.m.(LID 80)

	297	12/11/68	E. Newport (800 Block) sewer lateral #20 - call for feasibility report

	298	12/11/68	E. Newport (800 Block) sewer lateral #20 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 01/08/69 at 8:45 p.m. (LID 81)

	299	12/18/68	Establish 30 minute parking in front of library

	300	12/18/68	Approve application for preliminary loan for low-rent public housing (elderly)

	301	01/22/69	Establish dog pound for Cities of Hermiston, Echo, Stanfield, Umatilla; Constructed and maintained by County Court

	302	02/12/69	Designate District 12 enforcement agency

	303	02/12/69	Initiate proceedings to annex Butte area and Well #4 area to City

	304	02/26/69	Railroad lease - 1st and Main

	305	03/10/69	Eliminate parking between driveways in 4 downtown parking lots

	306	03/24/69	Eliminate loading zone, establish parking meter zone, 200 Block, N. side Main Street

	307	03/24/69	Establish parking meter zone in front of Lot 6, Block 7, Original Town East (Amended by Res. No. 331 12/08/69)

	308	03/24/69	FAILED

	309	03/24/69	FAILED

	310	03/24/69	Approve cooperation agreement for low-rent public housing for the elderly

	311	04/02/69	Approve extension of agreement with UPRR for 4" water pipe line encroachment on RR property to August 2,1974

	312	04/16/69	Irrigation expenditures be met by funds from Contingent Fund until irrigation income becomes available

	313	06/09/69	W. Ridgeway (9th to 11th) paving - call for feasibility report

	314	06/09/69	W. Ridgeway (9th to 11th) paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 06/23/69, 8:00 (LID 83)

	315	06/09/69	Extend contract completion dates for Stadeli

	316	06/09/69	Extend contract completion dates for GATX

	317	06/25/69	Superceded by Res. No. 338

	318	06/25/69	N. First sewer lateral #22 - call for feasibility report

	319	06/25/69	N. First sewer lateral #22 - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 07/28/69, 8:00 (LID 84)

	320	07/28/69	Re-appropriate budget items in General Fund, 68-69 budget

	321	07/28/69	Transfer Airport income during 68-69 to Airport Improvement Sinking Fund

	322	07/28/69	Grant airport manager free occupancy of living quarters at airport

	323	07/28/69	N.E. 2nd (Gladys to Ridgeway) and E. Ridgeway (2nd to 3rd) overlay - call for feasibility report

	324	07/28/70	N.E. 2nd (Gladys to Ridgeway) and E. Ridgeway (2nd to 3rd) overlay - accept feasibility report, call for hearing 08/11/69, 8:00 (LID 86)

	325	07/28/69	Superceded by Res. No. 397

	326	07/28/69	Superceded by Res. No. 398

	327	09/08/69	E. Dogwood (First to McNary) water line - call for feasibility report

	328	09/08/69	E. Dogwood (First to McNary) water line - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 87)

	329	11/24/69	Superceded by Res. No. 754

	330	11/24/69	Approve agreement establishing District Council for Local Governments of State Administrative District 12 and become participating unit

	331	12/08/69	Establish 10 minute parking in front of Lot 6, Block 7, Original Town (P P & L Building) (Amends Res. No 307)

	332	12/22/69	Rescinded by Res. No. 509

	333	01/26/70	Contingent Fund expenditures (for Police Car)

	334	03/09/70	Favor examination of causes of accidents on Highway 32 between Umatilla and Stanfield Junction

	335	03/23/70	Rescinded by Res. No. 510

	336	04/13/70	Initiate vacation proceedings - strip of land (Gettmann)

	337	04/13/70	Execute agreement with State for improvement of Highway 32 through city

	338	05/25/70	Superceded by Res. No. 376

	339	05/11/70	E. Cherry water/sewer line - call for feasibility report

	340	05/11/70	E. Cherry water/sewer - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 88)

	341	06/08/70	Establish Elm Avenue as truck route

	342	06/08/70	Adopt fees for fence permits

	343	06/22/70	S.W. 10th Street (Lathrop S.) paving - call for feasibility report

	344	06/22/70	S.W. 10th Street (Lathrop S.) paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 90)

	345	06/22/70	N.E. 2nd Street (Catherine/Jennie) paving - call for feasibility report

	346	06/22/70	N.E. 2nd Street (Catherine/Jennie) paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 91)

	347	07/27/70	W. Division Avenue paving/water - call for feasibility report

	348	07/27/70	W. Division Avenue paving/water - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 92)

	349	07/27/70	Transfer airport income during 69-70 to airport improvement sinking fund

	350	07/27/70	Re-appropriate budget items in 69-70 budget

	351	08/24/70	Appropriate funds for payment to architect - new fire station

	352	10/26/70	E. Beech Avenue paving - call for feasibility report

	353	10/26/70	E. Beech Avenue paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing (LID 94)

	354	11/23/70	In support of captured American and allied fighting men and those missing in action in Vietnam conflict

	355	12/28/70	S. First paving - call for feasibility report

	356	12/28/70	S. First paving - accept feasibility report, call for hearing January 25,1971 (LID 95)

	357	12/28/70	Install stop signs

	358	01/11/71	Establish certain traffic control signals

	359	01/11/71	Establish certain on-street passenger loading zones

	360	01/25/71	Establish certain prohibited parking areas

	361	01/11/71	Install parking meters (Amended by Res. No. 391)

	362	02/03/71	In support of the retention of the N-Reactor operation at Hanford, Washington

	363	02/08/71	E. Wilshire Avenue sewer lateral - call for feasibility report

	364	02/08/71	E. Wilshire Avenue sewer lateral #26 - Accept feasibility report, call for hearing 02/22/71 (LID 96)

	365	02/22/71	Cooperative construction/finance agreement of June 1970 between City and State for Highway 32 improvement to remain in force except as modified by this resolution

	366	02/22/71	Accept Roberta Dickens offer of $1,200 to purchase City property -Hermiston Park Plat #1, Block 6, Lots 7 and 8 (4N28 11BD 3500)

	367	03/22/71	Call for feasibility report on Highway 32 from S.E. 4th to Elm improvement

	368	03/22/71	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing 3/29 on Highway 32 from S.E. 4th to Elm improvement (LID 97)

	369	03/22/71	Approve 701 Program

	370	04/12/71	Consider adequate pedestrian crossings

	371	04/12/71	Endorse and support Baseball Commission effort to secure N.W. Regional Babe Ruth Tournament in 1972

	372	04/26/71	Modify statements pertaining to participation of cost in Construction-Finance Agreement for Highway 32 (City/State)

	373	05/24/71	Call for feasibility report on W. Madrona Avenue paving (4th to 7th)

	374	05/24/71	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Madrona Avenue paving (4th to 7th) (LID 98)

	375	05/20/71	Begin condemnation proceedings in connection with the improvement of Highway 32 within the city limits

	376	06/28/71	Superceded by Res. No. 408

	377	06/01/71	Accept State's anticipated project costs for Highway 32 improvement

	378	06/01/71	Apply for State Highway special funds to improve E. 4th Street from Ridgeway to Newport Avenues

	379	06/28/71	Install stop sign at SW Butte Drive and W. Park Avenue

	380	06/28/71	Approve agreement establishing county intergovernmental council and become participating unit

	381	07/12/71	Call for feasibility report, N.W. 5th Street paving

	382	07/12/71	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.W. 5th Street paving (LID 99)

	383	07/12/71	Call for feasibility report on N.E. 3rd Street paving (Catherine to Jennie)

	384	07/12/71	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.E. 3rd Street paving (LID 100)

	385	08/23/71	Call for feasibility report on W. Orchard sewer

	386	08/23/71	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Orchard sewer (800 Block) (LID 101)

	387	09/13/71	Terminate water bond construction fund, transfer money to general water construction fund ($3,869.74)

	388	10/11/71	Participate in Federal Rent Supplement Program

	389	09/27/71	Call for feasibility report on S.E. 7th paving

	390	09/27/71	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.E. 7th paving (LID 102)

	391	10/27/71	Remove parking meters (Amends Res. No. 361)

	392	10/27/71	Establish certain prohibited parking areas

	393	11/08/71	Support Columbia Cable T.V. proposal to add channels

	394	12/13/71	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign agreement with State Highway Commission for S.E. 4th Street improvement (Main to Newport)

	395	01/10/72	Call for feasibility report on N.W. 9th paving

	396	01/10/72	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing January 24 on N.W.9thpaving (LID 104)

	397	01/10/72	Call for feasibility report on Hartley Addition sewer lateral #23 (Supercedes Res. No. 325)

	398	01/10/72	Accept feasibility report,  call for hearing January 24 on Hartley Addition sewer lateral #23 (LID 85) (Supercedes Res. No. 326

	399	02/14/72	Terminate irrigation fund, transfer remaining money to General Fund

	400	02/28/72	Call for feasibility report on Newport Avenue sewer lateral #29

	401	02/28/72	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on Newport Avenue sewer lateral #29 (LID 105)

	402	04/10/72	Terminate water/sewer bond and interest fund, transfer remaining money to sinking fund

	403	04/24/72	Vacate water line easement across E. 20' of Lot 6, Block 15, Osburn Tract to James Taggert (under Sands Motel parking lot)

	404	05/15/72	Initiate proceedings to vacate N.W. 2nd from W. Beebe south approximately 125' to south line of Osburn Tract Addition (Hearing June 12)

	405	05/22/72	Consent to assignment of refuse collection franchise (Sullivan to Kik and Jewett)

	406	05/22/72	Call for feasibility report on Hermiston Orchards water main

	407	05/22/72	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing June 12 on Hermiston Orchards water main  (LID 106)

	408	06/26/72	Superceded by Res. No. 441

	409	06/26/72	Install 4-way stop signs at S. First/W. Highland intersection

	410	07/10/72	Call for feasibility report on E. Dogwood sewer lateral #28

	411	07/10/72	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Dogwood sewer lateral #28 (LID 103)

	412	09/11/72	Call for feasibility report on Hartley Addition water main

	413	09/11/72	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on Hartley Addition water main (LID 107)

	414	09/11/72	Install 4-way stop signs at W. Ridgeway Avenue and N.W. 6th Street

	415	09/11/72	Initiate proceedings to vacate certain streets in Hartley Addition

	416	09/25/72	Call for feasibility report on S.E. 4th paving

	417	09/25/72	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing 10/09 on S.E. 4th paving (LID 108)

	418	10/09/72	Accept Alleman Subdivision

	419	01/08/73	Install stop signs

	420	01/22/73	Establish one-way street on Hermiston Avenue from N. First Street to N. First Place

	421	02/12/73	Rescinded by Res. No. 517

	422	02/12/73	Endorsement for routing of I-82 N

	423	02/12/73	Parking restrictions at schools

	424	02/26/73	Initiate proceedings to vacate utility easement in Laird Addition

	425	02/26/73	Call for feasibility report on Hartley Addition paving

	426	02/26/73	Accept feasibility report on Hartley Addition paving (LID 109)

	427	03/19/73	Rail passenger service (support Amtrak)

	428	03/19/73	Support the County's Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Planning Study

	429	04/02/73	Oppose Senate Bill 665

	430	04/23/73	Authorize signing extension rider covering water pipe crossing railroad tracks

	431	04/23/73	Call for feasibility report on Ekleberry Tracts sewer lateral #30

	432	04/23/73	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on Ekleberry Tracts sewer lateral #30 (LID 110)

	433	04/23/73	Call for feasibility report on S. Highway 395 sewer lateral #31

	434	04/23/73	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S. Highway 395 sewer lateral #31 (LID 111)

	435	04/23/73	Call for feasibility report on S.E. 4th Street sewer lateral #32

	436	04/23/73	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.E. 4th Street sewer lateral #32 (LID 112)

	437	04/23/73	Call for feasibility report on W. Moore Avenue sewer lateral #33

	438	04/23/73	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Moore Avenue sewer lateral #33 (LID 113)

	439	04/23/73	Call for feasibility report on E. Newport sewer lateral #34 (500 Block)

	440	04/23/73	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Newport sewer lateral #34 (500 Block) (LID 114)

	441	06/20/73	Superceded by Res. No. 503

	442	05/14/73	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 7th/Tamarack paving (West Park Baptist Church)

	443	05/14/73	Accept feasibility report on S.W. 7th/Tamarack paving (West Park Baptist Church) (LID 115)

	444	05/28/73	Authorize city manager to sign revenue sharing documents

	445	06/11/73	Install stop signs on S.E. 5th at Hurlburt Avenue

	446	06/11/73	Initiate procedure to vacate portion of alley (PGG)

	447	06/20/73	Transfer monies to sinking fund (72-73 budget)

	448	06/25/73	Support efforts to construct bicycle path along Diagonal (Highway 207 E.)

	449	07/11/73	Accept title from Board of Aeronautics to property 500' either side of center-line of existing runway at airport

	450	08/13/73	Authorize filing application with U.S. for planning funds for airport

	451	08/27/73	Transfer funds from utility contingent account to water commodity account ($1,411.00)

	452	10/08/73	Call for feasibility report on Main Street widening (4th to 7th)

	453	10/08/73	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on Main Street widening (LID 116)

	454	10/08/73	FAILED

	455	10/08/73	FAILED

	456	10/08/73	Call for feasibility report on E. Jennie Avenue sewer lateral #35

	457	10/08/73	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Jennie sewer lateral #35 )LID 118)

	458	10/22/73	Change street name - W. "Mae" Avenue to W. "Fulton" Avenue

	459	06/17/74	Superceded by Res. No. 709

	460	11/26/73	"No parking" signs on south side E. Hurlburt Avenue between S.E. 5th and S.E. 6th by Newport Park

	461	11/26/73	Accept grant for airport study

	462	11/26/73	Superceded by Res. No. 493

	463	11/26/73	Superceded by Res. No. 494

	464	01/14/74	Authorize mayor to sign pipe line crossing agreement with U.P.R.R.

	465	01/14/74	Transfer cemetery deed to Hermiston Cemetery District

	466	01/14/74	Call for feasibility on paving S.E. 2nd Street from Hurlburt to Highway 395

	467	01/14/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.E. 2nd Street from Hurlburt to Highway 395 (LID 120)

	468	01/14/74	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Newport Avenue From Highway 395 to S.E. 3rd

	469	01/14/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Newport Avenue from Highway 395 to S.E. 3rd (LID 121)

	470	01/14/74	Call for feasibility report on paving east-west alley from. 1st Place to N.W. 2nd between Hermiston and Ridgeway Avenues

	471	01/14/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving east-west alley from N. 1st Place to N.W. 2nd between Hermiston and Ridgeway Avenues (LID 122)

	472	01/14/74	Call for feasibility report on paving east-west alley from N.W. 2nd Street to N.W. 3rd Street between Hermiston and madrona Avenues

	473	01/14/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving east-west alley from N.W. 2nd to N.W. 3rd between Hermiston and Madrona Avenues (LID 123)

	474	01/14/74	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. 2nd Street from Hermiston to Ridgeway Avenues

	475	01/14/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.W. 2nd Street from Hermiston to Ridgeway Avenues (LID 124)

	476	01/14/74	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Ridgeway Avenue from N. 1st Place to N.W. 3rd

	477	01/14/74	Accept feasibility report, call for  hearing on paving W. Ridgeway Avenue from N. 1st Place to N.W. 3rd (LID 125)

	478	01/14/74	Establish traffic control installations

	479	01/28/74	Call for feasibility report on E. Dogwood water main (4th to McNary)

	480	01/28/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Dogwood water main (4th to McNary) LID 126

	481	01/28/74	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Dogwood Avenue from 4th to McNary

	482	01/28/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Dogwood Avenue from 4th to McNary (LID 127)

	483	01/28/74	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Hurlburt Avenue from 2nd to 3rd

	484	01/28/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Hurlburt Avenue from 2nd to 3rd (LID 128)

	485	01/28/74	Call for feasibility report on paving S.W. 3rd Street from Orchard to Hermiston

	486	01/28/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S. W. 3rd Street from Orchard to Hermiston (LID 129)

	487	01/38/74	Call for feasibility report on paving N.E. 7th Street from Main to Ridgeway

	488	01/28/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.E. 7th Street from Main to Ridgeway (LID 130)

	489	01/28/74	Call for feasibility report on pavement overlay on E. Hurlburt avenue from S.E. 3rd to S.E. 4th

	490	01/28/74	Accept feasibility report on pavement overlay on E. Hurlburt Avenue from S.E. 3rd to S.E. 4th

	491	01/28/74	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. 3rd Street from the alley north of Hermiston Avenue to W. Ridgeway

	492	01/28/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.W. 3rd Street from the alley north of Hermiston Avenue to W. Ridgeway (LID 131)

	493	02/11/74	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Moore Avenue from S. First Street west 565' (supercedes Res. No. 462)

	494	02/11/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W Moore Avenue from S. First Street west 565' (supercedes Res. No. 463)

	495	02/11/74	Authorize mayor to sign lease agreement with Union Pacific Railroad for parking lot at First and Main Streets

	496	02/25/74	Call for feasibility report on paving N.E. 4th Street from Elm to Jennie Avenues

	497	02/25/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.E. 4th Street from Elm to Jennie Avenues (LID 132)

	498	02/25/74	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. 6th Street from Hermiston to Standard Avenues

	499	02/25/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N. W. 6th Street from Hermiston to Standard Avenues (LID 133)

	500	02/25/74	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Standard Avenue from N. First Place to N.W. 7th Street

	501	02/25/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W. Standard Avenue from N. First Place to N.W. 7th Street (LID 134)

	502	03/11/74	Authorize mayor to sign pipe line encroachment agreement with Union Pacific Railroad

	503	06/17/74	Superceded by Res. No. 549

	504	05/13/74	Transfer cemetery sinking fund monies to street construction sinking fund

	505	05/20/74	Call for feasibility report on N.W. 7th Street sewer lateral #36

	506	05/20/74	Accept feasibility report on N.W. 7th Street sewer lateral #36 (LID 135)

	507	05/20/74	Superceded by Res. No. 508

	508	06/10/74	Initiate procedure to vacate W. Madrona between 2nd and 3rd

	509	06/17/74	Adopt new sewer rates (Rescinds Res. No. 332)

	510	06/17/74	Rescinded by Res. No. 692

	511	07/08/74	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute supplemental agreement with U.P.R.R. (underground cable crossings)

	512	07/08/74	Transfer funds to sinking fund (73-74 budget)

	513	08/12/74	Superceded by Res. No. 521

	514	08/12/74	Superceded by Res. No. 522

	515	08/12/74	Policy statement on implementation of federal-aid highway act of 1973

	516	08/26/74	Superceded by Res. No. 836

	517	08/26/74	Rescinded by Res. No. 583

	518	08/26/74	Regulate and limit parking in off-street parking lots

	519	08/26/74	Call for feasibility report on E. View Drive sewer lateral #37

	520	08/26/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. View Drive sewer lateral #37 (LID 136)

	521	08/26/74	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. 6th Street from Hermiston Avenue to Standard Avenue

	522	08/26/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.W. 6th Street from Hermiston Avenue to Standard Avenue (LID 138)

	523	08/26/74	Call for feasibility report on N. First Place/Standard sewer lateral #38

	524	08/26/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N. First Place/Standard sewer lateral #38 (LID 139)

	525	08/26/74	Call for feasibility report on sewer lateral #39 between E. Highland and E. Quince

	526	08/26/74	Accept feasibility report,  call for hearing on sewer lateral #39 between E. Highland and E. Quince (LID 140)

	527	09/09/74	Establish loading zone on W. Orchard Avenue in front of CRC

	528	09/23/74	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/sidewalk on E. Gladys Avenue from 6th to 7th Streets

	529	09/23/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/gutter/sidewalk on E. Gladys Avenue from 6th to 7th Streets (LID 141)

	530	09/23/74	Authorize FAA ADAP grant application

	531	10/14/74	Request to Federal Insurance Administration for City certification in National Flood Insurance program

	532	10/14/74	City certification of adoption of building code and enforcement

	533	10/28/74	Establish 3 hour parking on Gladys Avenue from First to 2nd Streets

	534	10/28/74	Establish on-street loading zone on Gladys Avenue and on N.E. 2nd Street in front of Methodist Church entrances

	535	11/11/74	Call for feasibility report on sewer lateral #40 in W. Moore Avenue from S.W. 4th Street

	536	11/11/74	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on sewer lateral #40 in W. Moore Avenue from S.W. 4th east (LID 142)

	537	02/10/75	Install stop signs on S.E. 8th Street at E. Highland Avenue and on E. Quince Avenue at S.E. 7th Street

	538	04/14/75	Rescinded by Res. No.627

	539	NOT USED

	540	04/14/75	Call for feasibility report on E. Pine Avenue water main from S.E. 7th to S.E. 8th Streets

	541	06/23/75	Accept feasibility report on E. Pine Avenue water main from S.E. 7th to S.E. 8th Streets (LID 144)

	542	06/23/75	Call for feasibility report on sewer lateral #42 to serve benefited property on W. Standard Avenue from N.W. 7th east to N.W. 3rd Street

	543	06/23/75	Accept feasibility report and call for hearing on sewer lateral #42 to serve benefited property on W. Standard Avenue from N.W. 7th east to N. W. 3rd Street (LID 145)

	544	05/12/75	Establish 2 hour parking S.E. 2nd and Hurlburt area

	545	05/12/75	Install "dead-end street" sign on W. Beebe Avenue

	546	05/12/75	Establish 10 minute parking zone on N.E. 3rd in front of business (Bud's Tac-N-Sew)

	547	05/19/75	Direct mayor and recorder to execute agreement with State Highway Division to provide for  abandonment of highway (Ore 207) from Highway 395 South to south city limits

	548	NOT USED

	549	06/09/75	Superceded by Res. No. 619

	550	06/23/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving on W. Standard Avenue from N. First Place to N.W. 7th

	551	06/23/75	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving on W. Standard Avenue from N. First Place to N.W. 7th (LID 146)

	552	06/23/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/paving on S.W. 4th Street from W. McKenzie to W. Moore Avenues and on W. Moore Avenue from the west line of Laird Addition east to Lot 7, Block 5 of said addition

	553	06/23/75	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/gutter/paving on S.W. 4th Street from W. McKenzie to W. Moore Avenue and on W. Moore Avenue from the west line of Laird Addition east to Lot 7, Block 5 of said addition (LID 148)

	554	06/30/75	Transfer revenue sharing monies to sinking fund

	555	07/14/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving on E. Quince Avenue from S.E. 7th to S.E. 8th Streets

	556	07/14/75	Accept feasibility report on curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving on E. Quince from S.E. 7th to S.E. 8th Streets (LID 147)

	557	07/14/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/paving on E. Beebe Avenue from N. First to N. McNary Streets

	558	07/14/75	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/gutter/paving on E. Beebe Avenue from N. First to N. McNary Streets (LID 149)

	559	07/28/75	Reappropriate funds 1974-75 budget

	560	07/28/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/paving on S.E. 7th Street

	561	07/28/75	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.E. 7th Street paving (LID 150)

	562	08/11/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/paving of E. Hurlburt Avenue from S.E. 2nd to S.E. 3rd Streets

	563	08/11/75	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/gutter/paving of Hurlburt Avenue from S.E. 2nd to S.E. 3rd (LID 151)

	564	08/11/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/sidewalk/paving of S.W. 7th Street from Hermiston to Orchard Avenues

	565	08/11/75	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/sidewalk/paving of S.W. 7th Street from Hermiston to Orchard Avenues (LID 152)

	566	08/11/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/sidewalk/paving of S.W. 7th Place from Park to Orchard Avenues

	567	08/11/75	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/sidewalk/paving of S.W. 7th Place from Park to Orchard Avenues (LID 153)

	568	08/25/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving of E. Quince Avenue from S.E. 8th to S.E. 9th

	569	08/25/75	Accept feasibility report on curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving of E. Quince Avenue from S.E. 8th to S.E. 9th (LID 154)

	570	11/10/75	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving of S.E. 8th from E. Quince to E. Highland

	571	11/10/75	Accept feasibility report on curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving of S.E. 8th Street from E. Quince to E. Highland (LID 155)

	572	11/10/75	Call for feasibility report on water main in N. First from Elm Avenue to Theater Road

	573	11/10/75	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on water main in N. First Street from Elm Avenue to Theater Road (LID 156)

	574	11/10/75	Establish traffic control installation (right turn only at S.E. 2nd and Highway 395 from Safeway parking lot)

	575	11/10/75	Grant Housing Authority permission to operate within city

	576	11/24/75	Establish traffic controls on Highway 395 through city

	577	11/24/75	Designate size of planning commission (9 members)

	578	12/08/75	Establish traffic control (right turn only from alley)

	579	12/08/75	Approve procedure for amending UCIC by-laws

	580	12/15/75	Designate street names in newly annexed area along N. First Street

	581	01/12/76	Call for feasibility report on Birch Drive curb/gutter/paving

	582	01/12/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on Birch Drive curb/gutter/paving (LID 157)

	583	01/26/76	Rescinded by Res. No. 653

	584	01/26/76	Install stop signs on S.E. 5th Street at E. Highland Avenue, W. Linda Avenue and W. Juanita Avenue at N.W. 11th Street

	585	02/09/76	Call for feasibility report on sanitary sewer lateral #43 in N. First Street from Elm Avenue to Theater Road

	586	02/09/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on sanitary sewer lateral #43 in N. First Street from Elm Avenue to Theater Road (LID 158)

	587	02/23/76	Initiate proceeding to vacate street easement (N. of Birch Drive)

	588	02/23/76	Eliminate parking stall on E. Gladys (front of PPL), establish 10 minute parking zone in off-street parking lot

	589	02/23/76	Establish "no parking" zone south side W. Main from N. First west 75 feet

	590	03/08/76	Call for feasibility report on Turner Addition water/sewer lateral #44

	591	03/08/76	Accept feasibility report on Turner Addition water/sewer lateral #44 (LID 159)

	592	03/22/76	Initiate proceedings to vacate alley (east-west alley south of E. Newport between 5th and 6th)

	593	04/12/76	Transfer general funds for office equipment and ordinance codification to sinking fund

	594	04/12/76	Transfer 41,000 from reserve for w/s B and I redemption fund to utilities fund (75-76 budget)

	595	04/12/76	Call for feasibility report on Sunnyvale Heights sewer lateral #45

	596	04/12/76	Accept feasibility report on Sunnyvale Heights sewer lateral #45 (LID 160)

	597	04/12/76	Support effort for new and larger post office facilities

	598	04/12/76	Call for feasibility report on Sunland Estates water main - Phase I

	599	04/12/76	Accept feasibility report on Sunland Estates water main - Phase I (LID 162)

	600	04/12/76	Call for feasibility report on Sunland Estates paving - Phase I

	601	04/12/76	Accept feasibility report on Sunland Estates paving - Phase I(LID 163) I

	602	04/12/76	Call for feasibility report on Sunland Estates sewer lateral #46- Phase I

	603	04/12/76	Accept feasibility report on Sunland Estates sewer lateral #46 - Phase I (LID 161)

	604	04/26/76	Superceded by Res. No. 865

	605	04/26/76	Establish 15 minute parking zone on S.W. 7th Street in front of West Park Elementary School

	606	04/26/76	Call for feasibility report on Prairie House Development  (Phase 1) water/sewer lateral #47

	607	04/26/76	Accept feasibility report on Prairie House Development (Phase 1) water/sewer lateral #47 (LID 164)

	608	05/10/76	Initiate proceedings to vacate street rights-of-way (Gass Prairie House Development

	609	05/24/76	Install stop signs on W. Madrona Avenue at N.W. 6th Street

	610	05/24/76	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 9th Place curb/gutter/paving (Turner Addition)

	611	05/24/76	Accept feasibility report on S.W. 9th Place curb/gutter/paving (LID 165) Turner Addition

	612	06/14/76	Call for feasibility report on DeGroff Mobile Village water main

	613	06/14/76	Accept feasibility report on DeGroff Mobile Village water main (LID 166)

	614	06/14/76	Request Oregon Transportation Commission to consider the improvement of S.E. 4th Street from Newport to Highway 395 South eligible for special highway funds

	615	06/14/76	Call for feasibility report on S. First Street water main

	616	06/14/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S. First Street water main (LID 167)

	617	06/14/76	Call for feasibility report on S. First Street sewer lateral #48

	618	06/14/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S. First Street sewer lateral #48 (LID 168)

	619	06/28/76	Superceded by Res. No. 710

	620	06/28/76	Grant state right to install advance railroad warning signs

	621	06/28/76	Call for feasibility report on E. Ridgeway sidewalk

	622	06/28/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Ridgeway sidewalk (LID 169)

	623	06/28/76	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 9th Street paving

	624	06/28/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 9th Street paving (LID 170)

	625	06/28/76	Call for feasibility report on N.E. McNary Street paving

	626	06/28/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N. E. McNary Street paving (LID 171)

	627	06/28/76	Call for feasibility report on E. Pine sewer lateral #41 and rescind Res. No. 538

	628	06/28/76	Accept feasibility report on E. Pine sewer lateral #41 (LID 143)

	629	07/12/76	Call for feasibility report on N.W. Butte Drive sewer lateral #50

	630	07/12/76	Accept feasibility report on N.W. Butte Drive sewer lateral #50 (LID 172)

	631	07/12/76	Call for feasibility report on W. Juniper Avenue curb/sidewalk/and overlay

	632	07/12/76	Accept feasibility report on W. Juniper Avenue curb/sidewalk/overlay (LID 173)

	633	07/12/76	Call for feasibility report on W. Oak Avenue paving

	634	07/12/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Oak Avenue paving (LID 174)

	635	07/12/76	Call for feasibility report on W. Park Avenue paving

	636	07/12/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Park Avenue paving (LID 175)

	637	07/12/76	Petition State to enter into program for sharing state income tax revenues with Oregon cities

	638	07/26/76	Authorize mayor to sign documents pertaining to sewer project

	639	08/09/76	General fund transfers (1975-76 budget)

	640	08/23/76	Call for feasibility report on Water Pressure System, Part A - Pump Station

	641	08/23/76	Accept feasibility report on Water Pressure System, Part A - Pump Station (LID 176)

	642	08/23/76	Call for feasibility report on Water Pressure System, Part B- 10" Water Main

	643	08/23/76	Accept feasibility report on Water Pressure System, Part B - 10" Water Main (LID 177)

	644	08/30/76	Install stop signs

	645	09/13/76	Initiate proceedings to vacate alley (east-west between E. Ridgeway and E. Wilshire from N.E. 3rd to N.E. 4th

	646	09/13/76	Call for feasibility report on Campbell Drive paving

	647	09/13/76	Accept feasibility report and call for hearing on Campbell Drive paving (LID 178)

	648	09/15/76	Call for feasibility report on curb/gutter/paving on W. Lathrop Avenue from S.W. 9th to S.W. 10th

	649	09/15/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/gutter/paving on W. Lathrop Avenue from S.W. 9th To S.W. 10th (LID 179)

	650	09/15/76	Call for feasibility report on curb, gutter & paving on N.W. 7th Street from Standard Avenue north 660 feet (FAILED)

	651	09/15/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb/gutter/paving on N.W. 7th Street from Standard Avenue north 660 feet (LID 180) (FAILED)

	652	09/27/76	Accept FAA grant offer for airport construction project (ADAP Project 5-1-0024-01)

	653	09/27/76	Rescinded by Res. No. 762

	654	09/27/76	Initiate proceedings to vacate utility easement (12' E. of NW corner of Lot 7, Bl. 3, Berg's Addition, thence S. and parallel to W. line of said Lot 7 108' to N. line thereof) Rob't Montgomery

	655	10/11/76	Accept $25,000 allocation from Special City Allotment, State Highway Division (S.E. 4th, Newport to 395)

	656	10/11/76	Accept grant offer of EPA for $105,284 to be used in sewer project, step 1 and authorize signatures (Project #c-410517-01-0)

	657	10/18/76	Enter into option with Ben and Dovie Connor to purchase 28 acres of land at $110,000 for new sewage treatment plant

	658	10/25/76	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 9th Street paving

	659	10/25/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 9th Street paving (LID 181)

	660	10/25/76	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 10th Street paving

	661	10/25/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 10th Street paving (LID 183)

	662	10/25/76	Call for feasibility report on W. Duane Avenue paving

	663	10/25/76	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Duane Avenue paving (LID 182)

	664	10/25/76	Call for feasibility report on Creamery Annex sidewalk

	665	10/25/76	Accept feasibility report on Creamery Annex sidewalk (LID 184)

	666	10/25/76	Apply for assistance under Public Works Employment Act of 1976, Title I, and authorize mayor to sign application for public works building

	667	11/08/76	Initiate proceedings to vacate alleys in Hermiston Orchards Addition, Blocks H and I and portion of S. E. 9th Street

	668	11/08/76	Install stop signs on N.W. Butte Drive at W. Ridgeway

	669	11/08/76	Apply for assistance under Public Works Employment Act of 1976, Title I and authorize mayor to sign applications

	670	11/22/76	Install dead-end street sign on S.W. 7th Place at W. Highland Avenue

	671	12/13/76	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 10th Street paving (from south line of Turner Addition south approximately 370 feet - DeGroff)

	672	12/13/76	Accept feasibility report on S.W. 10th Street paving (DeGroff) LID 185

	673	12/20/76	Accept PP&L proposal to relocate 69 KV transmission line from airport clear zone (ADAP Project 5-41-0024-01)

	674	12/27/76	Designate one-way alleys

	675	01/10/77	Call for feasibility report on Lathrop/Block 4 sewer lateral #51

	676	01/10/77	Accept feasibility report on Lathrop/Block 4 sewer lateral #51 (LID 186)

	677	01/10/77	Call for feasibility report on W. Division (8th/9th) paving

	678	01/10/77	Accept feasibility report on W. Division  (8th/9th) paving (LID 187)

	679	01/10/77	Call for feasibility report on W. Johns (8th/9th) paving

	680	01/10/77	Accept feasibility report on W. Johns (8th/9th) paving (LID 188)

	681	01/10/77	Call for feasibility report on curb and gutter on west side S.W. 8th Street (Division/Johns)

	682	01/10/77	Accept feasibility report on curb and gutter on west side S.W. 8th Street (Division/Johns) (LID 189)

	683	01/10/77	Call for feasibility report on W. Division water main (8th/9th)

	684	01/10/77	Accept feasibility report on W. Division water main (8th/9th) (LID 190)

	685	01/10/77	Call for feasibility report on W. Johns water main (8th/9th)

	686	01/10/77	Accept feasibility report on W. Johns water main (8th/9th) (LID 191)

	687	01/10/77	Initiate proceedings to vacate alleys in Dodd Addition

	688	01/24/77	Call for feasibility report on Meyer Subdivision improvements

	689	01/24/77	Accept feasibility report on Meyer Subdivision improvements (LID 193)

	690	01/24/77	Rescinded by Res. No. 696

	691	01/24/77	Rescinded by Res. No. 697

	692	02/14/77	Rescinded by Res. No. 941

	693	02/14/77	Participate in ECOAC excess property program for one year beginning December 1, 1976

	694	03/14/77	Call for feasibility report on Village Port water/sewer lateral #53

	695	03/14/77	Accept feasibility report on Village Port water/sewer lateral #53 (LID 195)

	696	03/28/77	Call for feasibility report on off-street parking lot acquisition, rescind Res. No. 690

	697	03/28/77	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing April 18 on off-street parking lot acquisition, rescind Res. No. 691 (LID 192)

	698	04/11/77	Call for feasibility report on S.E. 9th Street paving

	699	04/11/77	Accept feasibility report on S.E. 9th Street paving (LID 196)

	700	04/25/77	Transfer planning monies from general fund to sinking fund

	701	05/09/77	Call for feasibility report on E. Pine paving (7th/8th)

	702	05/09/77	Accept feasibility report on E. Pine paving (LID 194)

	703	06/13/77	Call for feasibility report on Village Port paving (Port Drive/S.E. 9th/Columbia Drive)

	704	06/13/77	Accept feasibility report on Village Port paving (Port Drive/S.E. 9th/Columbia Drive) LID 197

	705	06/27/77	Call for feasibility report on airport water/sewer lateral #54

	706	06/27/77	Accept feasibility report on airport water/sewer lateral #54 (LID 198)

	707	06/20/77	Water/sewer pipeline crossing agreement with UPRR (to airport)

	708	06/27/77	Transfer planning monies to sinking fund

	709	08/22/77	Superceded by Res. No. 868

	710	06/27/77	Superceded by Res. No. 768

	711	06/27/77	Install traffic signals at Highway 395 and Highland Avenue

	712	06/27/77	Adopt CIP and amend work program adopted September 1, 1976 (Comp Plan Update to meet LCDC guidelines)

	713	07/11/77	Initiate proceedings to vacate street easement in Marshall Addition

	714	07/11/77	Establish "no parking" zone on S.W. 11th and Hermiston Avenue adjacent to Dean Holmes Plaza

	715	07/11/77	Install traffic signals at Highway 395 at Elm, Jennie, Hurlburt

	716	07/11/77	Accept bid for Series 9 Bancroft Bonds (Charles N. Tripp)

	717	07/25/77	Reappropriate 1976-77 budgeted items

	718	07/25/77	Project Failed

	719	07/25/77	Project Failed (LID 199)

	720	07/25/77	Call for feasibility report on S.E. 8th Street paving (Quince /Pine)

	721	07/25/77	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.E. 8th Street paving - Quince to Pine (LID 200)

	722	07/25/77	Call for feasibility report on Village Port improvements - Phase 2 - (water/sewer/paving)

	723	07/25/77	Accept feasibility report on Village Port improvements - Phase 2 - (water/sewer lateral #55/paving) LID 201

	724	08/22/77	Call for feasibility report on W. Highland Avenue paving (395/S.W. 11th)

	725	08/22/77	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Highland Avenue paving from 395 west to 11th (LID 202)

	726	08/29/77	Amend agreement with State Highway Division for construction and operation of traffic signals on First Street at Main and Gladys (State to maintain)

	727	08/29/77	Authorize mayor to execute LCDC planning assistance grant agreement

	728	09/12/77	Change street name (E. Ketel Avenue to E. Catherine Avenue)

	729	09/12/77	Designate no truck parking areas on Hurlburt at 395 and no parking area on S. First Street from W. Highland north 300 feet

	730	09/12/77	Change street name (E. Monkman Avenue from S.E. 8th to S.E. 9th to E. View Drive)

	731	09/26/77	Restrict parking by mail drop boxes on Main near 4th

	732	09/26/77	Call for feasibility report on E. Monkman (View) sewer lateral #56

	733	09/26/77	Accept feasibility report on E. Monkman (View) sewer lateral #56 (LID 203)

	734	10/10/77	Call for feasibility report on W. Orchard water main

	735	10/10/77	Accept feasibility report on W. Orchard water main

	736	10/10/77	Direct mayor and recorded to execute agreement with UPRR for sewer pipeline crossing railroad tracks at S. First Street

	737	11/28/77	Call for feasibility report on N.E. 4th curb/gutter/sidewalk (Beech to Cherry)

	738	11/28/77	Accept feasibility report on N.E. 4th curb/gutter/sidewalk (Beech to Cherry) LID 205

	739	11/28/78	Call for feasibility report on E. Pine Avenue paving from 8th to 9th

	740	11/28/77	Accept feasibility report on E. Pine Avenue paving from 8th to 9th (LID 206)

	741	12/12/77	Install stop signs on N.E. North, N.E. 2nd and N.E. 3rd Streets at Jennie Avenue and on N.W. 6th Street at Standard Avenue

	742	12/21/77	Establish 10 minute parking zone on Main Street in front of City Hall

	743	01/09/78	Rescinded by Res. No. 861

	744	01/09/78	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign agreement with State Highway Division for preliminary engineering and construction finance for S.E. 4th Off-System Roads Project

	745	01/16/78	Request Transportation Commission to consider the improvement of N.E. 4th Street from Main to Ridgeway and from Jennie to Elm eligible for special cities allotment

	746	02/13/78	Install stop signs on S.E. 9th Drive at E. Highland Avenue and at E. Newport Avenue and on Carter Drive at E. Newport Avenue

	747	03/13/78	Direct city manager to execute agreement with State Parks Branch for Newport Park sprinklers project

	748	03/13/78	Call for feasibility report on Sagebrush Plaza sidewalks

	749	03/13/78	Accept feasibility report on Sagebrush Plaza sidewalks (LID 207)

	750	03/13/78	Install stop sign on S.W. Birch Drive at W. Highland Avenue

	751	03/13/78	Project failed

	752	03/13/78	Project failed (LID 208)

	753	03/27/78	Accept FAA amended grant offer for airport construction project - ADAP Project

	754	03/27/78	Raise water deposit from $15 to $25 (supercedes Res. No. 329) (superseded by Res. 1467)

	755	03/27/78	Accept bid for purchases of $3,000,000 G.O. sewer bonds, direct execution, delivery, sale

	756	04/10/78	Initiate proceedings to vacate portion of alley in Original Town West

	757	04/10/78	Authorize mayor and recorder to enter into agreement with State Highway Division for installation of traffic signal at 395 and Highland

	758	04/10/78	Accept bid for purchase of Bancroft Bonds, Series 10

	759	04/24/78	Accept FAA grant offer for airport construction project (phase 2) ADAP Project 5-41--0024-02

	760	04/24/78	Call for feasibility report on View Drive sewer #2 lateral #117

	761	04/24/78	Accept feasibility report on View Drive sewer #2 lateral #117 (LID 209)

	762	05/08/78	Rescinded by Res. No. 875

	763	05/22/78	Initiate proceedings to vacate portion of alley lying between Cornecl and Hermiston Orchards Addition

	764	05/22/78	Call for feasibility report on E. Pine water main (S.E. 3rd to S.E. 4th)

	765	05/22/78	Accept feasibility report on E. Pine water main (S.E. 3rd to S.E. 4th) (LID 210)

	766	05/22/78	Reaffirm support for Amtrak

	767	06/26/78	Install stop signs on S.W. 4th Street and W. Moore Avenue

	768	06/26/78	Superceded by Res. No. 830

	769	07/10/78	Call for feasibility report on land acquisition for Westview Park

	770	07/10/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on land acquisition for Westview Park (LID 211)

	771	07/24/78	Call for feasibility report on First Place curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving from Hermiston to Orchard Avenues

	772	07/24/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on First Place curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving (overlay) from Hermiston to Orchard Avenues (LID 212)

	773	07/24/78	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 2nd Street curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving (overlay) from Hermiston to Locust Avenues

	774	07/24/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 2nd Street curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving (overlay) from Hermiston to Locust Avenues (LID 213)

	775	07/24/78	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 2nd Street curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving from Locust to Orchard Avenues

	776	07/24/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 2nd Street curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving from Locust to Orchard Avenues (LID 214)

	777	07/24/78	Call for feasibility report on W. Locust Avenue curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving (overlay) from First Place to S.W. 2nd Street

	778	07/24/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Locust Avenue curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving (overlay) from First Place to S.W. 2nd Street (LID 215)

	779	07/24/78	Call for feasibility report on W. Locust Avenue curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving from S.W. 2nd to S.W. 3rd Streets

	780	07/24/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Locust Avenue curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving from S.W. 2nd to S.W. 3rd Streets (LID 216)

	781	07/24/78	Call for feasibility report on E. 3rd Street curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving (overlay) from E. Gladys to E. Hurlburt Avenues

	782	07/24/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. 3rd Street curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving (overlay) from E. Gladys to E. Hurlburt Avenues (LID 217)

	783	07/24/78	Call for feasibility report on E. 2nd Street paving (overlay) (E. Gladys to E. Hurlburt Avenues)

	784	07/24/78	Accept feasibility report on E. 2nd Street paving (overlay) (E. Gladys to E. Hurlburt Avenues)

	785	07/24/78	Reappropriate 1977-78 budgeted items

	786	08/28/78	Call for feasibility report on E. Cherry Avenue curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving from N.E. McNary to N.E. 4th Streets

	787	08/28/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Cherry Avenue curb/gutter/sidewalk/paving from N.E. McNary to N.E. 4th Streets (LID 218)

	788	08/28/78	Rescinded by Res. No. 1131

	789	09/25/78	Accept FAA lease for remote communications outlet at airport

	790	10/09/78	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign agreement for railroad crossing at E. Highland Avenue

	791	10/09/78	Establish "no parking" on west side of S.E. 6th Street from E. Highland Avenue north 600 feet

	792	10/23/78	Call for feasibility report on S.E. Kelli Boulevard and Shannon Way

	793	10/23/78	Accept feasibility report on S.E. Kelli Boulevard and Shannon Way (LID 219)

	794	11/09/78	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign joint support agreement for water supply outlet in proposed dam expansion project

	795	11/09/78	Authorize city to arrange with BLM for continuation of cable t.v. facilities on Butte

	796	11/27/78	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute lease with Micro-Cable Communications Corporation for site on Butte for Home Box Office receiving station

	797	12/11/78	Accept FAA grant agreement amendment #1, ADAP Project 5-41-0024-02 (2nd phase, airport construction)

	799	12/18/78	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on installation of metal street light poles in Highland Hills Addition (LID 220)

	798	12/18/78	Call for feasibility report on installation of metal street light poles in Highland Hills Addition

	800	12/27/78	Remove uncollectible ambulance and cemetery bills from current accounts receivable (keep in inactive file for possible future collection)

	801	01/08/79	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign lease agreement with UPRR for parking and tree planting

	802	01/08/79	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Tamarack Avenue from S.E. 3rd to S.E. 4th Streets

	803	01/08/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Tamarack Avenue from S.E. 3rd to S.E. 4th Streets (LID 221)

	804	01/08/79	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Pine Avenue from S. E. 3rd to S. E. 4th Streets

	805	01/08/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Pine Avenue from S.E. 3rd to S.E. 4th Streets (LID 222)

	806	01/08/79	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 3rd Street from  E. Tamarack to E. Pine Avenues

	807	01/08/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.E. 3rd Street from E. Tamarack to E. Pine Avenues (LID 223)

	808	01/08/79	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 3rd Street from E. Pine to E. Quince Avenues

	809	01/08/79	Accept feasibility, call for hearing on paving S.E. 3rd Street from E. Pine to E. Quince Avenues (LID 224)

	810	01/08/79	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 3rd Street from E. Newport to E. Tamarack Avenues

	811	01/08/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.E. 3rd Street from E. Newport to E. Tamarack Avenues (LID 226)

	812	01/22/79	Initiate proceedings to vacate walkway and street right-of-way easements in Highland Hills

	813	02/26/79	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 4th Street from E. Newport Avenue to Highway 395

	814	02/2679	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.E. 4th Street from E. Newport Avenue to Highway 395 (LID 227)

	815	04/23/79	Establish loading zone at S.W. 7th and W. Juniper

	816	05/14/79	Call for feasibility report on paving S.W. 7th Street from Highland to Division

	817	05/14/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.W. 7th Street from Highland to Division (LID 229)

	818	05/14/79	Install dead-end street sign at northwest corner of S.E. 8th Street and Cassen Court

	819	05/29/79	Call for feasibility report on curb, gutter, sidewalk on north side Diagonal Boulevard from N.E. 7th Street east

	820	05/29/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on curb, gutter, sidewalk  on north side Diagonal Boulevard from N.E. 7th Street east (LID 232)

	821	06/04/79	Direct administration to acquire easements for sewer project, make offer to compensate owners, prepare and file for condemnation if necessary

	822	06/11/79	Develop and adopt industrial cost recovery system acceptable to EPA

	823	06/11/79	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Hurlburt Avenue from 7th to 8th

	824	06/11/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Hurlburt Avenue from 7th to 8th (LID 225)

	825	06/11/79	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Cherry Avenue from Highway 395 to N.W. Spruce

	826	06/11/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W. Cherry Avenue from Highway 395 to N.W. Spruce (LID 230)

	827	06/11/79	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Dogwood Avenue from Highway 395 to N.W. 2nd

	828	06/11/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W. Dogwood Avenue from Highway 395 to N.W. 2nd (LID 231)

	829	06/11/79	Direct mayor and recorder to execute agreement with UPRR for sewer pipeline crossing railroad tracks between milepost 4.91 and milepost 5.39

	830	06/25/79	Superceded by Res. No. 869

	831	06/25/79	Reappropriate 1978-79 budgeted items

	832	06/25/79	Call for feasibility report on Alora Heights improvements

	833	06/25/79	Accept feasibility report on Alora Heights improvements (LID 233)

	834	06/25/79	Initiate proceedings to vacate W. Duane Avenue from 7th to 8th

	835	07/10/79	Install stop signs in Hermiston Park Plats 1 and 2 and on W. Moore Avenue at S.W. 4th Street

	836	07/10/79	Superceded by Res. No. 894

	837	07/10/79	Call for feasibility report on South Hill improvements

	838	07/10/79	Accept feasibility report on South Hill improvements (LID 234)

	839	07/23/79	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Park Avenue from S.W. 7th to S.W. Butte Drive

	840	07/23/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing 08/13 on paving W. Park Avenue from S.W. 7th to S.W. Butte Drive (LID 235)

	841	07/23/79	Name north-south street off Harper Road - N.W. 6th Street

	842	08/13/79	Call for feasibility report on W. Sunland/17th Street water

	843	08/13/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Sunland/17th Street water (LID 236)

	844	08/13/79	Call for feasibility report on S.E. 7th Street paving from Hurlburt to Newport Avenues

	845	08/13/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.E. 7th Street paving from Hurlburt to Newport Avenues

	846	08/13/79	Call for feasibility report on W. Standard Avenue paving from N.W. 7th Street to N.W. Butte Drive

	847	08/13/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Standard Avenue paving from N.W. 7th Street to N.W. Butte Drive (LID 238)

	848	08/13/79	Dust control

	849	08/13/79	Request Highway Division to study retention of Westland Interchange (Exit 180) on 80-N & I-82

	850	08/27/79	Install stop signs on S.W. 2nd & S.W. 3rd at W. Locust

	851	08/27/79	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Sunland Avenue from west line Sunland Estates to S.W. 17th Street

	852	08/27/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W. Sunland Avenue from west line Sunland Estates to S.W. 17th Street (LID 239)

	853	09/10/79	Initiate proceedings to vacate utility (sewer) easement in River Hill Addition, Phase II

	854	09/10/79	Initiate proceedings to vacate east-west alley from N. First Place to N.W. 3rd Street between W. Standard and W. Hartley Avenues

	855	09/10/79	Authorize city attorney to acquire property as described in condemnation suit for sewer easement (Brent Horn's)

	856	10/08/79	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Wilshire Avenue (3rd/4th)

	857	10/08/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Wilshire avenue from 3rd to 4th (LID 240)

	858	10/08/79	Call for feasibility report on paving N.E. 3rd Street (Ridgeway/Wilshire)

	859	10/08/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.E. 3rd Street from Ridgeway to Wilshire (LID 241)

	860	10/08/79	Install stop signs on N.W. Spruce Street at  W. Jennie and on S.E. 9th Street at E. Newport

	861	10/22/79	Rescinded by Res. No. 940

	862	10/22/79	Call for feasibility report on sewer line in Block H of Hermiston Orchards

	863	10/22/79	Accept feasibility report on sewer line in Block H of Hermiston Orchards (LID 242)

	864	11/05/79	Accept bid on Series XI Bancroft Bonds

	865	11/05/79	Rescinded by Res. No. 1055

	866	11/05/79	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 7th Street from E. Newport to E. Highland Avenues

	867	11/05/79	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.E. 7th Street from E. Newport to E. Highland Avenues (LID 243)

	868	12/10/79	Superceded by Res. No. 953

	869	12/10/79	Superceded by Res. No. 896

	870	12/10/79	Install stop sign on N.W. Spruce Street at Beebe Avenue

	871	12/10/79	Establish no parking zone on north side of W. Standard beginning 60' west of N.W. 6th and thence west 50' (by steps at Rocky Heights)

	872	01/14/80	Install stop signs in Westview Estates

	873	01/14/80	Call for feasibility report on W. Highland water main

	874	01/14/80	Accept feasibility report on W. Highland water main (LID 244)

	875	01/28/80	Rescinded by Res. No. 942

	876	01/28/80	Install dead-end street signs on W. Beech, W. Beebe, and W. Cherry Avenues at N.W. 2nd Street

	877	01/28/80	Initiate proceedings to vacate street rights--of-way (0.6' on N. First side and 0.5' on E. Main side of Inland Empire Bank property)

	878	01/28/80	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign agreement for railroad crossing improvement (including automatic signals) at Orchard Avenue

	879	02/11/80	Apply for project under 1981 special city allotment program (N.E. 4th Street from Main to Ridgeway)

	880	03/10/80	Call for feasibility report on paving W, June Avenue (1st/Spruce)

	881	03/10/80	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W. June Avenue (1st/Spruce) (LID 245)

	882	03/10/80	Initiate proceedings to vacate W. Dogwood Avenue from N.W. 2nd west

	883	03/24/80	Initiate proceedings to vacate north-south alley in Block 1 of Original Town West

	884	03/24/80	Call for feasibility report on W. Theater Lane sewer

	885	03/24/80	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Theater Lane sewer (LID 246)

	886	03/24/80	Call for feasibility report on sewer to serve T.L. 101 16AC & T.L. 10500 28B

	887	03/24/80	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on sewer to serve T.L. 101 16AC & 10500 28B (LID 247)

	888	04/28/80	Initiate proceedings to vacate north-south alley in Hal Brandt Tracts

	889	04/28/80	Install stop signs on N.W. 3rd street at W. Standard Avenue

	890	05/12/80	Authorize transfer of public property from one entity to another

	891	05/12/80	Prohibit truck traffic (gross weight greater than 5 tons) - except for in-town deliveries - on S.E. 4th Street from Highway 395 to Main Street

	892	05/27/80	Certifying tax levy election results (80-81 fiscal year)

	893	05/27/80	Certifying tax base election results (80-81 fiscal year)

	894	06/09/80	Superceded by Res. No. 921

	895	06/30/80	Certify tax election results (80-81 fiscal year)

	896	06/30/80	Superceded by Res. No. 954

	897	06/30/80	Reappropriate 1979-80 budgeted items

	898	07/14/80	Call for feasibility report on E. View Drive paving

	899	07/14/80	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. View Drive paving (LID 248)

	900	07/14/80	Call for feasibility report on N.W. Spruce/W. May sewer

	901	07/14/80	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.W. Spruce/W. May sewer (LID 249)

	902	07/14/80	Call for feasibility report on Pender Residential PUD water/sewer/enclose storm drainage ditch

	904	07/14/80	Terminate airport bond improvement fund, transfer money to airport improvement sinking funds

	903	07/14/80	Accept feasibility report on Pender Residential PUD water/sewer/enclose storm drainage ditch (LID 250)

	905	07/14/80	Direct city manager to execute agreement with State Parks and Recreation Division for Belt Park improvements

	906	07/28/80	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (Senior Citizen Taxi Funding)

	907	07/28/80	Initiate proceedings to vacate utility easement in Hermiston Park Plat 1

	908	08/11/80	Traffic control on E. Highland between Highway 395 and railroad crossing

	909	09/08/80	Call for feasibility report on Sunland Estates paving (Phase 2)

	910	09/09/80	Accept feasibility report on Sunland Estates paving (Phase 2) LID 251

	911	09/22/80	Establish truck route on Hermiston Avenue from Highway 395 to N. First Place

	912	09/25/80	Authorize use of city land for fair use by Umatilla County Fair Board

	913	10/13/80	Prohibit truck traffic (gross weight greater than 5 tons) - except for in-town deliveries - on N.E. 7th from Main to Ridgeway, on E. Gladys from 4th to 7th and on E. Ridgeway from 4th to 7th

	914	10/16/80	Direct and authorize mayor to execute deed to U.S. Government for post office site

	915	10/27/80	Accept bid for purchase of G.O. improvement bonds for Bancroft Series XII

	916	11/10/80	Install stop signs on N.W. Spruce at Beech, E. Pine, and E. Tamarack at S.E. 9th Dr & S.E. 9th Street at E. Newport

	917	11/10/80	Accept election returns on tax base

	918	12/08/80	1979-80 audit report deficiencies

	919	12/22/80	Call for feasibility report on S.E. 7th - Hurlburt/Newport - paving

	920	12/22/80	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.E. 7th - Hurlburt/Newport - paving (LID 252)

	921	01/26/81	Superceded by Res. No. 1050

	922	01/26/81	Terminate water bond improvement fund, transfer monies to reserve fund

	923	02/09/81	Call for feasibility report on N.E. 4th Street overlay

	924	02/09/81	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.E. 4th Street overlay from Jennie to Elm (LID 254)

	925	03/09/81	Call for feasibility report on N.E. 4th Street overlay (Jennie/Elm)

	926	03/09/81	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.E. 4th Street overlay from Jennie to Elm (LID 254) - reconsider project at request of over 50% of property owners

	927	03/23/81	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Ridgeway from 7th to 8th

	928	03/23/81	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Ridgeway from 7th to 8th (LID 255)

	929	03/23/81	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 6th Street from Newport Avenue south approximately 700 feet

	930	03/23/81	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.E. 6th Street from Newport Avenue south approximately 700 feet (LID 256)

	931	04/13/81	Restrict parking on S. First Street from Highland Avenue south approximately 400 feet (no parking during school hours)

	932	04/13/81	Authorize FAA ADAP grant application for airport improvement, Phase II

	933	04/13/81	Support Alumax location

	934	04/27/81	Call for feasibility report on W. Sunland sewer

	935	04/27/81	Accept feasibility report on W. Sunland sewer (LID 253)

	936	05/11/82	Call for feasibility report on E. Gladys water/sewer

	937	05/11/81	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Gladys water/sewer (LID 257)

	938	05/26/81	Certify tax levy election results (1981-82 fiscal year)

	939	05/26/81	Install stop signs on W. Poplar Avenue and S.W. 12th Street

	940	06/22/81	Rescinded by Res. No. 1036

	941	06/22/81	Rescinded by Res. No. 1035

	942	06/22/81	Rescinded by Res. No. 1051

	943	06/22/81	Call for feasibility report on W. Orchard water

	944	06/22/81	Accept feasibility report on W. Orchard water (LID 258)

	945	06/22/81	Reappropriate 1980-81 budgeted items

	946	07/13/81	Accept bid for purchase of Series XIII G.O. improvement bonds from __________

	947	07/13/81	Call for feasibility report on paving alley in Pender First Addition

	948	07/13/81	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving alley in Pender First Addition (LID 260)

	949	09/28/81	Install stop signs on W. Moore at 7th and on W. Division at 7th

	950	09/28/81	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (Senior Citizen Taxi Funding)

	951	10/12/81	Establish on and off-street parking time limits

	952	12/28/81	Establish no parking zone, S.W. 7th and W. Highland--Failed

	953	01/11/82	Superceded by Res. No. 1054

	954	01/11/82	Superceded by Res. No. 977

	955	01/11/82	Designate S.E. 7th Street from E. Highland Avenue to E. Main Street as through street, remove north/south stop signs at Newport; install east/west stop signs at Newport and Hurlburt, west bound stop sign at Pine (all at intersections of S.E. 7th)

	956	02/08/82	Accept deferred compensation plan for city employees, authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement

	957	02/08/82	Authorize interfund loan

	958	02/22/82	Rescinded by Res. No. 963

	959	04/12/82	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign oil and gas lease agreement

	960	04/12/82	Bond sale void

	961	04/12/82	Call for feasibility report on paving S.W. 11th Street from Hermiston Avenue south to city limits

	962	04/12/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.W. 11th Street from Hermiston Avenue south to city limits (LID 259)

	963	04/12/82	Install east bound stop signs at Beebe, Beech, Cherry and Dogwood Avenues (all at intersection of N.E. 4th Street) (Rescind Res. No. 958)

	964	05/24/82	Accept bid of Inland Empire Bank for purchase of G. O. improvement bonds, Series XIV, directing delivery and sale thereof

	965	VOID

	966	05/24/82	Certifying tax levy election results (82-83 fiscal year)

	967	05/24/82	Certifying tax base election results (82-82 fiscal year)

	968	06/14/82	Install east bound stop sign on W. Division Avenue at S.W. 10th Street

	969	06/14/82	Establish no parking along N. First Street from Elm Avenue to Theater Lane

	970	06/28/82	Authorize fund transfer from general to special assessment

	971	06/28/82	Reappropriate 1981-82 budgeted items

	972	06/28/82	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. 3rd Street from W. Marie to W. Elm

	973	06/28/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.W. 3rd Street from W. Marie to W. Elm (LID 261)

	974	06/28/82	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Marie Avenue from N. First Place to N.W. 3rd Street

	975	06/28/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W. Marie Avenue from N. First Place to N.W. 3rd Street

	976	07/12/82	Certifying tax levy election results (82-83 fiscal year)

	977	07/12/82	Superceded by Res. No. 1013

	978	08/09/82	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (Senior Citizen Taxi Funding)

	979	08/09/82	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 11th sewer

	980	08/09/82	Accept feasibility report on S.W. 11th sewer (LID 263)

	981	08/23/82	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 8th Place sewer

	982	08/23/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 8th Place sewer (LID 264)

	983	09/27/82	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 4th Street overlay (Hermiston/Locust)

	984	09/27/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 4th Street overlay (Hermiston/Locust) (LID 265)

	985	09/27/82	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 4th Street overlay (Locust/Orchard)

	986	09/27/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 4th Street overlay (Locust/Orchard) (LID 266)

	987	09/27/82	Call for feasibility report on W. Locust Avenue overlay (3rd/4th)

	988	09/27/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Locust Avenue overlay (3rd/4th) (LID 267)

	989	11/22/82	Recharge deep acquifer wells

	990	10/25/82	Accept bid of U.S. National Bank for purchase of G. O. improvement bonds, Series XV, direct delivery and sale thereof

	991	10/25/82	Call for feasibility report on N.E. 4th Street overlay (Main/Ridgeway)

	992	10/25/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.E. 4th Street overlay (Main/Ridgeway) (LID 268)

	993	11/04/82	Certify tax base election results (1982-83 fiscal year)

	994	11/04/82	Certify charter amendments election results (redescribe existing ward boundaries, create new council representation)

	995	11/04/82	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 5th Street from Newport to Highland

	996	11/04/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.E. 5th Street from Newport to Highland

	997	11/22/82	Restrict parking on north side E. Ridgeway from N.E. 3rd west approximately 230 feet (no parking during school hours)

	998	12/13/82	Authorize city manager to acquire federal surplus property from state

	999	12/13/82	Restrict parking on east side of S.W. 7th Street by West Park School (no parking during school hours)

	1000	12/27/82	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Pine Avenue from S.E. 4th to S.E. 5th

	1001	12/27/82	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Pine Avenue from S.E. 4th to S.E. 5th (LID 270)

	1002	01/10/83	Call for feasibility report on east-west sewer line between E. Quince and E. Highland (Superceded by Res. No. 1005)

	1003	01/10/83	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on east-west sewer line between E. Quince and E. Highland (LID 271) (Superceded by Res. No. 1006)

	1004	01/24/83	Install stop signs (east bound on W. Johns Avenue at S.W. 7th Street, north bound on S.W. 7th Street at W. Johns Avenue)

	1005	03/28/83	Call for feasibility report on sewer line between E. Quince and E. Highland (supercedes Res. No. 1002)

	1006	03/28/83	Accept feasibility report on sewer line between E. Quince and E. Highland - (LID 271) (Supercedes Res. No. 1003)

	1007	03/30/83	Certifying Transit Room Tax (Ordinance No. 1449) election results

	1009	04/25/83	Establish criteria council will follow in land use decision (present fairgrounds site)

	1008	04/11/83	Remove uncollectible ambulance bills from current accounts receivable (keep in inactive file for possible future collection)

	1010	05/23/83	Certifying tax levy election results (83-84 fiscal year)

	1011	05/23/83	Initiate proceedings to vacate N.W. 4th from W. Madrona to W. Ridgeway as platted in First Addition

	1012	05/23/83	Establish traffic controls - limited parking on south side W. Orchard/from S.W. 9th west 173' (2 hour) & 173' west of S.W. 9th west 73' (30 min); eliminate on-street parking space north side E. Hurlburt 45' east of Hwy 395

	1013	06/13/83	Superceded by Res. No. 1060

	1014	06/27/83	Authorize additional "911" fund transfer

	1015	06/27/83	Reappropriate 1982-83 budgeted funds

	1016	08/08/83	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (Senior Citizen Taxi Funding)

	1017	08/08/83	Initiate proceedings to vacate N.W. Spruce Street from W. Beebe south 119 feet

	1018	08/08/83	Install stop signs (4-way at S.E. 8th & Quince)

	1019	08/22/83	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. 7th Street from W. Standard Avenue to W. Fulton Avenue

	1020	08/22/83	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.W. 7th Street from W. Standard Avenue to W. Fulton Avenue (LID 272)

	1021	08/22/83	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. 7th Street from W. Fulton Avenue to W. Elm Avenue

	1022	08/22/83	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.W. 7th Street from W. Fulton to W. Elm Avenue (LID 273)

	1023	10/24/83	Install stop signs (N.W. 7th at Elm, S.W. 4th at Locust)

	1024	10/24/83	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. Spruce Street from W. June Avenue to W. Jennie Avenue

	1025	10/24/83	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.W. Spruce Street from W. June Avenue to W. Jennie Avenue (LID 274)

	1026	12/12/83	Install stop sign on N.E. 9th Street at E. Ridgeway Avenue

	1027	01/23/84	Call for feasibility report on N.E. 5th Street overlay (Main/Ridgeway)

	1028	01/23/84	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.E. 5th Street overlay (Main/Ridgeway) (LID 276)

	1029	01/23/84	Call for feasibility report on E. Ridgeway Avenue overlay (3rd/4th)

	1030	01/23/84	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Ridgeway Avenue overlay (3rd/4th) (LID 276)

	1031	01/23/84	Call for feasibility report on E. Ridgeway Avenue overlay (4th/7th)

	1032	01/23/84	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Ridgeway Avenue overlay (4th/7th) (LID 277)

	1033	04/23/84	Call for feasibility report on N.W. 11th Street overlay (Hermiston Avenue to south line of hospital property)

	1034	04/23/84	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.W. 11th Street overlay (Hermiston Avenue to south line of hospital property) LID 278

	1035	01/23/84	Rescinded by Res. No. 1277

	1036	01/23/84	Rescinded by Res. No. 1261

	1037	01/23/84	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with State Highway Division for preliminary engineering study for improvement of E. Highland Avenue from Highway 395 to S.E. 8th Street (FAU 7100)

	1038	02/13/84	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Highland Avenue from Highway 395 to S.E. 8th Street (FAUS project)

	1039	02/13/84	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Highland Avenue from Highway 395 to S.E. 8th Street (FAUS project) (LID 279)

	1040	03/12/84	Eliminate utility B & I reserve fund

	1041	04/09/84	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute and endorse agreement with League of Oregon Cities governing league status as unit of local government

	1042	04/09/84	Establish traffic controls (restricted parking north side of W. Jennie west of N. First Street

	1043	04/23/84	Establish traffic controls (restricted parking north side of S.E. 6th Street from 35 feet south of E. Main Street south 60 feet

	1044	04/23/84	Authorize signing land lease with Micro-Cable Communications Corp. to construct building on Butte for cable t.v. equipment

	1045	05/14/84	Designate marked pedestrian crosswalk on W. Orchard Avenue at "B" Street

	1046	05/14/84	Authorize mayor and city manager to sign deed with State Highway Division for right-of-way near airport

	1047	05/14/84	Oppose revisions in current methodology used to determine power costs, calls on BPA Administrator to withdraw proposal

	1048	05/21/84	Certify new tax base election items

	1049	05/21/84	Reappropriate 1983-84 budgeted items

	1050	05/29/84	Superceded by Res. No. 1127

	1051	06/11/84	Rescinded by Res. No. 1116

	1052	06/11/84	Initiate procedure to convert land from urbanizable to urban status (82.4 acres N.W. 11th Street area)

	1053	06/11/84	Initiate procedure to convert land from urbanizable to urban status (84 acres Highway 395 area)

	1054	06/25/84	Superceded by Res. No. 1075

	1055	06/25/84	Establish cable t.v. rates, rescind Res. No. 865

	1056	07/09/84	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (Senior Citizen Taxi Funding)

	1057	07/30/84	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign pipe line encroachment agreement with UPRR ( 4" water main in N. First Place crossing

	1058	07/30/94	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Ridgeway Avenue from Diagonal Boulevard to N.E. 10th Street

	1059	07/30/84	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Ridgeway Avenue from Diagonal Boulevard to N.E. 10th Street (LID 289)

	1060	08/13/84	Superceded by Res. No. 1076

	1061	09/17/84	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with State Highway Division for "Title II, Hazard Elimination Project - Horizontal/Vertical No Passing Zone Stripping"

	1062	09/24/84	Establish traffic controls (designate N.E. 4th from Main to Elm as through street; remove stop signs on N.E. 4th at Gladys, Ridgeway, and Jennie; install stop signs on E. Gladys, Ridgeway, Wilshire, Catherine, Jennie, Beebe, Beech, Cherry, Dogwood - all at N.E. 4th

	1063	09/24/84	Traffic controls on W. Orchard Avenue between S.W. 3rd and S.W. 4th (no parking and west bound turn-out lane)

	1064	09/24/84	Accept bid of U.S. National Bank for purchase of G.O. Bancroft Bonds, Series XVI, direct delivery and sale thereof

	1065	10/22/84	Establish building permit policy (primary structure have permits issued first)

	1066	10/15/84	Insure equal opportunity in employment and policy of nondiscrimination on basis of handicapped status

	1067	10/22/84	Support state border information center

	1068	12/10/84	Authorize mayor to sign contract with Century West Engineering for airport improvement project

	1069	01/28/85	Establish traffic controls (2 hour parking on Hurlburt and S.E. 2nd)

	1070	02/11/85	Install stop sign (southbound on N.W. 7th Street at W. Standard Avenue

	1071	02/11/85	Remove uncollectible ambulance accounts from current list of accounts receivable

	1072	02/25/85	Restrict parking on S. First Street (no parking between entrances to high school student parking lot)

	1073	03/25/85	Change name of Nancy Estates Subdivision to Alderbrooke Addition and S.W. 7th Place within subdivision to S.W. Alderbrooke Place

	1074	03/28/85	Certify transit room tax election results (Ordinance No. 1543)

	1075	04/08/85	Superceded by Res. No. 1145

	1076	04/08/85	Superceded by Res. No. 1079

	1077	05/20/85	Establish loading zone and unloading zone in off-street parking lot (alley behind Inland Empire Bank)

	1078	05/13/85	Initiate proceeding to vacate easement in Cassens II Subdivision

	1079	06/24/85	Superceded by Res. No. 1115

	1080	06/24/85	Reappropriate 1984-85 budgeted items

	1081	07/22/85	Call for feasibility report on paving north side W. Division Avenue from S.W. 7th Street west 135 feet

	1082	07/22/85	Accept feasibility report on paving north side W. Division Avenue from S.W. 7th Street west 135 feet (LID 281)

	1083	07/22/85	Establish computer inventory control of all City materials and equipment

	1084	08/12/85	Oppose federal tax reform provisions

	1085	08/26/85	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Dogwood Avenue from N. First Street to N.E. McNary Street

	1086	08/26/85	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Dogwood Avenue from N. First Street to N.E. McNary Street (LID 282)

	1087	08/26/85	Establish west bound one-way traffic in alley between W. Hermiston and W. Ridgeway from N.W. 2nd to N.W. 3rd

	1088	08/26/85	Call for feasibility report on overlay on N.E. 5th Street from Main Street to Gladys Avenue

	1089	08/26/85	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on overlay on N.E. 5th Street from Main Street to Gladys Avenue (LID 283)

	1089	11/04/85	Establish traffic controls (no parking on north and south sides of E. Elm Avenue from N. First Street east 40 feet)

	1090	08/26/85	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute deed to sell land to Beck Construction Company (Alora Heights, Block 1, Lot 30)

	1091	11/25/85	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Hartley Avenue from N. First Place to N.W. 7th Street

	1092	11/25/85	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W. Hartley Avenue from N. First Place to N.W. 7th Street (LID 284)

	1093	10/14/85	Eligibility for federal surplus property

	1094	10/14/85	Endorse North Morrow County site for Superconducting Super Collider research and testing facility

	1095	10/28/85	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute documents of title to sell Lot 19, South Hill Addition to Wayne Beck

	1096	10/28/85	Request Economic Development Commission & State to assist in financing J&L Wood Products project

	1097	11/04/85	Establish 10 foot fire lane in off-street parking lot (west 10 feet of Lot 4, Block 8, Original Town East)

	1100	11/25/85	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding)

	1099	11/04/85	Extend JB's Taxi Service franchise for five years to January 26,1991

	1101	12/23/85	Establish utility easements in Alora Heights Subdivision

	1102	01/13/86	Remove uncollectible ambulance accounts from current list of accounts receivable

	1103	01/27/86	Reappropriate 1985-86 budgeted items

	1104	01/27/86	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute deed to sell Lot 16, Block 1, South Hill Addition

	1105	01/27/86	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Cornell Place from N. First Street east 170 feet

	1106	01/27/86	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Cornell Place from N. First Street east 170 feet (LID 285)

	1107	03/24/86	Oppose reduction in AMTRAK service

	1108	04/14/86	Provide workers' compensation insurance for community service work

	1109	04/14/86	Support onsite destruction of chemical weapons at UAD

	1110	04/14/86	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 6th Street from Main Street south to alley

	1111	04/14/86	Accept feasibility report on paving S.E. 6th Street from Main Street south to alley (hearing waived) (LID 287)

	1112	05/12/86	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute deed to sell Lot 13, Block 1, Alora Heights

	1113	05/19/86	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute deeds to sell Lots 4 and 8 in South Hill Addition

	1114	06/09/86	Membership in City/County - CIS Workers' Compensation Self-Insured Group

	1115	06/09/86	Superceded by Res. No. 1141

	1116	06/23/86	Rescinded by Res. No. 1239

	1117	07/28/86	Call for feasibility report on overlay on S.W. 7th Street from W. Orchard Avenue to W. Highland Avenue

	1118	07/28/86	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on overlay on S.W. 7th Street from Orchard Avenue to W. Highland Avenue (LID 286)

	1119	07/28/86	Call for feasibility report on paving west side of N.W. Spruce Street from W. June Avenue to W. Jennie Avenue

	1120	07/28/86	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving west side of N.W. Spruce Street from W. June Avenue to W. Jennie Avenue (LID 288)

	1121	07/28/86	Establish traffic controls (no parking on north side of W. Orchard Avenue from a point 105 feet east of S.W. 2nd Street east 30 feet)

	1122	08/25/86	Propose application for enterprise zone designation

	1123	09/08/86	Call for feasibility report to pave N.W. Spruce Street from W. June Avenue to W. Jennie Avenue

	1124	09/08/86	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing to pave N.W. Spruce Street from W. June Avenue to W. Jennie Avenue (LID 289)

	1125	09/22/86	Initiate proceedings to vacate street (north half W. Ridgeway from N. First west 325 feet)

	1126	09/22/86	Accept Bancroft applications and include in current G.O. Bancroft improvement issue to be considered under Ord. No. 1605

	1127	10/13/86	Superceded by Res. No. 1206

	1128	10/30/86	Accept bid of U.S. National Bank for purchase of G.O. Bancroft Bonds, Series XVII

	1129	11/03/86	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding)

	1130	12/08/86	Name airport terminal "Harper Airport Terminal"

	1131	02/09/87	Rescinded by Res. No. 1146

	1132	02/09/87	Establish loading zone and prohibitive parking zone (in front of 236 E. Newport Avenue)

	1133	02/09/87	Grant encroachment easement to Michael S. & Jackie M. Wheelhouse

	1134	03/09/87	Reappropriate 1986-87 budgeted items

	1136	04/13/87	Remove north-south bound stop signs on S.E. 8th at E. Quince, install east-west bound stop signs on E. Pine at S.E. 8th

	1135	03/23/87	League of Oregon Cities/Department of Transportation roadway analysis

	1137	04/27/87	Eliminate insect control reserve fund

	1138	05/26/87	N.E. Cornell Place utility assessment (water/sewer)

	1139	05/26/87	Implement procedure to amend comp plan map designation for land on north side of E. Jennie Avenue approximately 690 feet east of N.E. 4th Street

	1140	06/08/87	Install north-south bound stop signs on S.E. 6th Street at E. Newport Avenue

	1141	06/22/87	Superceded by Res. No. 1156

	1142	06/22/87	Reappropriate 1986-87 budgeted items

	1143	07/14/87	Superceded by Res. No. 1148

	1144	07/21/87	Remove uncollectible ambulance accounts from current list of accounts receivable

	1145	08/10/87	Install north-south bound stop signs on S.E. 6th Street at Hurlburt

	1146	08/10/87	Rescinded by Res. No. 1270

	1147	09/28/87	Establish traffic control (no parking space on N.W. 7th Street at Rocky Heights School driveway)

	1148	09/28/87	Superceded by Res. No. 1155

	1149	10/26/87	Establish prohibited parking on north side of W. Theater Lane from Highway 395 North west 20 feet

	1150	09/28/87	Designate marked pedestrian crosswalk on W. Orchard Avenue 335 feet east of S.W. 11th Street

	1151	10/26/87	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute deed to sell Lot 3, South Hill Addition (4N28 14BC Tax Lot 1400)

	1152	11/02/87	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 87-88

	1153	11/23/87	Change street name (B Street to S.W. 10th Street)

	1154	12/14/87	Concerns to FCC re: cable t.v. rate increase

	1155	12/28/87	Rescinded by Res. No. 1192

	1156	12/28/87	Superceded by Res. No. 1170

	1157	12/28/87	Establish loading zone on S.W. 7th Street from W. Juniper Avenue south 80'

	1158	01/25/88	Support Umatilla Basin Project

	1159	02/08/88	Support Oregon Trail Tourism Council activities

	1160	02/08/88	Support existing Hanford Reserve

	1161	02/22/88	Reappropriate 1987-88 budgeted items

	1162	03/14/88	Reappropriate 1987-88 budgeted items

	1163	03/14/88	Support additional funding for county fair

	1164	04/11/88	Establish traffic control on south side of W. Jennie Avenue adjacent to N. First Street (by Frasu's)

	1165	04/11/88	East-west bound stop signs on W. Elm Avenue at N. First Place (in opposition to removing)

	1166	04/25/88	Oppose proposed regulations to require federally approved pavement management system

	1167	04/25/88	Support ability of state and local governments to self governance (Salt Cave Dam in Klamath Falls)

	1168	05/09/88	Restrict loading in east-west alley from N.E. 2nd Street east 75 feet

	1169	05/23/88	Accept offer to purchase Lot 7, South Hill Addition/Paul Burns

	1170	07/27/88	Superceded by Res. No. 1177

	1171	07/11/88	City/County Insurance Services Trust (CIS) membership agreement (General and Auto Liability)

	1172	07/25/88	Designate handicapped parking spaces on north side Main at First (front of Inland Empire Bank)

	1173	08/08/88	Provide worker's compensation insurance coverage to all volunteers and community service workers at an assumed wage of $800 per month

	1174	08/08/88	Authorization to acquire municipal credit cards

	1175	08/08/88	Designating compact parking spaces on W. Hermiston Avenue and E. Main Street at intersection streets

	1176	08/22/88	Adopt policy for review and approval of sign permits

	1177	08/22/88	Superceded by Res. No. 1187

	1178	09/12/88	Extend loading zone on east side of S.W. 7th Street by West Part School

	1179	09/12/88	Reappropriate 1988-89 budgeted items (detention)

	1180	09/12/88	Designate hours for Hodge Park

	1181	09/26/88	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 88-89

	1182	10/10/88	Authorization to acquire federal surplus property from Oregon State Agency for Surplus Property

	1183	10/10/88	Initiate proceedings to vacate street right-of-way (S.E. Port Drive in Village Port Addition)

	1184	11/07/88	Reappropriate 1988-89 budgeted items (land transaction)

	1185	11/28/88	Call for feasibility report on paving W. Beebe Avenue from N. First Street to N.W. Spruce Street

	1186	11/28/88	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving W. Beebe Avenue from N. First Street to N.W. Spruce Street (LID 290)

	1187	12/12/88	Adopt compensation plan for city employees (supercedes Res. No. 1177) Superceded by Res. No. 1194

	1188	01/09/89	Establish prohibited parking 20 feet on either side of Senior Center entrance located on south side of W. Orchard Avenue

	1189	01/09/89	Urge continuation of Army Depot Activity mission

	1190	03/13/89	Remove uncollectible ambulance accounts from current list of accounts receivable

	1191	05/08/89	Authorize mayor and Recorder to sign lease agreement with UPRR for Maxwell Siding

	1192	05/22/89	Adopt employee handbook dated May 22 as employee policies of City, rescind Res. No. 1155

	1193	05/22/89	Call for feasibility report on industrial development, Section 24

	1194	06/26/89	Adopt compensation plan for city employees (supercedes Res. No. 1187) (rescinded & superceded by Res. No. 1196)

	1195	06/26/89	Reappropriate 1988-89 budgeted items

	1196	08/14/89	Adopt compensation plan for city employees for FY 1989-90 (rescinds & supercedes Res. No. 1194)

	1197	09/25/89	Establish new ambulance rates, accept Medicare assignment (superseded by Res. No. 1324)

	1198	09/25/89	Authorize mayor or designated rep to sign/submit EDA funding application

	1199	09/25/89	Sources of funding as local match for EDA funding application conditions

	1200	10/05/89	Accept feasibility report on Hermiston Port, Unit One improvements (LID 291)

	1201	11/07/89	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 89-90

	1202	11/07/89	Authorize mayor & city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding) FY 89-90

	1203	12/11/89	Establish trust account to receive drug forfeitures for law enforcement activities ($10,000 cap)

	1204	01/08/90	Establish library trust fund (Felthouse donation)

	1205	01/08/90	Express appreciation to Emma Felthouse for library donation

	1206	01/08/90	Approve taxi fare increase (supercedes Res. No. 1127) (superseded by Res. 1355)

	1207	02/26/90	Authorize Community Development Block Grant application

	1208	02/26/90	Request assistance to Legal Advocacy Review Committee (Hospital suit)

	1209	03/12/90	Establish no parking on south side of E. Hurlburt Avenue between S.E. 5th & S.E. 6th Streets (adjacent to Newport Park)

	1210	03/12/90	Rescinded by Res. No. 1277

	1211	03/12/90	Establish new sewer billing category

	1212	03/12/90	Authorize mayor and recorder to execute agreement with Union Pacific Railroad for underground 36 inch sewer pipeline encroachment

	1213	03/12/90	Adopt new charter and refer to voters on May 15

	1214	03/26/90	Authorize extension and costs for installation of sewer lateral in S.E. 2nd Street between E. Hurlburt and E. Newport Avenues

	1215	04/09/90	Call for feasibility report on overlay project - N.E. Sunset Drive from E. Wilshire to N.E. 7th, N.E. Reeder Drive from E. Wilshire to E. Catherine and E. Wilshire Avenue from N.E. 4th to N.E. Sunset

	1216	04/09/90	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on overlay project - N.E. Sunset Drive from E. Wilshire to N.E. 7th, E. Reeder Drive from E. Wilshire to E. Catherine & E. Wilshire Ave from N.E. 4th to N.E. Sunset Drive (LID 292)

	1217	04/23/90	Establish parking for handicapped on north side of Gladys Avenue in front of Methodist Church on Sundays only from 9:30 am to 12:30 pm

	1218	05/14/90	Name public street right-of-way (W. Jennie Avenue west of N.W. 11th)

	1219	05/14/90	Agree to conditions for use of Newport Park for well site

	1220	05/21/90	Accept right-of-way for segments of Highland Avenue

	1221	06/11/90	Superceded by Res. No. 1238

	1222	06/04/90	Recommending Roundhouse Corporation project to Oregon Business Development Fund

	1223	06/25/90	Reappropriate 1989-90 budget items

	1224	07/09/90	Appropriate unanticipated grant from Lifeguard

	1225	07/16/90	Adopt new charter and refer to voters on November 6

	1226	07/23/90	Establish on-street loading zone (west side S.W. 2nd between Hermiston & Locust Avenues from alley north 20 feet)

	1227	08/27/90	Remove uncollectible ambulance accounts from current lists of accounts receivable

	1228	09/24/90	Recognize error on zoning map (4N28 24A, Tax Lots 702 & 703) - area north & east of Highway 395 South

	1229	09/24/90	City/County Insurance Services Trust (CIS) membership agreement (self insurance pool for property coverage)

	1230	10/08/90	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 90-91

	1231	10/22/90	Authorize creation of trust account for well No. 6

	1232	10/31/90	Accept bid of PaineWebber for Bancroft Series XVIII

	1233	11/08/90	Call for feasibility report on paving alley between Hurlburt & Newport from S.E. 2nd Street east 300 feet

	1234	11/08/90	Accept feasibility report on paving alley between Hurlburt & Newport from S.E. 2nd Street east 300 feet (LID 293)

	1235	11/08/90	Expend funds from street construction reserve to cover improvement liens

	1236	11/08/90	Declare City-owned hangar at airport surplus property

	1237	11/26/90	Accept jurisdiction of Highland Avenue

	1238	12/10/90	Superceded by Res. No. 1256

	1239	12/10/90	Charges for solid waste collection (rescinds Res. No. 1116) (rescinded by Res. No. 1334)

	1240	01/14/91	Joint resolution on intergovernmental cooperation (Cities & County) (rescinded by Res. No. 1328)

	1241	02/11/91	Establish D.A.R.E. trust & agencies account

	1242	02/25/91	Establish weapons replacement fund & agencies account

	1243	02/25/91	Establish marriage license fees trust & agencies account

	1244	03/25/91	Call for feasibility report on E. Highland Avenue water main (140' east of S.E. 9th Dr. to S.E. 10th St., and S.E. 10th St. from E. Highland Ave. north 350')

	1245	03/25/91	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Highland Avenue water main (140' east of S.E. 9th Dr. to S.E. 10th St., and S.E. 10th St. from E. Highland Avenue north 350') (LID 294)

	1246	03/25/91	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Highland Avenue from S.E. 8th Street to S.E. 10th Street

	1247	03/25/91	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving E. Highland Avenue from S.E. 10th Street (LID 295)

	1248	03/25/91	Establish on-street handicapped parking (south side of Hermiston Ave. 70' east of east right-of-way line of S.W. 6th St.; thence east 140')

	1249	03/25/91	Call for feasibility report on E. Elm Avenue sidewalk from Hwy. 395 to N.E. 4th Street

	1250	03/25/91	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Elm Avenue curb/gutter/sidewalk from Hwy. 395 to N.E. 4th Street (LID 296)

	1251	04/08/91	Declare as surplus property and authorize sale (Kilcup Addition, Block B, Lot 4)

	1252	04/22/91	Authorize extension and costs for sewer line in E. Highland & S.E. 9th

	1253	05/13/91	Certify eligibility to receive state-shared revenue

	1254	05/13/91	Call for feasibility report on E. Jennie Avenue paving from 300' west of N.E. 6th Street to 120' east of N.E. 6th Street

	1255	05/13/91	(LID 297) Rescinded by Res. No. 1276

	1256	06/24/91	Superceded by Res. No. 1284

	1257	06/14/91	Install southbound stop sign on Kelli Boulevard at Feedville Road

	1258	06/16/91	Contract review board authorizing exemption from competitive bid procedures for purchase of rinsate holding tanks & related hardware (airport project AIP #3-41-0024-03)

	1259	06/24/91	Declare as surplus property and authorize sale (Village Port)

	1260	06/24/91	Proposing to grant exception to Policy 6 in comp plan to convert land from urbanizable to urban status (Nazarene Church)

	1261	06/24/91	Rescinded by Res. No. 1278

	1262	07/01/91	Corporate Surety Bond

	1263	08/12/91	Accept donation of land from Spectrum Properties, Inc. (Lots 13, 14, 15 & 16, Block 8, Newport Addition)

	1264	08/26/91	Rescinded by Res. No. 1290

	1265	08/26/91	Install westerly bound stop signs on Shannon Way at Campbell Drive and Kelli Boulevard and easterly bound stop sign on Shannon Way at Kelli Boulevard

	1266	09/23/91	Authorize costs for sewer extension in W. Highland Avenue/S.W. 13th Street

	1267	10/14/91	City/County Insurance Services Trust (CIS) membership agreement (general and auto liability)

	1268	10/14/91	Authorize mayor and city recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 91-92

	1269	10/14/91	Call for feasibility report on E. Main Street improvements from Hwy. 395 to E. 5th Street

	1270	10/14/91	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Main Street improvements from Hwy. 395 to E. 5th Street (LID 298)

	1271	11/25/91	Establish traffic controls (one hour parking on south side of E. Highland at Hodge Park and no parking during school hours on south side of W. Highland from S. First west approximately 385 feet) and rescind Res. No. 1146

	1272	11/25/91	Accept County offer to transfer portion of E. Elm Avenue from Highway 395 to N.E. 4th Street to City

	1273	11/25/91	Support Oregon Transportation Plan and role City's transportation resources play

	1274	12/23/91	Initiate proceedings to vacate sewer easement (Nazarene property/ S.W. 13th Street)

	1275	12/23/91	Designate GEODC as Economic District Organization

	1276	01/13/92	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on E. Jennie Avenue paving from 300' west of N.E. 6th Street to 120' east of N.E. 6th Street (LID 297) - (rescinds Res. No. 1255)

	1277	02/24/92	Establish new water rates (rescinds Res. No. 1035 & 1210) (superseded by Res. 1436)

	1278	02/24/92	Establish new sewer rates (rescinds Res. No. 1261) (superseded by Res. 1454

	1279	02/24/92	Appropriate unanticipated grant from Economic Development Administration

	1280	03/09/92	Superceded by Res. No. 1283

	1281	03/09/92	Terminate HFI Infrastructure Fund, transfer remaining monies to Water/Sewer Improvement Reserve Fund

	1282	03/09/92	Certify eligibility to receive State shared revenues

	1283	04/27/92	Establish criteria for appointing standing committees (budget, planning commission, library board, parks & recreation, airport advisory and recreation projects fund advisory) (Supercedes Res. 1280)

	1284	05/11/92	Superceded by Res. No. 1285

	1285	06/22/92	Adopt compensation plan for FY 92-93 (Supercedes Res. No. 1284) (superseded by Res. 1303)

	1286	06/22/92	Appropriate unanticipated grant from FAA

	1287	07/13/92	City/County Insurance Services Trust (CIS) membership agreement (Workers' Compensation)

	1288	07/27/92	Reappropriate 1992-93 budgeted items

	1289	07/27/92	Appropriate unanticipated grant from State Traffic Safety Division

	1290	07/27/92	Rescind Res. No. 1264 establishing traffic controls

	1291	08/24/92	Propose granting exception to Policy 6 in comprehensive plan and converting land from urbanizable to urban status

	1292	00/14/92	Support Oregon Drinking Water Act of 1981 and adopt May 1990, Fifth Edition, Cross Connection Control Manual as guidelines for cross connection control program

	1293	09/28/92	Install stop signs north-south bound on N. W. 3rd Street at W. Hartley Avenue

	1294	10/26/92	Install stop signs north-south bound on S. E. 3rd Street at E. Newport Avenue (pursuant to area concerns and police recommendation)

	1295	10/26/92	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 92-93

	1296	10/26/92	Call for feasibility report on improving E. Newport Avenue from S.E. 5th to S.E. 10th Streets (FAILED)

	1297	10/26/92	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on improving  E. Newport Avenue from S.E. 5th to S.E. 10th Streets (LID 299) (FAILED)

	1298	11/09/92	Authorize costs of w/s  lines in Sunnyvale Heights Subdivision

	1299	11/09/92	Establish traffic controls (one hour parking on south side of E. Main Street from S.E. 4th Street east 50 feet)

	1300	11/09/92	Grant exception to Section 7, Ordinance 1647, for one year for temporary facility in Highlander Center

	1301	11/09/92	Grant exception to Section 17 in Appendix "A" of Ordinance 1770 until July 1, 1993 for temporary placement of recreational vehicles in mobile home parks

	1302	12/14/92	Remove uncollectible ambulance accounts from current list of accounts receivable

	1303	12/14/92	Adopt compensation plan for FY92-93 (effective 01/01/93) (Supercedes Res. No. 1285) (superceded by Res. No. 1312)

	1304	12/14/92	Provide for public interest to become consideration in setting Endangered Species Act laws

	1305	12/28/92	Support Oregon State Police office in Umatilla

	1306	01/25/93	Authorize extension and costs for water line in E. Highland Avenue from approximately 110' east of S.E. 9th Drive to S.E. 10th Street and north approximately 237' in S.E. 10th Street

	1307	03/22/93	Propose granting exception to Policy 6 in comprehensive plan and converting land from urbanizable to urban status (HID property)

	1308	03/22/93	Call for feasibility report on W. Elm Avenue curb/gutter & sidewalk/paving from N. First Place to N. First Street

	1309	03/22/93	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Elm Avenue curb & gutter/sidewalk/paving from N. First Place to N. First Street (LID 300)

	1310	04/26/93	Propose converting property south of airport from urbanizable to urban status (Able/City)

	1311	04/26/93	Authorize contract review board to consider criteria for determining acquisition of computer equipment

	1312A	05/10/93	Install north-south stop signs on N.W. Spruce Street at W. Cherry Avenue and N.E. McNary Street at E. Dogwood Avenue

	1312	06/14/93	Adopt compensation plan for FY93-94 (effective 07/01/93)(Supercedes Res. No. 1303) (superseded by Res. 1343)

	1313	06/28/93	Implement water conservation plan

	1314	06/28/93	Reappropriate 1992-93 budgeted items

	1315	07/12/93	City/County Insurance Services Trust membership

	1316	07/12/93	Install north-south stop signs on S.E. 5th Street at E. Newport Avenue

	1317	07/26/93	Propose converting property on N.E. 10th Street north of Elm from urbanizable to urban status (County Squire Estates)

	1318	07/26/93	Authorize bond refunding

	1319	08/30/93	Call for special election on general obligation bonded indebtedness to finance City's portion of regional water system improvements

	1320	09/13/93	Designate hours of operation in Victory Square Park (in accord with Ord. No. 1588)

	1321	09/27/93	Establish traffic controls (parking for police vehicles only on east side of S.E. 4th Street from E. Newport Avenue south to county building driveway access)

	1322	10/11/93	Install east-west stop signs on W. Standard Avenue at N.W. 7th Street

	1323	10/11/93	Establish hours of operation at Hodge Park

	1324	11/22/93	Establish ambulance rates, supercedes #1197

	1325	12/13/93	Appropriate unanticipated grant for gang related activities

	1326	12/13/93	Appropriate unanticipated grant for tree planting project

	1327	12/13/93	Install north bound stop sign on N.W. 7th Street at W. Standard Avenue

	1328	01/10/94	Joint resolution on intergovernmental cooperation (cities and county) (supercedes Res. #1240)

	1329	01/10/94	Authorize mayor & recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 Program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 93-94

	1330	01/10/94	Support proposed manufacturing project on Kelli Blvd. on Port property

	1330A	01/24/94	Call for feasibility report on improving E. Gladys Avenue from 250 feet east of N.E. 9th Street to N.E. 10th Street (LID failed)

	1331	01/24/94	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on improving E. Gladys Avenue from 250 feet east of N.E. 9th Street to N.E. 10th Street (LID 301) (LID Failed)

	1332	02/14/94	Call for feasibility report on improving W. Beech Avenue from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395

	1333	02/14/94	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on improving W. Beech Avenue from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (LID 302) (c/g/sw/p)

	1334	02/14/94	Charges for solid waste collection (rescinds #1239) (superseded by Res. 1460)

	1335	03/07/94	Authorize issuance and negotiated sale of G.O. Bond Anticipation Notes, Series 1994

	1336	03/14/94	Establish marked pedestrian crosswalks, eliminate present crosswalk at Armand Larive Junior High School

	1337	03/28/94	Supplement and adjust budget for 1993-94 fiscal period

	1338	05/23/94	Adopt budget for fiscal period 1994-95

	1339	05/23/94	Make appropriations for fiscal period 1994-95

	1340	05/23/94	Levy tax for fiscal period 1994-95

	1341	05/23/94	Authorize lease-purchase acquisition and other activities for Hermiston Community Center

	1342	05/23/94	Assume state electrical inspection program

	1343	06/13/94	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal year 94-95 (supersedes Res. 1312) superseded by Res. 1361

	1344	06/13/94	Approve interfund loan for purchase of community center properties

	1346	06/27/94	Authorize intergovernmental agreement with Port of Umatilla pursuant to ownership and operation of regional water system

	1345	06/27/94	Oppose proposal to reroute U.S. Highway 395

	1347	06/27/94	Reappropriate 1993-94 budgeted items

	1348	07/25/94	Authorize issuance of G.O. bonds, series 1994 (amended by Res. 1350)

	1349	08/08/94	Membership in City/County Insurance Services trust liability risk sharing pool

	1350	08/15/94	Amend Res. 1348 authorizing issuance and negotiated sale of G.O. Bonds Series 1994

	1351	08/22/94	Install north-south stop signs at intersection of S.W. 10th Street & W. Division Avenue

	1353	09/26/94	Initiate proceedings to convert property on the north side of W. Theater Lane from urbanizable to urban status (Cimmiyotti/Gifford/Hendrickson)

	1352	09/12/94	Authorize city manager to proceed with community center financing

	1354	09/26/94	Appropriate unanticipated grant from Oregon Department of Forestry

	1355	10/10/94	Approve taxi fare increase (supersedes Res. 1206) (superseded by Res. 1393)

	1356	10/10/94	Establish fire hydrant water rates (amends Res. 1277) (superseded by Res. 1436)

	1357	10/10/94	Establish community center rental rates and related policies (superseded by Res. 1375)

	1358	11/14/94	Receive and appropriate unanticipated grant for funding gang enforcement related activities

	1359	11/14/94	Install stop signs on W. Sunland Avenue

	1360	11/28/94	Eliminate "pick-up" of employee contributions to PERS in favor of withholding for all eligible City employees effective December 1, 1994

	1361	11/28/94	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal year 1994-95 (supersedes Res. 1343) (superseded by Res. 1377)

	1362	11/28/94	Establish pre-tax status of PERS contribution of 6% of salary

	1363	02/27/95	Supplement and adjust budget for 1994-95 fiscal period

	1364	03/13/95	Install south bound stop sign on N.W. 12th Street at W. Hartley Avenue and north and south bound stop signs on N.E. McNary Street at E. Beech Avenue

	1365	03/13/95	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 94-95

	1366	03/27/95	Appoint Planning and Administrative Assistant Aaron Henson as Enterprise Zone Manager (superseded by Res. 1461)

	1367	04/10/95	Install west bound stop sign on W. Lathrop Avenue at S.W. 10th Street and east bound stop sign on S.W. 10th Place at S.W. 10th Street

	1368	05/08/95	Outline request for proposal (RFP) procedures

	1369	04/24/95	Initiate proceedings to convert property along east bank of Umatilla River south and west of S.W. 17th Street from urbanizable to urban status (Hermiston Christian Center et al.)

	1370	04/24/95	Initiate proceedings to convert property west of Highway 395 South and south of the "A" Line Canal from urbanizable to urban status (Hadley/Sheets)

	1371	05/22/95	Adopt budget for fiscal period 1995-96

	1372	05/22/95	Make appropriations for fiscal period 1995-96

	1373	05/22/95	Levy and categorize taxes for fiscal period 1995-96

	1374	06/12/95	Supplement and adjust budget for 1994-95 fiscal period

	1376	06/12/95	Authorize approval and execution of revised and restated intergovernmental regional water system agreement

	1375	06/12/95	Establish community center rental rates and related policies (supersedes Res. 1357) (superseded by Res. 1396)

	1377	06/26/95	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal year 1995-96 (supersedes Res. 1361) (superseded by Res. 1384)

	1378	06/26/95	Establish official newspapers for legal publications (Hermiston Herald and East Oregonian)

	1379	06/26/95	Reappropriate 1994-95 budgeted items

	1380	07/24/95	Membership in City/County Insurance Services Trust Workers' Compensation Group

	1381	08/28/95	Reappropriate 1995-96 budgeted items

	1382	09/25/95	Change street name (W. Bailey Avenue to W. Johanna Avenue)

	1383	10/09/95	Supplement and adjust budget for 1995-96 fiscal period

	1384	10/23/95	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal year 1995-96 (supersedes Res. 1377)

	1385	10/23/95	Establish northbound one-way traffic on N.W. 7th Street between W.  Ridgeway and W. Standard Avenues

	1386	11/27/95	Receive and appropriate unanticipated grant for funding youth recreation facilities

	1387	11/27/95	Establish hours of operation at Hodge Park

	1388	11/27/95	Adopt Order, Decree and Money Judgment to conclude Mull Tin Shop vs. City of Hermiston

	1389	12/18/95	Establish hours of operation at Hodge Park (superseded by Res. 1411)

	1390	01/22/96	Initiate proceedings to convert property east of E. 10th Street south of and adjacent to Sandstone Middle School from urbanizable to urban status (Peterson/Antonsen)

	1391	01/22/96	Initiate proceedings to convert nine parcels of property bounded by E. Punkin Center Road, Highway 395, W. Theater Lane and N.W. Geer Road from urbanizable to urban status (City initiated)

	1392	02/26/96	Authorize reimbursement to Hermiston School District for a 10-year period for installation costs of a 12-inch water main in N.E. 10th Street and Diagonal Boulevard (superseded by Res. 1394)

	1393	02/26/96	Approve separation of taxi fares (Classic Cab - regular fares; Hermiston Senior & Disabled Transit - senior/disabled citizen ticket fares) (supersedes Res. 1355) (superseded by Res. 1622)

	1394	03/18/96	Authorize reimbursement to Hermiston School District for a 15-year period for installation costs of a 12-inch water main in N.E. 10th Street and Diagonal Boulevard (supersedes Res. 1392)

	1395	03/18/96	Authorize mayor and recorder to sign agreement with Public Transit Division for Section 18 program (senior citizen taxi funding) for FY 95-96

	1396	03/25/96	Establish community center rental rates and related policies (supersedes Res. 1375) (superseded by Res. 1398)

	1397	04/08/96	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 1995-96

	1398	05/13/96	Establish community center rental rates and related policies (supersedes Res. 1396) (superseded by Res. 1421)

	1399	05/20/96	Adopt budget for fiscal period 1996-97

	1400	05/20/96	Make appropriations for fiscal period 1996-97

	1401	05/20/96	Levy and categorize tax for fiscal period 1996-97

	1402	06/10/96	Call for feasibility report on W. Cherry Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395  PROJECT FAILED

	1403	06/10/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Cherry Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (LID 303)  PROJECT FAILED

	1404	06/10/96	Call for feasibility report on W. Dogwood Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (superseded by Res. 1440)

	1405	06/10/96	Accept  feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Dogwood Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (LID 304) (superseded by Res. 1441)

	1406	06/10/96	Call for feasibility report on N.W. Spruce Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from W. Elm Avenue to W. Cherry Avenue (superseded by Res. 1442)

	1407	06/10/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.W. Spruce Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from W. Elm Avenue to W. Cherry Avenue (LID 305) (superseded by Res. 1443)

	1408	06/10/96	Call for feasibility report on W. Beech Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 170 feet east of N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (superseded by Res. 1444)

	1409	06/10/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Beech Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 170 feet east of N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (LID 306) (superseded by Res. 1445)

	1410	06/10/96	Authorize issuance of revenue bonds not exceeding $750,000 to finance additional costs of regional water system

	1411	06/10/96	Establish hours of operation at Hodge Park (supersedes Res. 1389) (superseded by Res. 1425)

	1412	06/24/96	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal year 1996-97 (supersedes Res. 1384) (superseded by Res. 1477)

	1413	06/24/96	Reappropriate 1995-96 budgeted items

	1414	06/24/96	Propose annexation to Hermiston Rural Fire Protection District

	1415	07/22/96	City/County Insurance Services Trust membership - property

	1416	07/22/96	Call for election on November 5, 1996 on annexation to Hermiston Rural Fire Protection District

	1417	07/22/96	Install west bound stop sign on S.E. Opal Court at S.E. 7th Street

	1418	08/26/96	Request transfer of jurisdiction over E. 10th Street from Diagonal Boulevard to E. Highland Avenue from Umatilla County to City of Hermiston

	1419	08/26/96	Establish two 10-minute parking spaces in front of 125 S.E. 4th Street

	1420	08/26/96	Support continuation of Pioneer Amtrak line from Portland to Denver

	1421	09/23/96	Establish community center rental rates and related policies (supersedes Res. 1398) (superseded by Res. 1623)

	1422	10/14/96	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 12th Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 135' north of S.W. Poplar Place to W. Orchard Avenue (superseded by Res. 1446)

	1423	10/14/96	Accept  feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 12th Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 135' north of S.W. Poplar Place to W. Orchard Avenue (LID 307) (superseded by Res. 1435)

	1424	10/14/96	Support annexation/consolidation of City of Hermiston and Hermiston Rural Fire District

	1425	10/14/96	Establish hours of operation at Hodge Park (supersedes Res. 1411) (superseded by Res. 1481)

	1426	10/14/96	Change street name from E. Vista Avenue to E. Holt Avenue

	1427	10/28/96	Install east-west bound stop signs on W. Joseph Avenue at S.W. 15th Street

	1428	10/28/96	Call for feasibility report on paving only of west side of S.W. 8th Street from W. Duane Avenue to W. Division Avenue (superseded by Res. 1448)

	1429	10/28/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving only of west side of S.W. 8th Street from W. Duane Avenue to W. Division Avenue (LID 308) (superseded by Res. 1449)

	1430	10/28/96	Select Gelco Services, Inc. dba Insituform Technologies to rehabilitate unacceptable pipe fittings at Well #2

	1431	11/04/96	Call for feasibility report on W. Catherine Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (superseded by Res. 1450)

	1432	11/04/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Catherine Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (LID 309) (superseded by Res. 1451)

	1433	11/04/96	Propose annexation to Hermiston Rural Fire Protection District

	1434	11/04/96	Remove uncollectible ambulance accounts from current list of accounts

	1435	11/04/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 12th Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 135 feet north of S.W. Poplar Place to W. Orchard Avenue (LID 307) (supersedes Res. 1423) (superseded by Res. 1447)

	1436	11/25/96	Increase fire hydrant water rates (supersedes Res. 1277 & 1356) (superseded by Res. 1453 effective 07/01/97)

	1437	12/09/96	Request transfer of jurisdiction over S.E. 10th Street between S.E. Columbia Drive and Feedville Road from Umatilla County to City of Hermiston

	1438	12/09/96	Request transfer of jurisdiction over E. Airport Road between Highway 395 South and S.E. 10th Street from Umatilla County to City of Hermiston

	1439	12/23/96	Authorize issuance of revenue bonds not exceeding $750,000 to finance construction of street improvement projects

	1440	12/23/96	Call for feasibility report on W. Dogwood Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (supersedes Res. 1404)

	1441	12/23/96	Accept  feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Dogwood Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (LID 310) (sSupersedes Res. 1405)

	1442	12/23/96	Call for feasibility report on N.W. Spruce Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from W. Elm Avenue to W. Dogwood Avenue   (supersedes Res. 1406)

	1443	12/23/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on N.W. Spruce Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from W. Elm Avenue to W. Dogwood Avenue (LID 311)  (supersedes Res. 1407)

	1444	12/23/96	Call for feasibility report on W. Beech Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 170 feet east of N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (supersedes Res. 1408)

	1445	12/23/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Beech Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 170 feet east of N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (LID 312) (supersedes Res. 1409)

	1446	12/23/96	Call for feasibility report on S.W. 12th Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 135' north of S.W. Poplar Place to W. Orchard Avenue (supersedes Res. 1422)

	1447	12/23/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.W. 12th Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from 135 feet north of S.W. Poplar Place to W. Orchard Avenue (LID 313) (supersedes Res. 1435)

	1448	12/23/96	Call for feasibility report on paving only of west side of S.W. 8th Street from W. Duane Avenue to W. Division Avenue (supersedes Res. 1428)

	1449	12/23/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving only of west side of S.W. 8th Street from W. Duane Avenue to W. Division Avenue (LID 314) (supersedes Res. 1429)

	1450	12/23/96	Call for feasibility report on W. Catherine Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (supersedes Res. 1431)

	1451	12/23/96	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on W. Catherine Avenue curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from N.W. Spruce Street to Highway 395 (LID 315) (supersedes Res. 1432)

	1452	12/23/96	Support the Columbia Basin Softball Association and authorize the use of the City's tax identification number for grant applications

	1453	01/13/97	Establish new water rates effective July 1, 1997 (supersedes Res. 1436) (Superseded by Res. 1632)

	1454	01/13/97	Establish new sewer rates effective July 1, 1997 (supersedes Res. 1278) (Superseded by Res. 1633)

	1455	01/13/97	Support continuation of Amtrak passenger train service across Oregon

	1456	01/13/97	Authorizing issuance of revenue bonds and directing publication of notice of interest to issue revenue bonds in compliance with the Uniform Revenue Bond Act and evidencing its official intent to reimburse capital expenditures (water reservoir and other improvements)

	1457	01/27/97	Inclusion of properties outside of city limits in S.W. 12th Street paving project (LID 313)

	1458	01/27/97	Authorize mayor to sign all necessary documents for construction of a water storage reservoir on the Hermiston Butte

	1459	02/10/97	Establish land use applications fees effective immediately and rescind any previously established fees (rescinded by Res. 1637)

	1460	02/10/97	Establish charges for solid waste collection effective 04/01/97 (rescinds Res. 1334) Rescinded by Res. 1505

	1461	02/24/97	Authorize city manager to appoint a local enterprise zone manager (supersedes Res. 1366)

	1462	03/24/97	Supplement and adjust budget for 1996-97 fiscal period

	1463	03/24/97	Adopt Water Master Plan

	1464	03/24/97	Adopt Wastewater Master Plan

	1465	03/24/97	Establish reserve funds (Superseded by Res. 1504)

	1466	03/24/97	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 1997-98

	1467	04/14/97	Establish utility deposit (supersedes Res. No. 754)

	1468	04/14/97	Initiate proceedings to convert property south of E. Theater Lane and east of N.E. 4th Street from urbanizable to urban status (Chapman/Howland)

	1469	04/28/97	Resolution relative to overexpenditure in the regional water fund

	1470	04/28/97	Authorize issuance and negotiated sale of not to exceed $4,500,000 utility system revenue bonds, series 1997; designate an underwriter and bond counsel; and authorize execution of a bond purchase agreement

	1471	04/28/97	Establish “no parking” on west side of S.E. 4th Street from E. Main Street south approximately 75 feet

	1472	05/12/97	Oppose C&B Livestock, Inc. expansion and authorize direct intervention in administrative proceedings

	1473	05/12/97	Oppose C&B beef packing plant and authorize appropriate civil litigation on behalf of the city

	1474	06/09/97	Adopt budget for fiscal period 1997-98

	1475	06/09/97	Make appropriations for fiscal period 1997-98

	1476	06/09/97	Levy and categorize tax for fiscal period 1997-98

	1477	06/09/97	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal year 1997-98 (supersedes Res. 1412) (superseded by Res. 1513)

	1478	06/23/97	Request to ODOT for “Use of Exhaust Brakes Prohibited” signs on Hwy. 395 South

	1479	06/23/97	Reappropriate 1996-97 budgeted items

	1480	06/23/97	Appeals of land use decisions

	1481	07/14/97	Establish hours of operation at Hodge Park (supersedes Res. 1425)

	1482	07/14/97	Initiate proceedings to convert property lying south of Punkin Center Road, west of N.W. Geer Road and north of Hensel Road (Dack et al.)

	1483	07/14/97	Establish ambulance rates (supersedes Res. 1324)

	1484	07/28/97	Membership in City/County Insurance Services trust liability risk sharing pool (to 6/30/2000)

	1485	08/11/97	Reappropriate 1997-98 budgeted items

	1486	09/08/97	Adopt methodology and establish fee for wastewater system development charges

	1487	09/08/97	Adopt methodology and establish fee for water system development charges

	1488	09/08/97	Install west bound stop sign on W. Fulton Avenue at N.W. 7th Street

	1489	10/13/97	Initiate proceedings to convert property on the southeast corner of S.E. 10th Street and E. Pine Avenue (Karnowski)

	1490	11/10/97	Establish “20 minute parking” area on west side of S.W. 10th Street beginning approximately 200 feet south of W. Hermiston Avenue and extending south approximately 100 feet

	1491	11/24/97	Establish water system cross connection regulations

	1492	11/24/97	Adopt declarations of restrictive covenants for Village Port Subdivision

	1493	12/08/97	Propose annexation to Hermiston Rural Fire District

	1494	12/08/97	Electrical service comparative analysis

	1495	12/22/97	Refer ballot measure on annexation to Hermiston Rural Fire District to voters

	1496	12/22/97	Authorize issuance and negotiated sale of not to exceed $750,000 local improvements revenue bonds, Series 1997; designate bond counsel; and authorize execution of a bond purchase agreement (Amended by Res. 1518)

	1497	01/26/98	Extend Cascade Natural Gas franchise for 90 days

	1498	02/09/98	Supplement and adjust budget for 1997-98 fiscal period

	1499	02/23/98	Call for feasibility report on S.E. 8th Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from E. Highland Avenue to E. Evelyn Avenue

	1500	02/23/98	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on S.E. 8th Street curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving from E. Highland Avenue to E. Evelyn Avenue (LID 316)

	1501	02/23/98	Inclusion of properties outside of city limits in S.E. 8th Street paving project (LID 316)

	1502	03/09/98	Support refinement of HUES study pursuant to Umatilla Chemical Agent Disposal Facility infrastructure financial impacts

	1503	04/13/98	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 1998-99

	1504	04/13/98	Establish reserve funds (supersedes Res. 1465) (superseded by Res. 1627)

	1505	04/27/98	Establish charges for solid waste collection effective June 1, 1998 (rescinds Res. 1460)

	1506	04/27/98	Extend Cascade Natural Gas franchise for 60 days from April 27, 1998

	1507	04/27/98	Install east and west bound stop signs on E. Hurlburt Avenue at S.E. 6th Street

	1508	05/11/98	Request transfer of jurisdiction over Elm Avenue between N.W. 11th Street and Diagonal Road and over N.W. 11th Street between W. Elm Avenue and W. Hermiston Avenue from Umatilla County to City of Hermiston

	1509	05/11/98	Authorize City Manager Edward Brookshier to execute administrative and technical documents with agencies of the United States of America and the State of Oregon

	1510	06/22/98	Adopt budget for fiscal period 1998-99

	1511	06/22/98	Make appropriations for fiscal period 1998-99

	1512	06/22/98	Levy and categorize tax for fiscal period 1998-99

	1513	06/22/98	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal year 1998-99 (supersedes Res. 1477) (superseded by Res. 1530)

	1514	06/08/98	Refer ballot measure on electric service in the City to voters and express support for the measure

	1515	06/22/98	Terminate funds and transfer monies to Hermiston Fire & Emergency Services District

	1516	06/22/98	Transfer fire and emergency vehicles and equipment to Hermiston Fire & Emergency Services District

	1517A	06/22/98	Reappropriate budgeted items in the 1997-98 budget

	1517	07/13/98	Authorize transfer of TCI cable franchise to Falcon/TCI Partnership

	1518	07/13/98	Amend Res. 1496 pertaining to issuance and sale of not to exceed $750,000 local improvements revenue bonds

	1519	07/13/98	Establish hours of operation at Hermiston Skate Park and Newport Park basketball courts

	1520	08/24/98	Initiate proceedings to convert property lying east of Highland Summit Subdivision and south of Sandstone Middle School (Pacific Western Homes)

	1521	08/10/98	Adopt Building Codes Agency electrical permit inspection fee increase

	1522	08/10/98	Authorize entering into a Management, Operation, Repair and Maintenance Agreement with Umatilla Electric Cooperative subject to approval by City voters

	1523	08/24/98	Accept jurisdiction of E. Theater Lane from Highway 395 to N.E. 10th Street

	1524	08/24/98	Install east bound stop sign on E. Theater Lane at N.E. 10th Street

	1525	09/28/98	Establish “no parking” on the east side of S.W. 9th Street between W. Highland Avenue and W. Pine Avenue

	1526	09/28/98	Oppose Ballot Measure 67, “The Oregon Medical Marijuana Act”

	1527	10/12/98	Request transfer of jurisdiction over S.E. 9th Street between E. Highland Avenue and S.E. Port Drive from Umatilla County to City of Hermiston

	1528	10/12/98	Approve assignment of certain leases between TCI of Northern New Jersey, Inc. and the City of Hermiston

	1529	10/12/98	Support passage of BMCC November bond issue

	1530	10/26/98	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal year 1998-99 (supersedes Res. 1513) (superseded by Res. 1557)

	1531	11/09/98	Install north bound stop sign on N.E. 7th Street at E. Jennie Avenue

	1532	11/09/98	City manager performance review criteria and employment contract

	1533	11/09/98	Support mayors of the Columbia Basin Region of Oregon in opposition to breaching of dams or lowering of impoundments below current operating levels on lower Snake River and Columbia River

	1534	11/23/98	Amend Res. No. 1283 pertaining to appointment criteria for parks and recreation committee

	1535	12/21/98	Install east and west bound stop signs on E. Elm Avenue at N.E. 4th Street

	1536	12/21/98	Support restoration of Amtrak’s Pioneer Route

	1537	01/25/99	Authorize submittal of a $807,570 funding application to the State of Oregon Department of Transportation, Transportation Enhancement Program

	1538	01/25/99	Provide for a code of ordinances, revising, amending, restating and codifying certain existing general ordinances and to provide for a substantive legal review of ordinances

	1539	01/25/99	Declare public need to acquire electrical power facilities to provide service to existing and future city residents and authorize the acquisition of such facilities through negotiation or condemnation

	1540	01/25/99	Authorize the execution of definitive agreements for the acquisition, management, operation, repair and maintenance of power facilities and for acquisition of power for the facilities

	1541	02/22/99	Authorize execution of the first amendment to the Facilities Acquisition Agreement relating to the acquisition of certain power facilities

	1542	02/22/99	Oppose the drawdown of the John Day Pool and oppose breaching of the John Day Dam

	1543	03/15/99	Supplement and adjust budget for 1998-99 fiscal period

	1544	03/15/99	Accept jurisdiction of S. Townsend Road from the north side of the Maxwell Canal bridge to Diagonal Road (Hwy. 207)

	1545	03/15/99	Refer to city voters a proposed measure to amend the charter of the City of Hermiston to institute a primary election system for certain city offices in certain circumstances

	1546	03/15/99	Refer to city voters a proposed measure to amend the charter of the City of Hermiston to authorize the passage of ordinances by title only in certain circumstances

	1547	03/22/99	Install stop signs on W. Hartley and W. Alder Avenues, N.W. 10th Street, N.W. 9th Place and N.W. Butte Drive

	1548	03/22/99	Support restoration of Amtrak service between Boise and Portland (“The Northwest Experience”)

	1549	04/12/99	Rename portion of W. Main Street lying west of Highway 395 to W. Locust Avenue and portion of W. Gladys Avenue lying west of Highway 395 to W. Hermiston Avenue

	1550	04/12/99	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 1999-00

	1551	04/12/99	Reappropriate budgeted items in the 1998-99 budget

	1552	04/26/99	Install east bound stop sign on E. Hurlburt Avenue at S.E. 10th Street

	1553	04/26/99	Adopt health insurance premium conversion benefit plan

	1554	05/24/99	Adopt budget for fiscal period 1999-00

	1555	05/24/99	Make appropriations for fiscal period 1999-00

	1556	05/24/99	Levy and categorize tax for fiscal period 1999-00

	1557	05/24/99	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 1999-00 (supersedes Res. 1530) (superseded by Res. 1593)

	1558	05/24/99	Install south bound stop sign on N.E. Alora Drive at E. Theater Lane

	1559	05/24/99	Authorize reimbursement to Highland Vista, Inc. for a 10-year period for installation costs of sewer, water and paving along properties fronting on E. Hurlburt Avenue

	1560	05/24/99	Establish rate of $.10/gallon for disposal of on-site waste (septic tank and portable toilet) at City’s treatment plant

	1561	05/24/99	Authorize actions pursuant to acquisition of PacifiCorp electrical distribution facilities

	1562	06/14/99	Support approval of an Oregon Business Development Fund project proposal by  Ivan Cook

	1563	06/14/99	Install south bound stop sign on S.E. 9th Street at S.E. Port Drive

	1564	06/14/99	Request Umatilla County Commission to conduct a study of County capital facilities and defer proposed capital facilities expenditures in County Courthouse for six months

	1565	06/14/99	Support proceeding with chemical weapons incineration at the Umatilla Chemical Agent Disposal Facility without delay

	1566	06/14/99	Ratify and reaffirm declaration of public need to acquire electrical power facilities to provide service to existing and future city residents and authorize the acquisition of such facilities through negotiation or condemnation

	1567	06/28/99	Supplement and adjust budget for 1998-99 fiscal period

	1568	06/28/99	Recognize and address Y2K problems

	1569	08/09/99	Call for feasibility report on improving E. Gladys Avenue from 250 feet east of N.E. 9th Street to N.E. 10th Street

	1570	08/09/99	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on improving E. Gladys Avenue from 250 feet east of N.E. 9th Street to N.E. 10th Street (LID 317)

	1571	08/09/99	Urge Governor Kitzhaber to veto House Bill 2050 which would exempt centrally-assessed utilities from the intangible personal property tax

	1572	08/23/99	Call for feasibility report on improving N.E. 9th Street from E. Main Street to E. Ridgeway Avenue

	1573	08/23/99	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on improving N.E. 9th Street from E. Main Street to E. Ridgeway Avenue

	1574	11/09/99	Authorize establishing an account with Local Government Investment Pool for payment of right-of-way acquisition (N.E. 4th Street extension)

	1575	11/09/99	Support development of a Hat Rock National Park Site Interpretive Center

	1576	11/22/99	Extend the 11-09-98 city manager employment agreement and increase compensation of the city manager (superseded by Res. 1615)

	1577	01/20/00	Authorize the termination of the Definitive Agreements between the City and Umatilla Electric Cooperative and initiate a request for proposals process for the acquisition of operational assistance for the municipally-owned electric system

	1578	01/24/00	Urge the Governor, the Oregon State Legislature and the U.S. Army to immediately adopt a policy to allow the Commander of the Umatilla Chemical Agent Disposal Facility the authority to notify and activate Hermiston area warning systems in the case of a chemical incident with the potential to extend beyond the facility boundaries

	1579	01/24/00	Supplement and adjust budget for 1999-00 fiscal period

	1580	01/24/00	Accept jurisdiction of Diagonal Road (County Road #601/State Highway #333) from N.E. 10th Street to Townsend Road

	1581	02/14/00	Oppose the breaching of dams or lowering impoundments below current operating levels on the Snake and Columbia Rivers

	1582	02/28/00	Install stop signs in Highland Summit Subdivision

	1583	02/28/00	Install stop signs on N.W. 3rd Street/W. Marie Avenue and N.E. 7th Street

	1584	03/13/00	Accept jurisdiction of W. Orchard Avenue (County Road 1238) from the west boundary of Viewcrest Addition to S.W. 11th Street)

	1585	03/27/00	Support US 395 North Corridor Plan

	1586	03/27/00	Adopt schedule of fees and charges for various services, licenses and permits (superseded by Res. 1609)

	1587	04/10/00	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2000-01

	1588	04/24/00	Initiate proceedings to convert property lying east of N.E. 4th Street and south of Pheasant Run Subdivision (Cook)

	1589	04/24/00	Authorize City to apply for a Local Government Grant from the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department for Theater Sports Phase II improvements

	1590	05/08/00	Adopt budget for fiscal period 2000-01

	1591	05/08/00	Make appropriations for fiscal period 2000-01

	1592	05/08/00	Levy and categorize tax for fiscal period 2000-01

	1593	05/08/00	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2000-01 (supersedes Res. 1557) (Superseded by Res. 1634)

	1594	05/08/00	Reappropriate budgeted items in the 1999-00 budget

	1595	06/12/00	Reappropriate budgeted items in the 1999-00 budget

	1596	06/26/00	Declare public need to acquire certain real property from John Schnell for the E. 4th Street extension project and authorize the acquisition of such real property through condemnation

	1597	07/10/00	Install stop signs in southwest Hermiston in conjunction with new elementary school construction

	1598	07/10/00	Install stop signs on N.W. Spruce Street at Jennie, W. Linda Avenue at 11th, and N.W. 12th Street and N.W. 12th Place at Linda

	1599	07/24/00	Accept and appropriate unanticipated $600,000 DVS Community Development Block Grant

	1600	07/24/00	Authorize power sale contract negotiations with Bonneville Power Administration

	1601	08/14/00	Exempt development agreement and certain agreements relating to a combustion project to be developed by the City, the Tribes and EWEB from competitive bidding/proposal/quote requirements

	1602	08/14/00	Call for an election to submit to qualified city voters on the question of contracting a general obligation bonded indebtedness in an amount not to exceed $4,000,000 to finance construction and equipping of a swimming pool facility, pay all costs incidental thereto and evidencing its official intent to reimburse capital expenditures

	1603	09/25/00	Install north and south bound stop signs on S.E. 4th Street at E. Highland Avenue

	1604	09/25/00	Authorize issuance and negotiated sale of General Obligation Water Refunding Bonds, Series 2000, to advance refund all or a portion of the City’s outstanding General Obligation Bonds, Series 1994; designate an authorized representative, underwriter and bond counsel; authorize appointment of a paying agent, bond registrar, escrow agent and expert advisor; authorize execution of a bond purchase agreement and escrow agreement; and authorize submittal of an advance refunding plan to the State Treasurer

	1605	10/09/00	Amend Employee Handbook to add Martin Luther King Jr. Day as a City holiday with pay

	1606	11/13/00	Install stop signs on W. Cherry/Beech/Beebe/Dogwood Avenues and on E. Catherine Avenue and N.E. 7th Street

	1607	10/09/00	A resolution endorsing actions to protect and restore endangered salmon runs in Puget Sound, and supporting the removal of structures interfering with Puget Sound salmon runs

	1608	10/09/00	Affirm policy that the City’s law enforcement personnel shall not use excessive force against individuals engaged in nonviolent civil rights demonstrations

	1609	10/09/00	Adopt a schedule of fees and charges for various services, licenses and permits and supersede Resolution No. 1586  (superseded by Res. 1616)

	1610	10/23/00	Declare public need to acquire certain real property from William Arlin Phillips for the E. 4th Street extension project and authorize the acquisition of such real property through condemnation

	1611	10/23/00	Fair housing resolution pertaining to DVS grant

	1612	11/13/00	Appropriate proceeds from Bond Refunding

	1613	11/13/00	Appropriate Law Enforcement Block Grant

	1614	11/27/00	Supplement and adjust budget for 2000-01 fiscal period

	1615	11/27/00	Extend the 11-09-98 city manager employment agreement and increase the compensation of the city manager (Supersedes Res. 1576) Superseded by Res. 1652 as to term of agreement only

	1616	12/18/00	Adopt a schedule of fees and charges for various services, licenses and permits and supersede Res. No. 1609 (to add fees for park registrations)  (superseded by Res. 1617)

	1617	01/08/01	Adopt a schedule of fees and charges for various services, licenses and permits and supersede Res. No. 1616 (add fees pertaining to Title XVII – Telecommunication registration, etc.) (superseded by Res. 1706)

	1618	01/08/01	Declare public need to acquire certain real property from Rx Hermiston (Rite Aid) for the S.E. 4th Street and E. Highland Avenue signalization project and authorize acquisition of such real property through condemnation

	1619	01/22/01	Authorize City to apply for ODOT Pedestrian and Bicycle Program grant for improvement of south side of E. Main Street from E. 7th Street to E. 10th Street

	1620	01/22/01	Establish “no parking” on the south side of W. Linda Avenue between N.W. 12th Street and N.W. 13th Street, and on the west side of S.E. 6th Street from E. Highland Avenue north 550 feet

	1621	02/12/01	Support construction of motor speedway in Boardman area

	1622	02/26/01	Approve taxi fare increase for Classic Cab (supersedes Res. 1393)  (superseded by Res. 1625)

	1623	02/26/01	Establish community center rental rates and related policies (supersedes Res. 1421)

	1624	03/12/01	Grant 10-year telecommunications system franchise to Eastern Oregon Telecom, LLC

	1625	03/26/01	Approve taxi charges for designated taxi service provider and senior/disabled transit service provider (supersedes Res. 1622) (superseded by Res. 1716)

	1626	04/09/01	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2001-02

	1627	04/09/01	Establish reserve funds (supersedes Res. 1504) (superseded by Res. 1662)

	1628	04/23/01	Authorize City to apply for local government grant from the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department for improvements to Hodge Park

	1629	05/14/01	Adopt budget for fiscal period 2001-02

	1630	05/14/01	Make appropriations for fiscal period 2001-02

	1631	05/14/01	Levy and categorize tax for fiscal period 2001-02

	1632	06/11/01	Establish new water rates effective July 1, 2001 (supersedes Res. 1453)

	1633	06/11/01	Establish new sewer rates effective July 1, 2001 (supersedes Res. 1454) (superseded by Res. 1636)

	1634	06/11/01	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2001-02 (supersedes Res. 1593)(superseded by Res. 1649)

	1635	06/11/01	Accept $1,715 grant offer from the Oregon Department of Aviation for development at the airport

	1636	06/25/01	Establish new sewer rates effective July 1, 2001 (supersedes Res. 1633)

	1637	06/25/01	Establish land use applications fees effective July 26, 2001, and rescind Res. 1459

	1638	06/25/01	Establish “no parking” on the east and west sides of N.E. 4th Street between E. Elm Avenue and E. Theater Lane

	1639	06/25/01	Reappropriate budgeted items for the 2000-01 budget

	1640	07/16/01	Authorize execution of an asset purchase agreement to acquire from PacifiCorp specified electrical distribution facilities serving the City of Hermiston

	1641	07/30/01	Authorize execution of a management, operation and maintenance services agreement with Umatilla Electric Cooperative

	1642	09/10/01	Authorize interim financing for electric distribution system costs

	1643	09/24/01	Supplement and adjust budget for 2001-02 fiscal period

	1644	09/24/01	Establish building permit fees effective October 25, 2001

	1645	09/24/01	Establish rates and associated fees for the distribution and sale of electric energy by the City of Hermiston, Oregon d/b/a Hermiston Energy Services (HES) (Superseded by Res. 1710)

	1646	09/24/01	Authorize an amendment to the Asset Purchase Agreement between the City of Hermiston, Oregon and PacifiCorp and execution of a Transition Services Agreement

	1647	10/08/01	Establish  rates and associated fees for the distribution and sale of electric energy by the City of Hermiston, Oregon d/b/a Hermiston Energy Services (HES) (Superseded by Res. 1710)

	1648	10/08/01	Install south bound stop sign on N.E. North Street at E. Oregon Avenue

	1649	10/15/01	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2001-02 effective July 1, 2001 (supersedes Res. 1634)(superseded by Res. 1669)

	1650	10/15/01	Authorize the City to enforce Ord. No. 1795, requiring payment of telecommunications franchise fees, through legal action or otherwise

	1651	10/22/01	Establish  rates and associated fees for the distribution and sale of electric energy by the City of Hermiston, Oregon d/b/a Hermiston Energy Services (HES) for Schedules L1, L2, L3, L4 and U1  (Superseded by Res. 1710)

	1652	11/05/01	Extend the 11-9-98 City Manager Employment Agreement (supersedes Res. No. 1615 as to term of agreement only) (superseded by Res. 1687 as to term of agreement only)

	1653	11/26/01	Accept and appropriate unanticipated $6,170 LLEG (Local Law Enforcement Block Grant)

	1654	11/26/01	Amend Employee Handbook to add computer system usage policies

	1655	11/26/01	Authorize mayor to execute an amendment to the agreement with the League of Oregon Cities governing the League status as a unit of local government

	1656	12/17/01	Authorize reimbursement to Gene D. Edwards, Geraldine E. Edwards and William H. Hill for a 10-year period for water main installation costs along properties fronting on W. Poplar Avenue

	1657	12/17/01	A resolution pertaining to the proposed formation of a park and recreation district

	1658	02/11/02	Authorize creation of the Funland Playground Reconstruction trust account in the amount of $344,000 and authorize expenditure of such funds, in conjunction with the Funland Steering Committee, for repair and replacement of playground equipment and for design services

	1659	02/11/02	Oppose ODOT’s proposed placement of median barrier on Highway 395 South from S.E. Port Drive to south limits of the City of Hermiston’s urban growth boundary

	1660	03/11/02	Declare public need to acquire certain real property from Rena Alexander and Union Pacific Railroad for the First Place and W. Hermiston Avenue signalization project and authorize acquisition of such real property by purchase or through condemnation

	1661	04/08/02	Membership in City County Insurance Services Trust

	1662	04/08/02	Establish reserve funds (supersedes Res. 1627) (repealed and superseded by Res. 1696)

	1663	04/08/02	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2002-03

	1664	04/08/02	Support commencement of chemical agent disposal operations at Umatilla Chemical Depot

	1665	05/13/02	Supplement and adjust budget for 2001-02 fiscal period

	1666	05/20/02	Authorize an amendment to the Umatilla Tribal Generating Project Development Agreement (Wanapa Energy Center)

	1667	05/20/02	Authorize City Manager to participate on the Board of Directors of the Wanapa Energy Center Environmental Foundation

	1668	06/10/02	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax, and categorize the tax for fiscal period 2002-03

	1669	06/10/02	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2002-03 effective July 1, 2002 (supercedes Res. 1649) (superseded by Res. 1705)

	1670	06/10/02	Install stop signs at the intersections of S.W. 7th Street/W. Johns Avenue and W. Hartley Avenue/N.W. 6th and 7th Streets

	1671	06/10/02	Establish parks and recreation development reserve fund

	1672	06/10/02	Reappropriate budgeted items for the 2001-02 budget

	1673	06/24/02	Reappropriate budgeted items for the 2001-02 budget

	1674	07/08/02	Approve issuance of tax-exempt obligations to finance electric distribution system costs

	1675	08/26/02	Accept unanticipated Traffic Enforcement Grant

	1676	08/26/02	Amend Employee Handbook pertaining to use of personal credit cards , city vehicles, travel awards and personal credit card incentives

	1677	09/23/02	Establish Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvement Project reserve fund

	1678	09/23/02	Install stop signs on S.E. 8th Street at E. View Drive, E. Highland Avenue and E. Newport Avenue

	1679	09/23/02	Establish the terms and limits for revenue obligations, authorize the issuance of the City’s variable rate demand Electric System Revenue Obligations, Series 2002A and Series 2002B, and entry into a Letter of Credit, and establish the terms under which future parity obligations may be issued

	1680	09/23/02	A resolution pertaining to the formation of a park and recreation district and submission of that question to the November 5, 2002 election

	1681	10/14/02	A resolution authorizing rejection of all bids opened on September 23, 2002, for the E. Catherine Avenue storm drain system improvements and rebidding the project

	1682	10/28/02	Authorization for inclusion in the Oregon Savings Growth Plan (OSGP) (457 deferred compensation plan)

	1683	10/28/02	Establish “no parking” on the west side of N.E. 4th Street between E. Ridgeway Avenue and E. Elm Avenue

	1684	10/28/02	Install north and south bound stop signs on S.W. 7th Street at W. Division Avenue

	1685	10/28/02	Oppose proposed FERC/SMD changes to the Northwest electricity system

	1686	11/04/02	Adopt codes for the City’s building inspection program in accordance with Section 153.03 of the Hermiston Code of Ordinances

	1687	11/12/02	Extend the 11-9-98 City Manager Employment Agreement (supersedes Res. No. 1652 as to term of agreement only) (superseded by Res. 1714 as to term of agreement only)

	1688	11/25/02	Urge the Oregon Legislature to provide exemptions from mandated public safety answering point consolidation for those cities and districts that believe such consolidation will adversely affect their ability to provide essential public safety services within their communities

	1689	11/25/02	Install north and south bound stop signs on N.E. 4th Street at E. Jennie Avenue

	1690	12/09/02	Authorize reimbursement to Prancing Horse LLC for a 10-year period for water line oversizing for properties in St. Johns Estates Phase 1 abutting S.W. 7th Street

	1691	12/23/02	Adopt Hermiston Energy Services (HES) Customer Service Policies, Rates and Associated Fees manual (superseded by Res. 1695)

	1692	02/24/03	Accept and appropriate unanticipated $9,265 LLEBG (Local Law Enforcement Block Grant)

	1693	02/24/03	Authorize the League of Oregon Cities to coordinate the filing of an appeal on the City's behalf, through outside counsel, from the rate increase received from PERS

	1694	03/10/03	Authorize execution and delivery of a financing agreement and escrow agreement; declare intent to reimburse expenditures; and related matters (for outdoor swimming pool)

	1695	04/14/03	Adopt Hermiston Energy Services (HES) Customer Service Policies, Rates and Associated Fees manual (supersedes Res. 1691) (Superseded by Res. 1710)

	1696	04/28/03	Establish reserve funds (repeals and supersedes Res. 1662)

	1697	04/28/03	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2003-04

	1698	04/28/03	Declare an emergency under ORS 279.015(4)(a) and exempt the E. Catherine Avenue storm drain system improvements project from competitive bids

	1699	04/28/03	Support efforts among the Bureau of Reclamation, Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, Oregon State University and the City for development of the “Oxbow” river front area

	1700	05/12/03	Supplement and adjust budget for fiscal year 2002-03

	1701	05/12/03	Authorize City to apply for local government grant from the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department for development of the Hermiston Outdoor Pool Project

	1702	05/12/03	Grant 10-year telecommunications system franchise to Morrow Development Corporation

	1703	05/19/03	Establish St. Johns Estate Access Street Reserve Fund

	1704	06/09/03	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax, and categorize the tax for fiscal period 2003-04

	1705	06/09/03	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2003-04 effective July 1, 2003 (supercedes Res. 1669)

	1706	06/09/03	Adopt a schedule of fees and charges for various services, licenses and permits effective June 9, 2003 (Supersedes Res. 1617)

	1707	06/23/03	Reappropriate budgeted items for the 2002-03 budget

	1708	07/14/03	Designate the Hermiston public safety center as the Bob Shannon Safety Center

	1709	07/14/03	Terminate Bancroft Bond Redemption Fund and transfer remaining monies to the General Fund effective June 30, 2003

	1710	07/28/03	Adopt the “Hermiston Energy Services (HES) Customer Service Policies, Rates, and Associated Fees” manual as amended August 1, 2003 to become effective August 1, 2003 (supersedes Resolution Nos. 1645, 1647, 1651 and 1695)

	1711	08/11/03	Support Agape House capital campaign for new facility

	1712	10/27/03	Accept and appropriate unanticipated $7,000 Traffic Enforcement Grant

	1713	10/27/03	Accept and appropriate unanticipated $10,000 OECDD distribution center/warehouse marketing plan grant

	1714	10/27/03	Extend the 11-9-98 City Manager Employment Agreement (supersedes Res. No. 1687 as to term of agreement only)

	1715	10/27/03	Accept grant offer of State of Oregon through the Oregon Department of Aviation in the maximum amount of $10,000 to be used under the Federal Aid to Municipalities Program Project No. 5-7-0012-0 in the development of Hermiston Municipal Airport.

	1716	02/23/04	Approve taxi charges for designated taxi service provider and senior/disabled transit service provider (supersedes Res. 1625)

	1717	03/08/04	Accept unanticipated Traffic Enforcement Grant

	1718	03/08/04	Adopt a schedule of fees and charges for various services at the Hermiston Family Aquatics Center effective March 8, 2004

	1719	03/22/04	Accept grand from ODOT specific to reimbursement of overtime expended in enforcement activities on Highway 395 for grant period March 15 through September 30, 2004

	1720	03/22/04	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2004-2005

	1721	04/26/04	Support  Columbia River Channel deepening project

	1722	04/26/04	Authorize City to make application for an enterprise zone

	1723	04/26/04	Call for feasibility report on paving S.E. 9th Street to E. Main Street to E. Newport Avenue

	1724	04/26/04	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving S.E. 9th Street from E. Main Street to E. Newport Avenue (LID 319)

	1725	04/26/04	Call for feasibility report on paving N.W. 3rd Street from W. Elm Avenue to W. Marie Avenue

	1726	04/26/04	Accept feasibility report, call for hearing on paving N.W. 3rd Street from W Elm Avenue to W. Marie Avenue (LID 320)

	1727	04/26/04	Install North bound stop sign at the intersection of N.W. 9th Street and Ridgeway Avenue

	1728	04/26/04	Call for feasibility report on paving E. Newport Avenue from S.E. 7th Street to S.E. 9th Street

	1729	04/26/04	Accept feasibility report, call for a hearing on paving E. Newport Avenue from S.E. 7th Street to S.E. 9th Street (LID 321)

	1730	04/26/04	Amend Resolution 1486 pertaining to the adoption of a methodology and establish a fee for its wastewater system development charge

	1731	05/10/04	Keep Building Codes current with State Codes (supersedes Res. 1686)

	1732	05/24/04	Accept and appropriate unanticipated $32,000 grant for the Simplot facility and Economic Development Assessment project

	1733	06/14/04	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax, and categorize the tax for fiscal period 2004-05

	1734	06/14/04	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2004-2005 effective July 1, 2004 (supercedes Resolution 1705)

	1735	06/28/04	Supplement and adjust the total budget for fiscal period beginning July 1, 2003

	1736	06/28/04	Initiate amendments to comprehensive plan and UGB

	1737	10/11/04	Accept and appropriate unanticipated $5,000 traffic safety grant-DUII

	1738	10/11/04	establish water rates for reduced monthly minimum charge (supersedes resolution 1632)

	1739	10/11/04	Establish sewer rates for reduced monthly minimum charge (supersedes resolution 1636)

	1740	10/11/04	Support for Governor’s Meth Plan

	1741	10/25/04	Accept and appropriate unanticipated $2,500 Traffic Safety Grant-DUII

	1742	11/08/04	Extend the 11-9-98 City Manager Employment Agreement (supersedes Res. No. 1714 as to term of agreement only)

	1743	11/22/04	Accept grant from the State of Oregon through the Oregon Department of Aviation in the amount of $6,536 to be used in the development of the Hermiston Airport

	1744	12/13/04	Request transfer of jurisdiction over certain county roads within the City of Hermiston.

	1745	Skipped number

	1746	02/14/05	Install stop signs at designated locations in Overlook area

	1747	02/14/05	Appropriate grant in amount of $43,100 awarded to Hermiston Public Library to provide outreach to senior citizens

	1748	02/14/05	Appropriate grants in the amount of $7,673 for the specific purpose of purchasing bulletproof vests and additional portable report writing equipment

	1749	02/14/05	Appropriate grant in the amount of $6,285 for the specific purpose of developing the Belt Park arboretum

	1750	02/14/05	Oppose importation of chemical weapons from outside the State of Oregon to the Umatilla Chemical Depot

	1751	03/28/05	Install stop signs at designated locations

	1752	03/28/05	Increase compensation for classified employees effective January 1, 2005, (supersedes resolution No. 1734)

	1753	04/11/05	Supplemental budget for the fiscal year July 1, 2004 to June 30, 2005

	1754	04/25/05	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2005-2006

	1755	04/25/05	Repeal Resolution No. 1662 and establish designated reserve funds

	1756	04/25/05	Install stop signs at designated locations intersecting with SW 6th Street

	1757	04/25/05	Adopt methodology and establish fee for its wastewater system development charge (supersedes Resolution No. 1486)

	1758	04/25/05	Adopt methodology and establish fee for its water system development charge (supersedes Resolution No. 1487)

	1759	04/25/05	Authorize initiation of a text amendment to the zoning ordinance

	1760	05/23/05	Grant telecommunications system franchise to Windwave Technologies, Inc, DBA Windwave Communications

	1761	05/23/05	Grant telecommunications system franchise to EZ Wireless, LLC

	1762	06/20/05	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax, and categorize the tax for fiscal period 2005-06

	1763	06/20/05	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2005-2006 effective July 1, 2005 (supercedes Resolution 1734)

	1764	06/27/05	Install stop signs at specific locations intersecting with SW 7th Street

	1765	07/11/05	Adopt draft of City of Hermiston Vision Statement

	1766	07/25/05	Authorize extension of letter of credit for the City's electric system revenue obligation

	1767	08/22/05	Authorize acquisition of right-of way (Street zoning)

	1768	08/22/05	Install stop signs at the intersection of SW 8th St. & W Johns Avenue

	1769	09/12/05	Authorize fixed rate electric system revenue obligations to refund the city's variable rate electric system

	1770	09/12/05	Resolution amending the “Rules of Order and Procedure for the City Council”

	1771	10/10/05	Extend the November 9, 1998 City Manager employment agreement (supersedes resolution 1742 as to term of agreement only)

	1772	12/27/05	Accept & appropriate unanticipated $2,500 traffic safety grant - DUII

	1773	01/23/06	Proposing certain land from urbanizeable status to urban status - Mark Zoller, American Dev.

	1774	01/23/06	Authorize the removal of two parking spaces, creation of turn lane and installation of a median strip of E Main Street near NE 3rd Street

	1775	03/27/06	Resolution to support partial funding for McKenzie Park

	1776	03/27/06	Support partial funding for Umatilla River Trail boat ramps

	1777	03/27/06	Grant telecommunications system franchise to M2 Machmedia, LLC

	1778	04/24/06	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2006-07

	1779	04/24/06	Install stop signs at designated areas

	1780	05/22/06	Receive unanticipated traffic safety grant for DUII in amount of $2,000

	1781	05/22/06	Restrict parking on the east side of SW 7th Street by West Park School (supercedes resolution  999)

	1782	06/12/06	Supplemental budget for the fiscal year July 1, 2005 - June 30, 2006

	1783	06/26/06	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2006-2007 effective July 1, 2006 (supercedes resolution #1763)

	1784	06/26/06	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax, and categorize the tax for fiscal period 2006-2007

	1785	07/10/06	Working toward inclusive communities in partnership with the National League of Cities

	1786	07/24/06	Provide aquatic center passes for all permanent city employees and elected officials

	1787	07/24/06	Accept grant offer of State of Oregon through the Oregon Department of Aviation in the maximum amount of $20,092 to be used under the Federal Aid to Municipalities Program Project No. 3-41-0024-004 in the development of Hermiston Municipal Airport.

	1788	08/28/06	Receive grant in the amount of $2,240 through the Umatilla County Special Library District for the purpose of implementing the Up and Away Program

	1789	08/28/06	Receive unanticipated Traffic Safety Grant for DUII in the amount of $3,000

	1790	08/28/06	Adopt rules for regulation of commercial air cargo operations at the Hermiston Municipal Airport

	1791	10/09/06	Install stop signs at specific locations intersecting with W Cody Avenue

	1792	10/09/06	Extend the November 9, 1998 City Manager employment agreement (supersedes resolution No. 1771 as to term of agreement only)

	1793	10/23/06	Proposing to convert certain land from urbanizeable status to urban status

	1794	11/13/06	Receive bequest in the amount of $20,000 from estate of Mary Paul for the specific purpose of supporting the Hermiston Public Library

	1795	11/13/06	Prohibiting the operation of remote control locomotives by railroads operation withing the City of Hermiston

	1796	11/13/06	Supporting the Oregon Legislative Assembly's adoption of legislation to create the Oregon Oasis Project

	1797	11/13/06	Recreational immunity for all city parks

	1798	01/08/07	Authorize water and sewer system revenue refunding bond and a master water and sewer revenue bond declaration

	1799	01/08/07	Receive grant in the amount of $19,885 from the Collins Foundation, for the specific purpose of providing volunteer coordinator support for library services operated by community volunteers

	1800	02/12/07	Declaring an emergency, exempting the E Elm Avenue and NE 4th Street storm drain improvement project from competitive bids

	1801	Not Used

	1802	03/26/07	Supplemental budget for the fiscal year July 1, 2006 - June 30, 2007

	1803	03/26/07	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2007-08

	1804	03/26/07	Exercise the power of eminent domain for the acquisition of certain property (4th St and Elm St storm drainage)

	1805	04/05/07	Support grant application to Oregon Parks and Recreation Department's local government grant program

	1806	04/05/07	Award construction contract for West Joseph Avenue Extension to Blue Mountain Paving Co

	1807	05/14/07	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax,  categorize the tax for fiscal period 2007-2008

	1808	05/14/07	Adopt the National Incident Management System (NIMS)

	1809	05/14/07	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2007-2008 effective July 1, 2007 (supersedes Resolution No. 1783)

	1810	05/14/07	A trade resolution to retain local jobs

	1811	05/21/07	Adopt employee handbook dated May 21, 2007 as employee policies of City, rescind Resolution No. 1192

	1812	05/21/07	Install stop signs at intersection of SW River Hill Drive and West Sunland Avenue

	1813	06/11/07	Adopt alcohol use policies for McKenzie Park

	1814	06/25/07	Keep Building Codes current with State Codes (supercedes Resolution No. 1731)

	1815	07/09/07	Support the Northwest's dams and hydro system

	1816	07/23/07	Amend Section 62.B of the “Rules of Order and Procedure for the City  Council of the City of Hermiston, Oregon” to increase the amount and length of advertising City Council vacancies

	1817	09/10/07	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2007-2008 effective July 1, 2007 (supersedes Resolution No. 1809)

	1818	09/24/07	Extend the November 9, 1998 City Manager employment agreement (supersedes resolution No. 1792 as to term of agreement only)

	1819	10/08/07	Adopt Hermiston Energy Services customer service policies, rates, and associated fees manual as amended October 8, 2007 and superseding Resolution No. 1695

	1820	10/22/07	Install stop sign at the intersection of E Main Street and SE 13th Street

	1821	11/05/07	Expand the Hermiston enterprise zone (Snack Alliance Project)

	1822	11/26/07	Install stop signs in St Johns Estate - Phase 5

	1823
[IMAGE]
	02/11/08	Support Senate Bill 294, a bill to re-authorize Amtrack

	1824
[IMAGE]
	02/11/08	Receive unanticipated Economic Development Block Grants

	1825
[IMAGE]
	02/11/08	Adopt 2008 Park Master Plan

	1826
[IMAGE]
	02/11/08	Adopt grievance policy for disability discrimination

	1827
[IMAGE]
	02/25/08	Supplemental budget for the fiscal year July 1, 2007 - June 30, 2008

	1828
[IMAGE]
	02/25/08	Support the Northeast Oregon Business and Economic Growth Project

	1829
[IMAGE]
	03/24/08	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2008-2009

	1830
[IMAGE]
	03/24/08	Support application to the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department’s local government grant program for partial funding for Highland Park Development

	1831
[IMAGE]
	04/14/08	Supplement and adjust the total budget for the fiscal period beginning July 1, 2007

	1832
[IMAGE]
	04/28/08	Establish charges for solid waste collection effective July 1, 2008 ( rescinds Resolution No. 1505)

	1833
[IMAGE]
	05/12/08	Declare an emergency and exempt the replacement of variable frequency drives at the river pump station from competitive bids

	1834
[IMAGE]
	06/09/08	Adopt the budget, make appropriations, impose the tax and categorize the tax, for fiscal yr 2008-09

	1835
[IMAGE]
	06/09/08	Adopt compensation plan for fiscal period 2008-09 effective July 1, 2008 (supersedes Resolution #1817)

	1836
[IMAGE]
	06/23/08	Supplement and adjust the total budget for the fiscal period beginning July 1, 2007

	1837
[IMAGE]
	06/23/08	Terminate sewer plant repair and reserve fund

	1838
[IMAGE]
	07/14/08	Authorize borrowing 1,5000,000 for City water and sewer system

	1839
[IMAGE]
	07/14/08	Establish new water rate schedules, effective August 1, 2008 (supersedes Resolution 1738)

	1840
[IMAGE]
	07/14/08	Establish new sewer rate schedules, effective August 1, 2008 (supersedes Resolution 1739)

	1841
[IMAGE]
	07/28/08	Impose Park and Recreation System Development Charges on new development applicable at the time of application for a building permit

	1842
[IMAGE]
	07/28/08	Establish a System Development Charge for the park and recreation system and adjust the water and wastewater SDC’s (supersedes Resolution No. 1757 and 1758)

	1843
[IMAGE]
	08/11/08	Rename a portion of NE 7th Street (between E Theater Lane and E Punkin Center Ave) to NE 8th Street

	1844
[IMAGE]
	08/25/08	Adopt Skate Park and Riverfront Park hours

	1845
[IMAGE]
	10/13/08	Establish Wastewater Construction Fund for fiscal year 2008-2009

	1846
[IMAGE]
	10/13/08	Install stop signs at specific locations intersecting NE 8th Street

	1847
[IMAGE]
	10/13/08	Establish a “No Parking” zone at the west end of Hermiston Avenue

	1848
[IMAGE]
	11/24/08	Extend the November 9, 1998 City Manager employment agreement (supersedes resolution No. 1818 as to term of agreement only)

	1849
[IMAGE]
	12/22/08	Support special district to maintain and fund 450 MHZ radio system

	1850
[IMAGE]
	01/26/09	Support application for grant funding from DLCL

	1851
[IMAGE]
	03/09/09	Authorize loan from the Special Public Works Fund by entering into a loan contract with Oregon Economic and Community Development Department

	1852
[IMAGE]
	03/09/09	Agree to extend enterprise zone abatement for 5-years to Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc

	1853
[IMAGE]
	03/23/09	Supplement and adjust the budget for fiscal year 2008-2009

	1854
[IMAGE]
	04/13/09	Reappropriate expenditures int the 2008-09 budget

	1855
[IMAGE]
	04/27/09	Establish reserve funds (supersedes resolution No. 1755)

	1856
[IMAGE]
	04/27/09	Elect to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2009-10

	1857
[IMAGE]
	05/26/09	City “Pick up” of employee contribution to PERS

	1858	05/26/09	Authorize reimbursement to Dickehoof Properties, Inc (tabled until later date)

	1859
[IMAGE]
	05/26/09	Employee pay freeze for the 09-10 fiscal year

	1860
[IMAGE]
	06/08/09	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax and categorize tax for fiscal year 2009-10

	1861
[IMAGE]
	06/08/09	Consent to Charter Communications Chapter 11 restructuring

	1862
[IMAGE]
	08/10/09	A resolution adopting a schedule of fees and charges for various services, licenses and permits and superseding resolution No. 1706

	1863
[IMAGE]
	08/24/09	Implement a fee for the review of civil engineering drawings

	1864
[IMAGE]
	08/24/09	Acknowledge support for the City of Hermiston periodic review work program

	1865
[IMAGE]
	09/14/09	Establish a “No Parking” zone on West Harper Road

	1866
[IMAGE]
	10/26/09	Extend the November 9, 1998 City Manager Employment Agreement (supersedes Resolution No. 1848 as to term of agreement only).

	1867
[IMAGE]
	11/09/09	Approve taxi charges for designated taxi service provider (supersedes Resolution No. 1716)

	1868
[IMAGE]
	11/23/09	Establish reimbursement assessment for off-site utility extensions for Big 5 Sporting Goods

	1869
[IMAGE]
	12/28/09	Electing application for entry to the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System State and Local Government Rate Pool

	1870
[IMAGE]
	01/25/10	Establish rate of .25/gallon for disposal of on-site waste (septic tank and portable toilet) at City’s Treatment Plant (supersedes Resolution No. 1560)

	1871
[IMAGE]
	02/08/10	Calling for an election on the question of issuing General Obligation Bonds for the Higher Education Center

	1872
[IMAGE]
	02/22/10	Support Application to Oregon Parks and Recreation Department’s Local Government Grant Program for partial funding for Highland Park (Highland Summit Subdivision) Development

	1873
[IMAGE]
	02/22/10	Support Application to Oregon Parks and Recreation Department’s Land Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) Grant Program for partial funding for Victory Square Park Rehabilitation

	1874
[IMAGE]
	03/22/10	Rename portions of street to SW Cedar Drive

	1875
[IMAGE]
	04/12/10	Authorize the City to enter into a loan agreement with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality through its Clean Water State Revolving Loan Fund.

	1876
[IMAGE]
	05/24/10	Elect to receive State Revenues

	1877
[IMAGE]
	05/24/10	Reinstate step in range increases for eligible employees

	1878
[IMAGE]
	05/24/10	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax and categorize tax for fiscal year 2010-2011

	1879
[IMAGE]
	06/14/10	Supplement and adjust the budget for fiscal year beginning July 1, 2009

	1880
[IMAGE]
	07/12/10	Acquisition of Rights-of-Way for the Recycled Water Plant

	1881
[IMAGE]
	10/11/10	Extend November 9, 1998 City Manager Employment Agreement (supersedes Resolution No. 1866 as to term of agreement only)

	1882
[IMAGE]
	11/08/10	Authorize the establishment of a health reimbursement arrangement/voluntary employees beneficiary association (“HRA VEBA”) plan

	1883
[IMAGE]
	11/08/10	Authorize loan agreement with Oregon Department of Environmental Quality through its Clean Water State Revolving Loan Fund

	1884
[IMAGE]
	11/22/10	Establish a “No Parking” and “School Zone” for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at BMCC Learning Center Campus

	1885
[IMAGE]
	02/14/11	Establish a “School Zone” on West Orchard Avenue for vehicular and pedestrian traffic between 6th Street and 7th Street

	1886
[IMAGE]
	02/14/11	Delegate authority to the City Manager to act as the purchasing manager for the Joseph Pump Station project and declaring an emergency

	1887
[IMAGE]
	02/28/11	Supplement and adjust budget for fiscal period beginning July 1, 2010

	1888
[IMAGE]
	04/11/11	Corrective amendment to Resolution No. 1880

	1889
[IMAGE]
	04/25/11	Adopt Revised Standard Plans and Specifications for Streets and Sewers

	1890
[IMAGE]
	05/09/11	Elect to receive State Revenues for Fiscal Year 2011-2012

	1891
[IMAGE]
	05/09/11	Install Stop Signs at SW 9th Street and W Joseph Avenue

	1892
[IMAGE]
	06/13/11	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax and categorize the tax for fiscal year 2011-12

	1893
[IMAGE]
	06/13/11	Adopt compensation plan for classified employees for fiscal period 2011-2012 effective July 1, 2011 (supersedes Resolution  #1835)

	1894
[IMAGE]
	09/01/11	Honor 10th Anniversary of 9/11/01

	1895
[IMAGE]
	09/12/12	Authorizing the issuance and negotiated sale of General Obligation Water Refunding Bonds

	1896
[IMAGE]
	09/26/12	Authorize Mayor to sign any and all documents necessary to complete and land exchange between City and Hermiston School District

	1897
[IMAGE]
	10/10/11	Affordable Housing Resolution as required by Community Development Block Grant process to comply with the Fair Housing Act

	1898
[IMAGE]
	10/10/11	Create “one way” street on NW 7th Street from W Ridgeway Avenue to W Standard Avenue

	1899
[IMAGE]
	10/24/11	Permanent easement and temporary construction easement together with such access and other related rights in the real property of LGW Ranch, Inc as needed to accomplish a public purpose

	1900
[IMAGE]
	10/24/11	Extend the November 9, 1998 City Manager Employment Agreement (supersedes Resolution No. 1881 as to term of agreement only).

	1901
[IMAGE]
	12/12/11	Adopt compensation plan for classified employees for fiscal period 2012-2013 effective July 1, 2012 (supersedes Resolution  #1893)	

	1902
[IMAGE]
	01/09/12	Stop Sign resolution - NW Eucalyptus Drive

	1903
[IMAGE]
	04/23/12	Authorize the Mayor to sign documents necessary to terminate certain leases for football practice field between the City of Hermiston, Umatilla County and the Hermiston School District

	1904
[IMAGE]
	04/23/12	Authorize the Mayor to sign documents necessary to relinquish the City of Hermiston’s right of reversion to the fairgrounds property and to preserve its perpetual easements for sewer and domestic waterlines

	1905
[IMAGE]
	04/23/12	Authorize the Mayor and the City Manager to sign agreements allowing the Eastern Oregon Trade and event Center authority to approve lease for food booth and to find location for the thrift shop operated by the Good Shepherd Health Care System Auxiliary

	1906
[IMAGE]
	05/14/12	Approve grant agreement for Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center and authorize City Manager to sign documents

	1907
[IMAGE]
	06/11/12	Support for Neighborhood Association

	1908
[IMAGE]
	05/14/12	Provide for an addition to the City of Hermiston Employee Handbook

	1909
[IMAGE]
	05/21/12	Elect to receive State Revenues for Fiscal Year 2012-13

	1910
[IMAGE]
	05/21/12	Establish Reserve Funds

	1911
[IMAGE]
	05/21/12	Adopt budget, make appropriations, impose the tax and categorize the tax

	1912
[IMAGE]
	05/21/12	Adopt compensation plan for classified employees for Fiscal Year 2012-13

	1913
[IMAGE]
	05/121/12	Resolution Supporting the Morrow Pacific Project

	1914
[IMAGE]
	06/11/12	Hermiston Franchise Agreement with Charter

	1915
[IMAGE]
	08/13/12	Resolution authorizing Mayor to sign any and all documents necessary to transfer 75 acres of City Property to the Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center Authority

	1916
[IMAGE]
	08/27/12	Stop Sign resolution for intersections at SW 7th St and SW Sandy Drive

	1917
[IMAGE]
	09/24/12	Develop and implement a Umatilla County 10-year plan to end homelessness

	1918
[IMAGE]
	10/22/12	Establish charges for solid waste collection effective January 1, 2013 (rescinds Resolution No. 1832)

	1919
[IMAGE]
	11/26/12	Execute Franchise Agreement with Xayo Group, LLC

	1920
[IMAGE]
	12/10/12	Extend the November 9, 1988 City Manager Employment Agreement (supersedes Resolution No. 1900 as to term of agreement only)

	1921
[IMAGE]
	12/10/12	Authorize the City Manager to apply for a recreational trail easement and seek grant funding related to the Oxbow Property controlled by the Bureau of Reclamation

	1922
[IMAGE]
	1/14/13	Authorize the Mayor to sign any and all documents necessary to convey that certain 75 acres of land to the Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Authority pursuant to the EOTEC Intergovernmental Agreement

	1923
[IMAGE]
	1/28/13	Stop sign resolution - install stop signs east bound at E. Montana Avenue and NE 6th Place; and west bound at W. Catherine Avenue and NW Spruce Street

	1924
[IMAGE]
	1/28/13	Condemnation resolution authorizing the City of Hermiston to continue negotiations with the property owners but to also proceed with condemnation proceedings.

	1925
[IMAGE]
	1/28/13	Approving and authorizing execution of a franchise agreement with Pacificorp D.B.A. Pacific Power

	1926
[IMAGE]
	3/25/13	Adopt budget, supplemented and adjusted in the amount of $1,765,000 for the fiscal year 2012-13 beginning July 1, 2012

	1927
[IMAGE]
	3/11/13	Budget transfer in the amount of $40,000 from Capital Outlay to Materials and Services for the fiscal period beginning July 1, 2012

	1928
[IMAGE]
	3/11/13	Bond refunding; authorizing the issuance and negotiated sale of full faith and credit obligations to advance refund the City’s outstanding full faith & credit obligations, series 2003

	1929
[IMAGE]
	3/25/13	Approving and authorizing execution of a franchise agreement with Lightspeed Networks, Inc.

	1930
[IMAGE]
	4/8/13	Designate the playground at Victory Square as the Mayor Bob Severson Memorial Playground

	1931
[IMAGE]
	4/22/13	Authorizing an extension of the existing agreement which expires in May until a new franchise agreement can be reached with Inland Development Corporation, a telecommunications franchise

	1932
[IMAGE]
	4/22/13	Authorizing an extension of the existing agreement which expires in May until a new franchise agreement can be reached with Windwave Communications, a telecommunications franchise

	1933
[IMAGE]
	4/22/13	Authorize an extension of the existing agreement which expired February 22, 2013 until a new franchise agreement can be reached with US West Communications (CenturyLink)

	1934
[IMAGE]
	4/22/13	Supporting presenting the formation of a new fire district to the voters

	1935
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Receive state revenues for fiscal year 2013-14

	1936
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Establish reserve funds

	1937
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Adopt the budget, make appropriations, impose the tax and categorize the tax for fiscal year 2013-14

	1938
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Adopt compensation plan for classified employees for fiscal period 2013-2014 effective July 1, 2013 (supersedes Resolution #1912)

	1939
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Authorizing investment of monies in the Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP)

	1940
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Adoption of a new franchise agreement with Qwest/CenturyLink

	1941
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Adopt a resolution approving and authorizing execution of a franchise agreement with EZ Wireless, LLC.

	1942
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Authorizing the Mayor to sign on behalf of the City the acceptance of the deed from the Lamberts

	1943
[IMAGE]
	6/10/13	Authorizing the Mayor to sign any and all documents necessary to convey an undivided one-half interest in certain real property to the County of Umatilla pursuant to the Intergovernmental Agreement for the Trade Center Gateway Property

	1944
[IMAGE]
	7/22/13	Approving and authorizing execution of a franchise agreement with Inland Development Corporation

	1945
[IMAGE]
	7/22/13	Approving and authorizing execution of a franchise agreement with Windwave Communications

	1946
[IMAGE]
	8/26/13	Adopts written investment policy

	1947
[IMAGE]
	8/26/13	Adopts financial policies

	1948
[IMAGE]
	9/9/13	Supporting capital improvement bond renewal measure by Blue Mountain Community College

	1949
[IMAGE]
	10/28/13	Establish new sewer rate schedules, effective January 1, 2014 (supersedes Resolution 1840)

	1950
[IMAGE]
	10/28/13	Establish new water rates, effective January 1, 2014 (supersedes Resolution 1839)

	1951
[IMAGE]
	12/23/13	Amends Rules of Order and Procedure for the City Council pertaining to service on more than one board or commission

	1952
[IMAGE]
	3/24/14	Supplement and adjust the budget for fiscal year beginning July 1, 2013

	1953
[IMAGE]
	2/24/14	Approving an agreement between the City and Hermiston Senior Center Board of Directors

	1954
[IMAGE]
	3/24/14	Authorizing the issuance and negotiated sale of water and sewer system revenue bonds

	1955
[IMAGE]
	4/28/14	Adopting and ratifying procedure for hiring a city manager

	1956
[IMAGE]
	6/9/14	Election to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2014-15

	1957
[IMAGE]
	6/9/14	Establish reserve funds (repeals Resolution 1936)

	1958
[IMAGE]
	6/9/14	Adopts budget, makes appropriations, imposes tax and categorizes for fiscal year 2014-15

	1959
[IMAGE]
	6/9/14	Adopts compensation plan for classified employees effective July 1, 2014 (supersedes Resolution 1938)

	1960
[IMAGE]
	6/9/14	Rescinds certain parking regulations and establishes new restrictions

	1961
[IMAGE]
	6/9/14	Requests Hermiston Enterprise Zone be designated for electronic commerce

	1962
[IMAGE]
	7/14/14	Supports efforts to pass long-term funding program for transportation

	1963
[IMAGE]
	8/11/14	Requests Umatilla County Wasteshed’s recovery goal remain at 20 percent

	1964
[IMAGE]
	8/25/14	Grant agreement with Federal Aviation Administration for airport taxiway rehabilitation

	1965
[IMAGE]
	8/25/14	Creates gas utility department and city gas utility

	1966
[IMAGE]
	9/8/14	Grant agreement with Oregon Department of Transportation for airport taxiway rehabilitation

	1967
[IMAGE]
	11/10/14	Schedules public hearing on street vacation

	1968
[IMAGE]
	11/24/14	Readopts written investment policy (supersedes Resolution 1946)

	1969
[IMAGE]
	11/24/14	Adopts revised financial policies (supersedes Resolution 1947)

	1970
[IMAGE]
	11/24/14	Authorizes interfund loan

	1971
[IMAGE]
	12/8/14	Approves agreement for community service group kiosk

	1972
[IMAGE]
	1/12/15	Approves agreement for construction of new senior activity center facility

	1973
[IMAGE]
	2/9/15	Calls election to submit to city voters a new home rule charter

	1974
[IMAGE]
	2/9/15	Calls election to submit to city voters amendment to new home rule charter

	1975
[IMAGE]
	3/9/15	Authorizes submission of application to renew Hermiston Enterprise Zone

	1976
[IMAGE]
	3/9/15	Adopts Hermiston Energy Services customer service policies, rates, and associated fees manual as amended March 9, 2015 and superseding Resolutions No. 1645, 1647, 1651, 1695 and 1819

	1977
[IMAGE]
	3/23/15	Supplement and adjust the budget for fiscal year beginning July 1, 2014

	1978
[IMAGE]
	3/23/15	Establish reserve funds (repeals Resolution 1957)

	1979
[IMAGE]
	3/23/15	Authorizes interfund loan from general fund to reserve fund

	1980
[IMAGE]
	4/27/15	Accepts recommendation of senior advisory group to establish Aspen site as future location of senior activity center

	1981
[IMAGE]
	4/27/15	Declares new senior activity center be named "Harkenrider Center"

	1982
[IMAGE]
	4/27/15	Adopts schedule of fees and charges (supersedes Resolution 1862)

	1983
[IMAGE]
	5/13/15	Supplement and adjust the budget for fiscal year beginning July 1, 2014

	1984
[IMAGE]
	7/27/15	Terminates 9-1-1 communication fund

	1985
[IMAGE]
	5/11/15	Adopts schedule of fees and charges (supersedes Resolution 1982)

	1986
[IMAGE]
	6/8/15	Adopts compensation plan for classified employees effective July 1, 2015 (supersedes Resolution 1959)

	1987
[IMAGE]
	5/11/15	Authorizes city staff to issue RFQ for design of natural gas distribution facilities

	1988
[IMAGE]
	5/26/15	Authorizes intergovernmental agreement with the Oregon Department of Transportation for pavement maintenance at Hermiston Municipal Airport

	1989
[IMAGE]
	5/26/15	Authorizes agreement with FAA for preventative maintenance at Hermiston Municipal Airport

	1990
[IMAGE]
	6/8/15	Election to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2015-16

	1991
[IMAGE]
	6/8/15	Establish reserve funds (repeals Resolution 1978)

	1992
[IMAGE]
	6/8/15	Adopts budget, makes appropriations, imposes tax and categorizes for fiscal year 2015-16

	1993
[IMAGE]
	5/22/15	Adopts schedule of fees and charges for on-site wastewater disposal (supersedes Resolution 1870)

	1994
[IMAGE]
	7/27/15	Declares discrimination in housing prohibited and city support of and assistance with fair housing

	1995
[IMAGE]
	8/24/15	Authorizes agreement with Ascent Architecture and Interiors to design Harkenrider Center

	1996
[IMAGE]
	8/10/15	Grant agreement with Federal Aviation Administration for airport taxiway relocation

	1997
[IMAGE]
	8/24/15	Prohibits marijuana sale, warehousing, production and processing

	1998
[IMAGE]
	8/24/15	Authorizes construction contract award for airport taxiway rehabilitation to Columbia Pacific Construction, Inc.

	1999
[IMAGE]
	9/14/15	Intergovernmental agreement with Oregon Department of Transportation for traffic signal installation

	2000
[IMAGE]
	10/12/15	Intergovernmental agreement with Oregon Department of Transportation for improvements to U.S. Highway 395

	2001
[IMAGE]
	12/14/15	Stop sign installation at E. Hurlburt Ave. and SE 13th St.

	2002
[IMAGE]
	11/23/15	Supports presenting question to voters regarding formation of fire district

	2003
[IMAGE]
	11/23/15	Adopts deferred compensation plan

	2004
[IMAGE]
	11/23/15	Adopts employee handbook

	2005		Not approved

	2006
[IMAGE]
	12/14/15	Appoints pool of pro tem municipal court judges

	2007
[IMAGE]
	12/14/15	Supplements and adjusts budget for fiscal year 2015-2016

	2008
[IMAGE]
	12/14/15	Authorizes grant agreement; supplements 2015-2016 budget

	2009
[IMAGE]
	12/14/15	Authorizes EOTEC authority board to enter into financing agreements

	2010
[IMAGE]
	12/28/15	Adopts financial policies (supersedes Res. 1969)

	2011
[IMAGE]
	12/28/15	Adopts investment policy (supersedes Res. 1968)

	2012
[IMAGE]
	12/28/15	Establishes Ridgeway site as location for Harkenrider Center

	2013
[IMAGE]
	2/8/16	Authorizes agreement with Good Shepherd Medical Center

	2014
[IMAGE]
	2/8/16	Authorizes opportunity fund agreement with Oregon Department of Transportation for traffic signal installation

	2015
[IMAGE]
	2/8/16	Authorizes EOTEC authority board to enter into financing agreements

	2016
[IMAGE]
	2/22/16	Approves utility easement grant

	2017
[IMAGE]
	2/22/16	Approves utility easement grant

	2018
[IMAGE]
	3/14/16	Intergovernmental agreement with Oregon Department of Transportation for trail installation (Repealed by 2041)

	2019
[IMAGE]
	3/14/16	Names Greenwood Park

	2020
[IMAGE]
	4/11/16	Supplements and adjusts budget for fiscal year 2015-2016

	2021
[IMAGE]
	4/11/16	Authorizes interfund loan

	2022
[IMAGE]
	4/11/16	Establishes reserve funds (repeals Resolution 1991)

	2023
[IMAGE]
	4/25/16	Stop sign installation at Joshua Court and SW 10th Street

	2024
[IMAGE]
	5/9/16	Establishes charges for solid waste collection effective July 1, 2016 (rescinds Resolution No. 1918)

	2025
[IMAGE]
	5/9/16	Supplements and adjusts budget for fiscal year 2015-2016

	2026
[IMAGE]
	6/13/16	Adopts compensation plan for classified and exempt employees effective July 1, 2016 (supersedes Resolution 1986)

	2027
[IMAGE]
	6/13/16	Election to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2016-2017

	2028
[IMAGE]
	6/13/16	Adopts budget, makes appropriations, imposes and categorizes tax for fiscal year 2016-2017

	2029
[IMAGE]
	6/13/16	Establishes reserve funds (repeals Resolution 2022)

	2030
[IMAGE]
	6/13/16	Adopts schedule of fees and charges (supersedes Resolution 1993)

	2031
[IMAGE]
	6/13/16	Authorizes reimbursement of capital expenditures

	2032
[IMAGE]
	6/13/16	Funds transfer

	2033
[IMAGE]
	6/13/16	Adopts Hermiston Energy Services customer service policies, rates, and associated fees manual as amended June 13, 2016, and superseding Resolutions No. 1645, 1647, 1651, 1695, 1819 and 1976

	2034
[IMAGE]
	7/11/16	Authorizing the issuance and negotiated sale of electric system revenue bonds

	2035
[IMAGE]
	8/22/16	Hermiston School District ground lease for senior center

	2036
[IMAGE]
	8/22/16	Safety center lease with Umatilla County Fire District No. 1

	2037		(Pending)

	2038
[IMAGE]
	9/12/16	Franchise agreement with Fatbeam, LLC

	2039
[IMAGE]
	9/12/16	Stop sign installation at NW 5th Street and W. Madrona Ave.

	2040
[IMAGE]
	9/26/16	Stop sign installation at E. McNary Street and NE Beebe Ave.

	2041
[IMAGE]
	10/24/16	Intergovernmental agreement with Oregon Department of Transportation for trail installation; repeals Res. 2018

	2042
[IMAGE]
	11/14/16	Adopts financial policies (supersedes Res. 2010)

	2043
[IMAGE]
	11/14/16	Adopts investment policy (supersedes Res. 2011)

	2044
[IMAGE]
	11/14/16	Supplements city budget

	2045
[IMAGE]
	11/28/16	Declares property surplus

	2046
[IMAGE]
	11/28/16	Waives electric fees for former Umatilla County Fairgrounds

	2047		(Pending)

	2048
[IMAGE]
	1/23/17	Keep building codes current with state codes (supersedes Resolution No. 1814)

	2049
[IMAGE]
	1/23/17	Establishes new sewer rate schedules, effective March 1, 2017 (supersedes Resolution 1949)

	2050
[IMAGE]
	1/23/17	Establishes new water rates, effective March 1, 2017 (supersedes Resolution 1950)

	2051
[IMAGE]
	2/13/17	Issuance of credit obligations to finance water and sewer capital improvements

	2052
[IMAGE]
	2/13/17	Recommends restoring recreational immunity rights

	2053
[IMAGE]
	2/27/17	Supports transportation funding package in 2017 legislative session

	2054
[IMAGE]
	2/27/17	Opposes Governor’s proposed elimination of Oregon State Police Drug Enforcement Section and Pendleton Forensics Laboratory

	2055
[IMAGE]
	3/20/17	Adopts employee handbook

	2056
[IMAGE]
	3/20/17	Supplements city budget

	2057
[IMAGE]
	4/24/17	Awards public contract to General Pacific, Inc.

	2058
[IMAGE]
	6/12/17	Supplements city budget

	2059
[IMAGE]
	6/12/17	Adopts compensation plan for classified and exempt employees effective July 1, 2017 (supersedes Resolution 2026)

	2060
[IMAGE]
	6/12/17	Election to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2017-2018

	2061
[IMAGE]
	6/12/17	Adopts budget, makes appropriations, imposes and categorizes tax for fiscal year 2017-2018

	2062
[IMAGE]
	6/12/17	Establishes reserve funds (repeals Resolution 2029)

	2063
[IMAGE]
	6/26/17	Hermiston Franchise Agreement with Charter (supersedes Resolution 1914)

	2064
[IMAGE]
	7/24/17	Accepts transfer of Steelhead Park

	2065
[IMAGE]
	7/24/17	Exercises power of eminent domain for W Highland Trail

	2066
[IMAGE]
	8/14/17	Approves Umatilla County order to initiate formation of Umatilla County Extension Service District

	2067
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	Cascade Natural Gas fee increase

	2068
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	Charter Communications resolution amendment

	2069
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	Eastern Oregon Telecom fee increase

	2070
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	EZ Wireless, LLC, fee increase

	2071
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	Inland Development Corporation fee increase

	2072
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	Windwave Communications fee increase

	2073
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	M2 Machmedia, LLC, fee increase

	2074
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	Amends Art. III of the Hermiston Energy Services Manual

	2075
[IMAGE]
	9/11/17	Dedicates franchise fee increase to street fund

	2076
[IMAGE]
	9/25/17	Infill application fee

	2077
[IMAGE]
	9/25/17	Supports nomination of Ryan Bounds to the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals and urging confirmation

	2078
[IMAGE]
	9/25/17	Approves storm water easement grant

	2079
[IMAGE]
	11/13/17	Designates city-owned property eligible to meet off-street parking requirements

	2080
[IMAGE]
	11/13/17	Accepts jurisdiction of a portion of W. Highland Avenue

	2081
[IMAGE]
	11/27/17	Expands boundaries and changes name of enterprise zone

	2082
[IMAGE]
	12/11/17	Keep building codes current with state codes (supersedes Resolution 2048)

	2083
[IMAGE]
	12/11/17	Adopts schedule of fees and charges (supersedes Resolution 1985)

	2084
[IMAGE]
	1/8/18	Approves execution of long-term rural enterprise zone abatement agreement

	2085
[IMAGE]
	1/22/18	Supports government assisted housing programs

	2086
[IMAGE]
	2/26/18	Intent to reimburse capital expenditures

	2087
[IMAGE]
	3/12/18	Memorandum of understanding with Umatilla County to establish shared financial obligations for water storage and distribution improvements

	2088
[IMAGE]
	3/12/18	Loan documents for construction of water storage and distribution improvements

	2089
[IMAGE]
	3/12/18	Approves mayor’s signature on Eastern Oregon Trade and Event Center dissolution documents

	2090
[IMAGE]
	3/26/18	Awards construction contract to Sineco Construction, LLC

	2091
[IMAGE]
	4/9/18	Supplements city budget

	2092
[IMAGE]
	4/9/18	Authorizes work order with Anderson Perry & Associates, Inc.

	2093
[IMAGE]
	4/9/18	Adopts a schedule of fees and charges for various services at the Hermiston Family Aquatic Center effective April 9, 2018

	2094
[IMAGE]
	5/4/18	Supplements city budget

	2095		(Pending)

	2096
[IMAGE]
	6/11/18	Adopts budget, makes appropriations, imposes and categorizes tax for fiscal year 2018-2019

	2097
[IMAGE]
	6/11/18	Adopts compensation plan for classified and exempt employees effective July 1, 2018 (supersedes Resolution 2059)

	2098
[IMAGE]
	6/11/18	Establishes reserve funds (repeals Resolution 2062)

	2099
[IMAGE]
	6/11/18	Election to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2018-2019

	2100
[IMAGE]
	6/11/18	Adopts employee handbook

	2101
[IMAGE]
	6/25/18	Authorizes intergovernmental agreement with Oregon Department of Transportation

	2102
[IMAGE]
	8/13/18	Adopts schedule of fees and charges (supersedes Resolution 2083)

	2103
[IMAGE]
	7/23/18	Authorizes loan from special public works fund

	2104
[IMAGE]
	7/23/18	Appoints Nate Rivera as director to Northwest Requirements Utilities board of directors

	2105
[IMAGE]
	8/13/18	Authorizes property acquisition

	2106
[IMAGE]
	8/27/18	Designates locations for stop sign installation

	2107
[IMAGE]
	8/27/18	Authorizes participation in Buyboard National purchasing cooperative interlocal participating agreement

	2108
[IMAGE]
	8/27/18	Adopts schedule of fees and charges (supersedes Resolution 2102)

	2109
[IMAGE]
	9/10/18	Grants exemption from competitive bid requirements for design-build method of contracting for EOTEC County fair building and RV park development

	2110
[IMAGE]
	9/10/18	Readopts financial policies (supersedes Resolution 2042)

	2111
[IMAGE]
	9/10/18	Readopts written investment policy (supersedes Resolution 2043)

	2112
[IMAGE]
	10/8/18	Establishes new sewer rates, effective March 1, 2019 (supersedes Resolution 2049)

	2113
[IMAGE]
	10/8/18	Establishes new water rates, effective March 1, 2019 (supersedes Resolution 2050)

	2114
[IMAGE]
	10/8/18	Adopts joint facility use agreement with Hermiston School District

	2115
[IMAGE]
	10/22/18	Authorizes participation in the interlocal purchasing system (“TIPS”)

	2116
[IMAGE]
	11/26/18	Increases ticket prices for the senior and disabled citizen taxi ticket program

	2117
[IMAGE]
	12/10/18	Adopts Hermiston Energy Services customer service policies, rates, and associated fees manual as amended December 10, 2018, and superseding Resolutions No. 1645, 1647, 1651, 1695, 1819, 1976 and 2033

	2118
[IMAGE]
	4/8/19	Adopts policy for adjusting water and sewer utility billings to account for water leaks

	2119
[IMAGE]
	4/22/19	Grant application for development of skateboard and teen adventure park

	2120
[IMAGE]
	4/22/19	Supplements city budget

	2121
[IMAGE]
	4/22/19	Approves grant of stormwater easement

	2122
[IMAGE]
	5/13/19	Designates E. McKinney Ave. as public road

	2123
[IMAGE]
	6/10/19	Election to receive state revenues for fiscal year 2019-2020

	2124
[IMAGE]
	6/10/19	Adopts budget for fiscal year 2019-2020

	2125
[IMAGE]
	6/10/19	Establishes reserve funds (repeals Resolution 2098)

	2126
[IMAGE]
	6/10/19	Adopts compensation plan for classified and exempt employees effective July 1, 2019 (supersedes Resolution 2097)

	2127
[IMAGE]
	6/24/19	Initiates formation of local improvement district

	2128
[IMAGE]
	6/24/19	Authorizes city manager to act as certified officer and signing authority in regards to the Northeast Regional Housing Rehabilitation Revolving Loan Program



-----------------------------

The Code of Hermiston is current through Ordinance 2278, passed June 24, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the Code of Hermiston. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: https://hermiston.or.us/ City Telephone: (541) 567-5521

Code Publishing Company